CHAPTER 1 
ADMINISTRATION 

SECTION 101 
GENERAL 


101.1 Title. These regulations shall he known as the Property Maintenance Code of City of Chadron hereinafter referred to as “this code.” 
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
101.3 Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare in so far as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein. 
101.4 
Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 

SECTION 102 
APPLICABILITY 



102.1 
General. The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in Section 101. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 


102.2 Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fife protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises. 
102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the International Building Code, International Residential Code, International Plumbing Code and the currently adopted National Electric Code by the State of Nebraska. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the Zoning Regulations for the City of Chadron. 
102.4 Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and insanitary. 
102.5 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. 
102.6 Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of 
each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
102.8 Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the code official. 
SECTION 103 
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY 
MAINTENANCE INSPECTION 

103.1 General. The department of property maintenance inspection is hereby created and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. 
103.2 Appointment. The code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction; and the code official shall not be removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing authority. 
103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the code official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy code official, other related technical officers, inspectors and other employees. 
103.4 Liability. The code official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. 
Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any officer of the department of property maintenance inspection, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. 
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated in the following schedule. 
As cited in the Chadron Fee Ordinance 
SECTION 104 
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE 
CODE OFFICIAL 


104.1 General. The code official shall enforce the provisions of this code. 
104.2 Rule-making authority. The code official with the advice of the Problem Resolution Team shall have authority as necessary in the interest of public health safety and general welfare, to enforce and promulgate rules and procedures; to interpret and implement the provisions of this code; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this code, or of violating accepted engineering methods involving public safety. 
104.3 Inspections. The code official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority. 
104.4 Right of entry. The code official is authorized with the consent of the owner and/or occupant to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the code official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law. 
104.5 Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code. 
104.6 Notices and orders. The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code. 
104.7 Department records. The code official shall keep official records of all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long as the building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by other regulations. 
SECTION 105 
APPROVAL 


105.1 Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the code official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the code official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of acting granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files. 
105.2 Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
105.3 Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of the code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction. 
105.3.1 Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency. 
105.3.2 Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period required for retention of public records. 
105.4 Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved. 
SECTION 106 
VIOLATIONS 


106.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. 
106.2 Notice of violation. The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with Section 107. 
106.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil infraction as determined by the local municipality, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
106.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
106.5 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure of premises. 
SECTION 107 
NOTICES AND ORDERS 


107.1 Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in Sections 107.2 and 107.3 to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section 108.3. 
107.2 Form. Such notice prescribed in Section 107.1 shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
1. 	
Be in writing. 

2. 	
Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 

3. 	
Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued. 

4. 	
Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of this code. 

5. 	
Inform the property owner of the right to appeal. 

6. 	
Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with Section 106.3. 


107.3 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
1. 	
Delivered personally; 

2. 	
Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or 

3. 	
If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 


107.4 Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in Section 
106.4. 
107.5 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
SECTION 108 
UNSAFE STRUCTURES 
AND EQUIPMENT 


108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code. 
108.1.1 Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. 
108.1.2 Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. 
108.1.3 Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the code official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public. 
108.1.4 Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. 

108.2 Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of condenmation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource. 
108.3 Notice. Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with Section 107.3. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in Section 107.2. 
108.4 Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the code official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word “Condemned” and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard. 
108.4.1 Placard removal. The code official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code. 
108.5 Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the code official shall be vacated as ordered by the code official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code. 
SECTION 109 
EMERGENCY MEASURES 


109.1 Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Code Official.” It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous conditions or of demolishing the same. 
109.2 Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
109.3 Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
109.4 Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
109.5 Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
109.6 Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this code. 
SECTION 110 
DEMOLITION 


110.1 General. The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official’s judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner’s option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such structure. 
110.2 Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with Section 107. 
110.3 Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
110.4 Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state. 
SECTION 111 
MEANS OF APPEAL 


111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means. 
111.2 Membership of board. The board of appeals shall consist of a minimum of three members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to property maintenance and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The code official shall be an ex-officio member but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority, and shall serve staggered and overlapping terms. 
111.2.1 Alternate members. The chief appointing 
authority shall appoint two or more alternate members who shall be called by the board chairman to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for board membership. 
111.2.2 Chairman. The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairman. 
111.2.3 Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest. 
111.2.4 Secretary. The chief administrative officer shall designate a qualified person to serve as secretary to the board. The secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
111.2.5 Compensation of members. Compensa tion of members shall be determined by law. 

111.3 Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
111.4 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of not less than two-thirds of the board membership. 
111.4.1 Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
111.5 Postponed hearing. When the full board is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing. 
111.6 Board decision. The board shall modify or 
reverse the decision of the code official only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of appointed board members. 
111.6.1 Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be recorded. Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code official. 
111.6.2 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
111.7 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
111.8 Stays of enforcement. Appeals or notice and orders (other than Imminent Danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the appeals board. 
CHAPTER 2 


DEFINITIONS 

SECTION 201 
GENERAL 


201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter. 
201.2 Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular. 
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Building Code, International Fire Code, International Zoning Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code or the National Electric Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes. 
201.4 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
201.5 Parts. Whenever the words “dwelling unit,” “dwelling,” “premises,” “building,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “housekeeping unit,” or “story” are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.” 
SECTION 202 
GENERAL DEFINITIONS 


APPROVED. Approved by the code official. 
BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. 
BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 
BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit. 
CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative. 
CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy. 
[B] DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or lots. 
EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods. 
GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated waLking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level. 
HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
1I4MINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power. 
LABELED. Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards. 
LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land. 
OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. 
OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
OWNER. Any person, agency, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate 
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit. 
PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon. 
PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use. 
PROBLEM RESOLUTION TEAM. A board created by Chadron City Ordinance for the purpose of addressing all existing residential and non residential structures and all existing premises within the city’s jurisdiction and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties. Members are appointed by the Mayor and Council and report directly to the City Manager. 
ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one-or two-family dwelling. 
ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes. 
RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste 
materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
[B] SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units. 
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do. 
STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof. 
TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space. 
WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. 
YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure. 

CHAPTER 3 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

SECTION 301 
GENERAL 


301.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property. 
301.2 Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupied or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control. 
301.3 
Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 

SECTION 302 
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS 


302.1 
Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 


302.2 Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. 
Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs. 
302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 12 inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property. 
302.5 Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation. 
302.6 Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant. 
302.7 Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
302.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth. 
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work, 

provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes. 
302.9 Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. 
SECTION 303 
SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS 

303.1 Swinuning pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. 
303.2 Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas containing water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches (1219 mm) in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pooi. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than 54 inches (1372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of 6 inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. 
Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
SECTION 304 
EXTERIOR STRUCTURE 


304.1 General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
304.2 Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. 
[F] 304.3 Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). 
304.4 Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
304.5 Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. 
304.6 Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. 
304.7 Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
304.8 Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
304.9 Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
304.10 Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
304.11 Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
304.12 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
304.13 Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. 
304.13.1 Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
304.13.2 Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware. 
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 
st

to November 1every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellant fans, are employed. 
304.15 Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with Section 
702.3. 
304.16 Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water. 
304.17 Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents. 
304.18 Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, rooming units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within. 
304.18.1 Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let, if equipped with a deadboft lock it shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a lock throw of not less thani inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer’s specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. 
304.18.2 Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6 feet (1828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device. 
304.18.3 Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry. 
SECTION 305 
INTERIOR STRUCTURE 


305.1 General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property. 
305.2 Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
305.3 Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be conected. 
305.4 Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
305.5 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
305.6 Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frames and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. 
SECTION 306 
HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS 

306.1 General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high or more than 42 inches (1067 mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface. 
Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code. 
SECTION 307 
RUBBISH AND GARBAGE 


307.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
307.2 Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers. 
307.2.1 Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premises shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish. 
307.2.2 Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first 
removing the doors. 

307.3 Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers. 
307.3.1 Containers. Every establishment and resident of every dwelling unit producing garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak-proof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal. 
SECTION 308 
EXTERMINATION 


308.1 Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
308.2 Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure. 
308.3 Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises. 
308.4 Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination. 
308.5 Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. 
Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. 
CHAPTER 4 
LIGHT, VENTILATION AN]) OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS 

SECTION 401 
GENERAL 


401.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure. 
401.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
401.3 
Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the International Building Code shall be permitted. 

SECTION 402 
LIGHT 



402.1 
Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8 percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. 


Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m).2The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served. 
402.2 Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupanices, other than in one-and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a 60 watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m)of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided
2that the spacing between the lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm). In other than residential occupanices, means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of 1 footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads. 
402.3 
Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures. 

SECTION 403 
VENTILATION 



403.1 
Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in Section 402.1. 


Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 2m). The ventilation 
openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated. 

403.2 Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by Section 403.1 except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated. 
403.3 Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit. 
Exceptions: 
1. 
Where specifically approved in writing by the code official. 

2. 
Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be considered cooking appliances. 


403.4 Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space. 
403.5 
Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 

SECTION 404 
OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS 



404.1 
Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separated from other adjoining spaces. 


404.2 Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than 7 feet (2134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than 3 feet (914 mm) between counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls. 
404.3 Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm). 
Exceptions: 
1. 
In one-and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center and projecting not more than 6 inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling height. 

2. 
Basement rooms in one-and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2033 mm) with not less than 6 feet 4 inches (1932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions. 

3. 
Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling 


over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least 7 feet (2134 mm) over not less than one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of 5 feet (1524 mm) or more shall be included. 

404.4 Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and living room shall comply with the requirements of Sections 404.4.1 through 404.4.5. 
404.4.1 Room area. Every living room shall contain at least 120 square feet (11.2 m2)and every bedroom shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5 m
2
), 
404.4.2 Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces. 
Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms. 
404.4.3 Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story. 
404.4.4 Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and 
nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
404.4.5 Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code including, but not limited to the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and water heating facilities requirements of Chapter 5; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of Chapter 6; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of Chapter 7. 

404.5 Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not create conditions that, in the opinion of the code official, endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants. 
404.6 Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements: 
1. A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 220 square feet (20.4m). A unit occupied
2by three occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 320 square feet (29.7 m2). These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by Items 2 and 3. 
2. 
The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be provided. 

3. 
The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 

4. 
The maximum number of occupants shall be three. 


404.7 Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage. 
CHAPTER 5 
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS 

SECTION 501 
GENERAL 


501.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided. 
501.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
[P] SECTION 502 REQUIRED FACILITIES 

502.1 Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory. 
502.2 Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units. 
502.3 Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants. 
502.4 Employees’ facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking facility shall be available to employees. 
502.4.1 Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms. 
[P1 SECTION 503 TOILET ROOMS 

503.1 Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling. 
503.2 Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway. 
503.3 Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees’ working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story above or below the employees’ working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities. 
Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of 500 feet (152 m) from the employees’ regular working area to the facilities. 

503.4 
Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 

[P1 SECTION 504 
PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES 



504.1 
General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All 


plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
504.2 Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning. 
504.3 Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
SECTION 505 
WATER SYSTEM 


505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. 
[P] 505.2 Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker. 
505.3 Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressure adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks. 
505.4 Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43°C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. 
[P] SECTION 506 
SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM 


506.1 General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system. 
506.2 Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. 
[P] SECTION 507 STORM DRAINAGE 

507.1 General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
CHAPTER 6 
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS 

SECTION 601 
GENERAL 


601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided. 
601.2 
Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 

SECTION 602 
HEATING FACILITIES 



602.1 
Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section. 


602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section. 
Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained. 
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from 
1St 1st
October to May to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
Exceptions: 
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. 
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1 °C) a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained. 

602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be capable of supplying heat during the period from October l to May to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
1. 	
Processing, storage and operation areas that 
require cooling or special temperature 
conditions. 


2. 	
Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 



602.5 
Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured 3 feet (914mm) above the floor near the center of the room and 2 feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall. 

SECTION 603 
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT 



603.1 
Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. 


603.2 Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. 
Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation. 
603.3 Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained. 
603.4 Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
603.5 Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment. 
603.6. 
Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption to attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved. 

SECTION 604 
ELECTRICAL FACILITIES 



604.1 
Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and Section 605. 


604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the NEC Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes. 
604.3 
Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 

SECTION 605 
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 



605.1 
Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. 


605.2 Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. 
605.3 
Luminaires. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire. 

SECTION 606 
ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS 
AND DUMBWAITERS 



606.1 
General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with ASME A17.1. The most current certification of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, or the certificate shall be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator. The inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the periodical intervals listed in ASME A17.l, Appendix N, except where otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction. 


606.2 Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied. 
Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing. 
SECTION 607 
DUCT SYSTEMS 


607.1 General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required functions. 
CHAPTER 7 
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

SECTION 701 
GENERAL 


701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided. 
701.2 Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
[F] SECTION 702 MEANS OF EGRESS 

702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International Fire Code. 
702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code shall be unobstructed. 
702.3 Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code. 
702.4 Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. 
[F] SECTION 703 FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS 

703.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained. 
703.2 Opening protective. Required opening protective shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable. 
[F] SECTION 704 
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 


704.1 General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the International Fire Code. 
704.2 Smoke alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations: 
1. 
On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. 

2. 
In each room used for sleeping purposes. 

3. 
In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars, but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that 



the lower level is less than one full story below the 
upper level. 
Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be 
installed in other groups in accordance with the 
International Fire Code. 
704.3 Power source. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection. 
Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finished exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes. 
704.4 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. 
Exceptions: 
1. 
Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind. 

2. 
Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes. 



1 	ARTICLE ONE 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
101 	Title This title of the Chadron Municipal Code shall be known as the Zoning Regulations of the City of Chadron. 
102 	Jurisdiction 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all property within the corporate limits of the City of Chadron and its extra­territorial jurisdiction as provided by Chapter 19, Article 9, Sections 19­901 through 19­929 and Chapter 16, Article 9, Sections 16­901 through 16­904, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943. 
103 	Purpose 
The purposes of the Zoning Regulations of the City of Chadron are to: 
a. 	
Serve the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city and its jurisdiction. 

b. 	
Classify property in a manner that reflects its suitability for specific uses. 

c. 	
Provide for sound, attractive development within the city and its jurisdiction. 

d. 	
Encourage compatibility of adjacent land uses. 

e. 	
Protect environmentally sensitive areas. 

f. 	
Further the objectives of the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Chadron. 


104 	Consistency with Comprehensive Development Plan 
The City of Chadron intends that these Zoning Regulations and any amendments to them shall be consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Development Plan. It is the City’s intent to amend these regulations whenever such action is deemed necessary to keep regulatory provisions in conformance with the Comprehensive Development Plan. 
105 	Conflicting Provisions 
The Zoning Regulations shall be held to provide the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. If any provision of the Zoning Regulations conflicts with any other provision of the Zoning Regulations, any other Ordinance of the City of Chadron, or any applicable State or Federal law, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
106 Relief from Other Provisions 
Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a previous approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit issued under any local, State, or Federal ordinance or statute. 
107 Severability of Provision 
If any chapter, section, clause, or phrase of these Zoning Regulations is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. 
108 Publication 
These Regulations shall be published in book or pamphlet form and shall, together with the maps being a part hereof, shall be filed with the City Clerk of the City of Chadron, Nebraska. 

2 	ARTICLE TWO 
DEFINITIONS 
201 	Purpose Article Two shall be known as the Definitions. The purpose of these provisions is to promote consistency and precision in the interpretation of the Zoning Regulations. The meaning and construction of words as set forth shall apply throughout the Zoning Regulations, unless where modified in a specific section or where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. 
202 	General Construction of Language 
The following general rules of construction apply to the text of the Zoning Regulations. 
a. 	Headings 
Section and subsection headings contained herein are provided for illustrative purposes only and shall not be deemed to limit, govern, modify, or otherwise affect the scope, meaning, intent of any provision of the Zoning Regulations. 
b. 	Illustration 
In the case of any real or apparent conflict between the text of the Regulations and any illustration explaining the text, the text shall apply. 
c. 
Shall and May 
“Shall” is always mandatory. “May” is discretionary. 


d. 	
Tenses and Numbers 


Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
e. 
Conjunctions 
Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 


1. 	
“And” indicates that all connected items or provisions apply. 

2. 	
“Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in any combination. 

3. 
“Either ... or” indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination. 



f. 	
Referenced Agencies 


Unless otherwise indicated, all public officials, bodies, and agencies referred to in this Chapter are those of the City of Chadron. 
203 	Definition of Terms For the purposes of these Zoning Regulations, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Certain sections contain definitions which are additional to those listed here. Where terms are not specifically defined, their ordinarily accepted meaning or meanings implied by their context shall apply. 
204 A 
1. 
Abutting: Having lot lines or district boundaries in common, including property separated by a public street or alley. Used interchangeably with adjacent. 

2. 
Accessory Structure: A structure which is incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use or building on the same site. 

3. 
Accessory Use: A use which is incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use on the same site. 

4. 
Addition: Any construction which increases the size of a building or structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area. 

5. 
Agent of Owner: Any person showing written verification that he/she is acting for, and with the knowledge and consent of, a property owner. 

6. 
Alley: A public right of way which is used as a secondary means of access to abutting property. 

7. 
Alteration: Any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of spaces, the supporting members, the positioning on a site, or the appearance of a building or structure. 

8. 
Apartment: A housing unit within a building designed for and suitable for occupancy by only one family. Apartments are generally located within multi­family residential buildings. 

9. 
Attached: Having one or more walls in common with a principal building or connected to a principal building by an integral architectural element, such as a covered passageway; facade wall extension; or archway. 



205 B 
1. 
Base Zoning District: A district established by these Regulations which prescribes basic regulations governing land use and site development standards. No more than one Base Zoning District shall apply to any individually platted lot or parcel unless the lot or parcel is part of a Planned Unit Development. 

2. 
Basement: A level of a building below street level that has at least one­half of its height below the surface of adjacent ground. A basement used for independent dwelling or business purposes shall be considered a story for the purposes of height measurement. 

3. 
Beginning of Construction: The initial incorporation of labor and materials within the foundation of a building or structure. 

4. 
Block: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, by streets and the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, or by a combination of the above with a watercourse or lake, and which has been designated as such on a plat for the purposes of legal description of a property. 

5. 
Block Face: The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersection streets, or between the one nearest intersecting street and a major physical barrier, including, but not limited to, railroads, streams, lakes, or the corporate limits of Chadron. 

6. 
Board of Adjustments: A body, established by the City, pursuant to Section 19­901 through 19­914 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, expressly for the purpose of granting relief from situations of hardship and to hear appeals as provided by these Regulations. 

7. 
Bufferyard: A landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another. 

8. 
Building: A structure entirely separated from any other structure by space or by walls and having a roof and built to provide shelter, support, or enclosure for persons or property. 

9. 
Building Coverage: The area of a site covered by buildings or roofed areas, excluding allowed projecting eaves, balconies, and similar features. 

10. 
Building Envelope: The three­dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot after all zoning and other applicable municipal requirements have been met. 

11. 
Building Line: The outer boundary of a building established by the location of its exterior walls. 

12. 
Building Official: The designee of the City Council, responsible for the enforcement of the Uniform Building Code. 

13. 
Business: Activities that include the exchange or manufacture of goods or services on a site. 

14. 
Business Center: A building containing more than one commercial business, or any group of non­residential buildings within a common development, characterized by shared parking and access. 



206 C 
1. 
Certificate of Occupancy: An official certificate issued by the Building Official or his/her designee, upon finding of conformance with the Unified Building Code, and upon receipt of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. 

2. 
Certificate of Zoning Compliance: An official certificate issued by the Planning Director or his/her designee, which indicates that the proposed use of building or land complies with the provisions of the Zoning Regulations. 

3. 
Change of Use: The replacement of an existing use by a new use. 

4. 
Cluster: A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, or the preservation of historically or environmentally sensitive features. 

5. 
City: The City of Chadron, Nebraska. 

6. 
City Council: The City Council of Chadron, Nebraska. 

7. 
Collector Street: A street connecting neighborhoods within the same communities, designed to carry traffic from local to arterial streets. 

8. 
Common Area: An area held, designed, and designated for common or cooperative use within a development. 

9. 
Common Development: A development proposed and planned as one unified project not separated by a public street or alley. 

10. 
Common Open Space: Land within or related to a development that is not individually owned or dedicated for public use, designed and generally intended for the common use of the residents of the development. 

11. 
Compatibility: The degree to which two or more different land use types are able to exist together in 

close proximity, with no one use having significant negative effects on any other use. 

12. 
Comprehensive Plan: The duly adopted Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Chadron. 

13. 
Condominium: A real estate ownership arrangement that combines fee simple title to a specific unit and joint ownership in common elements shared with other unit owners. Types of units may include dwelling units, parking spaces, office spaces, or commercial spaces. 

14. 
Conservation Development: A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, or the preservation of historically or environmentally sensitive features. 

15. 
Conservation Subdivision: Wholly or in majority, a residential subdivision that permits a reduction in lot area, setback, or other site development regulations, provided 1) there is no increase in the overall density permitted for a conventional subdivision in a given zoning district, and 2) the remaining land area is used for common space. 

16. 
County: Dawes County, Nebraska. 

17. 
Court: An approved private right­of­way which provides access to residential properties and meets at least three of the following conditions: 

(a) 
Serves twelve or fewer housing units or platted lots. 

(b) 
Does not function as a local street because of its alignment, design, or location. 

(c) 
Is completely internal to a development. 

(d) 
Does not exceed 600 feet in length. 



18. 
Courtyard: An open, unoccupied space, bounded on two or more sides by the walls of the building. 

19. 
Conventional Subdivision: A subdivision which literally meets all nominal standards of the Land Development Ordinance for lot dimensions, setbacks, street frontage, and other site development regulations. 

20. 
Creative Subdivision: A subdivision which, while complying with the Subdivision Ordinance, diverges from nominal compliance with site development regulations in the Land Development Ordinance. Creative subdivisions imply a higher level of pre­planning than conventional subdivisions. They may be employed for the purpose of environmental protection or the creation of superior community design. Types of Creative Subdivisions include Cluster Subdivisions and Traditional Neighborhood Districts. 



207 D 
1. 
Density: The amount of development per specific unit of a site. 

2. 
Drive­in Services: Uses which involve the sale of products or provision of services to occupants in vehicles. 

3. 
Detached: Fully separated from any other building or jointed to another building in such a manner as not to constitute an enclosed or covered connection. 

4. 
Driveway: A permanently paved, surfaced area providing vehicular access between a street and an off­street parking or loading area. 

5. 
Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarter, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of 


a single family maintaining a household. 


208 E 
1. 
Easement: A privilege or right of use granted on, above, under, or across a particular tract of land for a specific purpose by one owner to another owner, public or private agency, or utility. 

2. 
Enclosed: A roofed or covered space fully surrounded by walls. 



209 F 
1. Family: One or more persons living together and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, and eating facilities within an individual housing unit, no more than 3 of whom may be unrelated. The following persons shall be considered related for the purpose of this title: 
(a) 
Persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption; 

(b) 
Persons residing with a family for the purpose of adoption; 

(c) 
Not more than eight persons under 19 years of age, residing in a foster house licensed or approved by the State of Nebraska. 

(d) 
Not more than eight persons 19 years of age or older residing with a family for the purpose of receiving foster care licensed or approved by the State of Nebraska. 

(e) 
Person(s) living with a family at the direction of a court. 


2. 
Federal: Pertaining to the Government of the United States of America. 

3. 
Floor Area Ratio: The quotient of gross floor area divided by gross site area. 

4. 
Frontage: The length of a property line of any one premises abutting and parallel to a public street, private way, or court. 



210 G 
1. Grade: The horizontal elevation of the finished surface of ground, paving, or sidewalk adjacent to any building line. 
(a) 
For buildings having walls facing one street only, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall facing the street. 

(b) 
For buildings having walls facing more than one street, the grade shall be the average elevation of the grades of all walls facing each street. 

(c) 
For buildings having no walls facing a street, the grade shall be the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 


2. Gross Floor Area: The total enclosed area of all floors of a building, measured to the inside surfaces of the exterior walls. This definition excludes the areas of basements, elevator shafts, airspaces above atriums, and enclosed off­street parking and loading areas serving a principal use. 
211 H 
1. 
Height: The vertical distance from the established grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, shed, or gambrel roofs. For other cases, height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the established grade to the highest point of a structure as herein defined. Where a building or structure is located on a slope, height shall be measured from the average grade level adjacent to the building or structure. 

2. 
Home Based Business/Home Occupation: An accessory occupational use conducted entirely within a dwelling unit by its inhabitants, which is clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling unit or residential structure and does not change the residential character of its site. 

3. 
Housing Unit or Dwelling Unit: A building or portion of a building arranged for and intended for occupancy as an independent living facility for one family, including permanent provisions for cooking. 


212 I 
1. Impervious coverage: The total horizontal area of all buildings, roofed or covered spaces, paved surface areas, walkways and driveways, and any other site improvements that decrease the ability of the surface of the site to absorb water, expressed as a percent of site area. The surface water area of pools is excluded from this definition. 

213 J 
214 K 
215 L 
1. Landscaped Area: The area within the boundaries of a given lot, site or common development consisting primarily of plant material, including but not limited to grass, trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, and other organic plant materials; or grass paver masonry units installed such that the appearance of the area is primarily landscaped. 
(a) 
Perimeter Landscaped Area: Any required landscaped area that adjoins the exterior boundary of a lot, site or common development. 

(b) 
Interior Landscaped Area: Any landscaped area within a site exclusive of required perimeter landscaping. 


2. 
Loading Area: An off­street area used for the loading or unloading of goods from a vehicle in connection with the use of the site on which such area is located. 

3. 
Lot: A parcel of property with a separate and distinct number or other identifying designation which has been created, assigned and recorded in the Office of the Dawes County Register of Deeds, as provided for by Sections 16­902, 16­903, 19­916, 19­918, and 19­921 Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943. Each individual lot is subject to the provisions of a particular base Zoning District, and shall have a minimum frontage of 20 feet, except as provided in an approved Planned Unit Development and/or Creative Subdivision. 

(a) 
Corner Lot: A lot located at the junction of at least two streets, private ways or courts or at least two segments of a curved street, private way or court, at which the angle of intersection is no greater than 135 degrees. 

(b) 
Double Frontage Lot: A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on two streets, private ways or courts. Primary access shall be restricted on a double frontage lot to the minor of the two streets or to the front line as determined at time of platting or as defined by these regulations. (Also known as a Through Lot) 

(c) 
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot. 

(d) 
Common Development Lot: When two or more contiguous lots are developed as part of a Planned Unit Development, these lots may be considered a single lot for purposes of these regulations. 



4. 
Lot Area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. 

5. 
Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance measured between the front and rear lot lines. 

6. 
Lot Line: A property boundary line(s) of record that divides one lot from another lot or a lot from the public or private street right­of­way or easement. Once established, lot lines may not be redefined due to a change of address which would result in a new definition of the prior defined lot lines. 

(a) Front Lot Line: The lot line separating a lot and a public or private street right­of­way or easement. 
1. 
For an interior lot, the lot line separating the lot from the right­of­way or easement. 

2. 
For a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a public or private street or easement. In instances of equal line dimension, the front lot line shall be determined by the Planning Director, or as may be noted on the final plat. 

3. 
For a double frontage lot, the lot lines separating the lot from the right­of­way or easement of the more minor street. In cases where each street has the same classification, the front lot line shall be determined by the Planning Director at the time of application for the original building permit for the lot, or as may be noted on the final plat. 


(b) 
Rear Lot Line: The lot line which is opposite and most distant form the front line. 

(c) 
Side Lot Line: Any lot line that is neither a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street, private way or court is a street side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 



7. 
Lot Width: The horizontal distance measured between the side lot lines of a lot, at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required setback line. 



216 M 
1. Manufactured Home Dwelling (Statute #19­1902): A factory built structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation, which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a permanent site; does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles; bears a label certifying that it was built in compliance with the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards promulgated by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development; and which complies with the following architectural and aesthetic standards: 
(a) 
The home shall have at least 900 square feet of floor area; 

(b) 
The home shall have an exterior width of at least 18 feet; 

(c) 
The roof shall be pitched with a maximum vertical rise of 2.5 inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run. 

(d) 
The exterior material is of a color, material, and scale comparable with those existing in the residential site on which the manufactured home dwelling is being permanently installed; 

(e) 
The home shall have a nonreflective roof material which is or simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile, or rock; 

(f) 
Permanent utility connections shall be installed in accordance with local regulations; 

(g) 
The home shall have all wheels, axles, transporting lights, and towing apparatus removed; and 

(h) 
The home shall be installed upon a permanent foundation that is constructed and built in accordance with local regulations. 


2. 
Mixed Use Building: A building or structure that incorporates two or more use types within a single building or structure, provided that each use type is permitted within the individual Base Zoning District in which the building or structure is to be located. 

3. 
Mixed Use Development: A single development which incorporates complementary land use types into a single development. 

4. 
Mobile Homes: A building type designed to be transportable in one or more sections, constructed on a permanent chassis or undercarriage, and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or other use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, but not bearing a seal attesting to the approval and issuance of the Nebraska Department of Health or conformance to the manufactured home procedural and enforcement regulations, as adopted by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development; or not otherwise satisfying the definition of Manufactured Home Dwellings. 

5. 
Mobile Home Park: A unified development under single ownership, developed, subdivided, planned, and improved for the placement of mobile home units for non­transient use. Mobile Home Parks include common areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry, utility services, storage, storm shelter, and other services; but do not include mobile home sales lots on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the purposes of display, inspection, sale, or storage. 

6. 
Mobile Home Subdivision: A development subdivided, planned, and improved for the placement of mobile home units on lots for uses by the individual owners of such lots. Mobile Home Subdivisions may include common areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry, utility services, storage, storm shelter, and other services; but do not include mobile home sales lots on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the purpose of display, inspection, sale, or storage. 



217 N 
1. 
Nonconforming Development: A building, structure, or improvement which does not comply with the regulations for its zoning district set forth by these Zoning Regulations but which complied with applicable regulations at the time of construction. 

2. 
Nonconforming Lot: A lot which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of these zoning regulations but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning regulations. No action can be taken which would increase the non­conforming characteristics of the lot. 

3. 
Nonconforming Sign: A sign that was legally erected prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of these zoning regulations but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning regulations. 

4. 
Nonconforming Structure: A structure which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of these zoning regulations but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning regulations. No action can be taken which would increase the non­conforming characteristics of the structure. 

5. 
Nonconforming Use: A land use which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of these Zoning Regulations but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the non­conforming characteristics of the land use. 

6. 
Nuisance: An unreasonable and continuous invasion of the use and enjoyment of a property right which a reasonable person would find annoying, unpleasant, obnoxious, or offensive. 



218 O 
1. 
Open Space: Area included on any site or lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky, except for allowed projections of cornices, overhangs, porches, balconies, or plant materials. 

2. 
Outdoor Storage: The storage of materials, parts, or products that are related to the primary use of a site for a period exceeding three days. 

3. 
Overlay District: A district established by these regulations to prescribe special regulations to be applied to a site only in combination with a base district. 

4. 
Owner: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of land. 



219 P 
1. 
Parking Facility: An area on a lot and/or within a building, including one or more parking spaces, along with provision for access circulation, maneuvering, and landscaping, meeting the requirements of these Zoning Regulations. Parking facilities include parking lots, private garages, and parking structures. Vehicle storage is distinct from parking, and is regulated by provisions in Sections 307b, 308, 309j, Table 4­2. Vehicle storage is also governed by provisions of Article 9: Parking Regulations. 

2. 
Parking Spaces: An area on a lot and/or within a building, intended for the use of temporary parking of a personal vehicle. This term is used interchangeably with “parking stall”. Each parking space must have a means of access to a public street. Tandem parking stalls in single­family detached, single­family attached, and townhome residential uses shall be considered to have a means of access to a public street. 

3. 
Paved: Permanently surfaced with poured concrete, concrete pavers, or asphalt. 

4. 
Permitted Use: A land use type allowed as a matter of right in a zoning district, subject only to special requirements of these Zoning Regulations. 

5. 
Planning Commission: The Planning Commission of the City of Chadron, as authorized pursuant to Sections 19­924 through 19­929, inclusive of Nebraska Revised State Statutes. 

6. 
Planned Unit Development: A development of land which is under unified control and is planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or programmed series of development stages. The development may include streets, circulation ways, utilities, buildings, open spaces, and other site features and improvements. 

7. 
Porch, Unenclosed: A roofed or unroofed open structure projecting from an exterior wall of a building and having no enclosed features more than thirty inches above its floor other than wire screening and a roof with supporting structure. 

8. 
Premises: A lot, parcel, tract or plot of land, contiguous and under common ownership or control, together with the buildings and structure thereon. 

9. 
Private Garage: A building for the storage of motor vehicles where no repair service facilities are maintained and where no motor vehicles are kept for rental or sale. 

10. 
Property Line: See “Lot Line.” 


220 Q 221 R 
1. 
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle towed or self propelled on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for temporary dwelling, recreational, or sporting purposes. Recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, travel trailers; campers; motor coach homes; converted buses and trucks, boats, and boat trailers. 

2. 
Regulation: A specific requirement set forth by these Zoning Regulations which must be followed. 

3. 
Remote Parking: A supply of off­street parking at a location not on the site of a given development. 



222 S 
1. 
Screening: The method by which a view of one site from another adjacent site is shielded, concealed, or hidden. Screening techniques include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other features as may be permitted by the landscape provisions of these regulations. 

2. 
Setback: The distance, as required by the minimum setback(s) which establishes the horizontal component(s) of the building envelope. 

3. 
Sign: A symbolic, visual device fixed upon a building, vehicle, structure, or parcel of land, which is intended to convey information about a product, business, activity, place, person, institution, candidate, or political idea. 

4. 
Site: The parcel of land to be developed or built upon. A site may encompass a single lot; or a group of lots developed as a common development under the special and overlay districts provisions of these regulations. 

5. 
Site Plan: A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development features proposed for a specific parcel of land; and any other information that may be reasonably be requested by the City in order that an informed decision can be made on the associated request. 

6. 
Special Permit Use: A use with operating and/or physical characteristics different from those of permitted uses in a given zoning district which may, nonetheless, be compatible with those uses under special conditions and with adequate public review. Special permit uses are allowed in a zoning district only at the discretion of and with the explicit permission of the Planning Commission. 

7. 
State: The State of Nebraska. 

8. 
Story: The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it; if there is no floor above it, the space between such floor and the next ceiling above it. A half story is a story under a sloped roof, the wall heights of which on at least two opposite, exterior walls are less than four feet. 

9. 
Street: A right of way, dedicated to public use, which affords a primary means of access to the abutting property. This definition is intended to be inclusive of the term as defined in Nebraska statute. 

10. 
Street, Intersecting and Principal: In regard to a site, the principal street shall be the street to which the majority of lots on a blockface are oriented; the intersecting street shall be a street other than a principal street. 

11. 
Street, Local: A street which is used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 

12. 
Street, Major: A street carrying traffic between neighborhoods, connecting neighborhoods with major activity centers, or accommodating major through traffic. Major streets are designated as collectors, arterials, 

or expressways by the Comprehensive Development Plan. 

13. 
Street Yard: The area of a lot or parcel which lies between any street propoerty line and the fronting walls of any building or buildings on the parcel. The street yard follows all irregularities or indentations in the building, excluding minor irregularities such as porches or steps. 

14. 
Structure: Any object constructed or built, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something located on the ground. 



223 T 
1. 
Townhouse: A dwelling unit having a common wall with or abutting one or more adjacent dwelling units in a townhouse structure, with its own front and rear access to the outside, and neither above nor below any other dwelling unit. 

2. 
Townhouse Structure: A building formed by at least two and not more than twelve contiguous townhouses with common or abutting walls. 



224 U 
1. 
Use: The conduct of an activity, or the performance of a function or operation, on a site or in a building or facility. 

2. 
Utilities: Installations, either above or below ground, necessary for the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, treatments, or storage of water, solid or fluid wastes, storm water, energy media, gas, electronic or electromagnetic signals, or other services which are precedent to development and use of land. 


225 V 226 W 227 X 
228 Y 
1. Yard; Required: That portion of a lot which lies between a lot line and the corresponding building setback line or the required landscape area. This area shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided for or required by these regulations. 
(a) 
Front Yard: The space extending the full width of a lot, lying between the front lot line and the front setback line. 

(b) 
Rear Yard: The space extending the full width of a lot, lying between the rear lot line and the rear setback line. 

(c) 
Side Yard: The space extending the depth of a lot from the front to rear lot lines, lying between the side yard setback line and the interior lot line. 

(d) 
Street Side Yard: On a corner lot, the space extending from the front yard to the rear yard, between the street side yard setback line and the street side lot line. 


2. Yard, Street: See Street Yard 
229 Z 
1. 
Zoning District: A designated specified land classification, within which all sites are subject to a unified group of use and site development regulations set forth in these Zoning Regulations. 

2. 
Zoning Administrator: The designee of the City Council, responsible for the interpretation and administration of the City of Chadron Zoning Regulations. 







3 ARTICLE THREE 
USE TYPES 
301 Purpose 
Article Three shall be known as the Use Types. The purpose of the Use Types is to establish a classification system for land uses and a consistent set of terms defining uses permitted or conditionally permitted within various zoning districts. The Use Types section also provides a procedure for determining the applicable use type of any activity not clearly within any defined use type. 
302 Determinations 
a. Classification of Uses 
In the event of any question as to the appropriate use types of any existing or proposed use or activity, the Zoning Administrator of the City of Chadron shall have the authority to determine the appropriate use type. A determination of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. In making such determinations, the Zoning Administrator and Board of Adjustment shall consider such characteristics or specific requirements of the use in common with those included as examples of use types. Those examples, when included in use type descriptions, are intended to be illustrative, as opposed to exclusive lists. 
b. Records 
The Zoning Administrator shall make all such determinations of appropriate use types in writing. The record of the determination shall contain a report explaining the reasons for the determination. 
303 Agricultural Use Types 
Agricultural use types include the on­site production and sale of plant and animal products by agricultural methods. 
a. Horticulture 
The growing of horticultural and floricultural specialties on an agricultural and commercial basis, such as flowers, shrubs, or trees intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes. This definition may include accessory retail sales under certain conditions. Typical uses include wholesale plant nurseries and commercial greenhouses. 
b. Crop Production 
The raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops for field crops on an agricultural and commercial basis. This definition may include accessory retail sales under certain conditions. 
c. Type I Animal Production 
The raising of animals or production of animal products, such as eggs or dairy products on an agricultural or commercial basis on a site which is also used for crop production or where grazing of natural vegetation is the major feed source; or the raising of animals for recreational use. Type I Animal Production shall also include confined feeding and holding facilities consisting of no more than 20 feeder or fat cattle; no more than 20 beef cows; no more than 20 dairy cattle; no more than 50 swine, llamas, and ostriches or similar large birds; no more than 200 sheep; no more than 300 turkeys; and/or no more than 1,000 chickens, ducks, or geese. Typical uses include grazing, ranching, dairy farming, and poultry farming. 
d. Type II Animal Production 
The confined feeding and holding facilities consisting of between 21 and 150 feeder or fat cattle; between 21 and 100 beef cows; between 21 and 100 dairy cattle; between 51 and 500 swine, llamas, and ostriches or similar large birds; between 201 and 2,000 sheep; between 301 and 3,000 turkeys; and/or between 1,001 and 10,000 chickens, ducks, or geese within buildings, lots, pens, or other close quarters which are not used for crop production or where gazing of natural vegetation is not the major feed source. Typical uses include small commercial feedlots. 
d. Type III Animal Production 
The confined feeding and holding facilities consisting of more than 150 feeder or fat cattle; more than 100 beef cows; more than 100 dairy cattle; more than 500 swine, llamas, and ostriches or similar large birds; more than 2,000 sheep; more than 3,000 turkeys; and/or more than 1,001 and 10,000 chickens, ducks, or geese within buildings, lots, pens, or other close quarters which are not used for crop production or where gazing of natural vegetation is not the major feed source. Typical uses include large commercial feedlots. 
f. Livestock Sales 
Use of a site for the temporary confinement and exchange or sale of livestock. Typical uses include sales barns. 
304 Residential Use Types 
Residential use types include uses providing wholly or primarily non­transient living accommodations. They exclude institutional living arrangements providing 24­hour skilled nursing or medical care, forced residence, or therapeutic settings. 
a. Single­Family Residential 
The use of a site for one dwelling unit, occupied by one family. (NOTE: Mobile home units are not a single­family use type. See below categories for such units). 
1. 
Single­Family Residential (Detached): A single­family residential use in which one dwelling unit is located on a single lot, with no physical or structural connection to any other dwelling unit. 

2. 
Single­Family Residential (Attached): A single­family residential use in which one dwelling unit is located on a single lot and is attached by a common vertical wall to only one other adjacent dwelling unit on another single lot. 


b. Duplex Residential 
The use of a legally­described lot for two dwelling units, each occupied by one family within a single building, excluding manufactured or mobile home units, but including modular housing units. 
c. Two­Family Residential 
The use of a site for two dwelling units, each occupied by one family, each in a separate building, excluding a mobile home unit. 
d. Townhouse Residential 
The use of a site for three or more attached dwelling units, each occupied by one family and separated by vertical side walls extending from foundation through roof without openings. Each townhouse unit must have at least two exposed exterior walls. 
e. Multiple­Family Residential 

The use of a site for three or more dwelling units within one building. 
f. Downtown Residential 
The use of upper levels above street level of a building within the Central Business District of the City of Chadron for single­or multiple­family residential uses. 
g. Group Residential 
The use of a site for a residence by more than three unrelated persons, not defined as a family, on a weekly or longer basis. 
h. 
Manufactured Home Residential 
Use of a site for one or more manufactured home dwellings, as defined in Section 216. 


i. 
Mobile Home Park 


Use of a site under single ownership for one or more mobile home units. Generally, the land on which mobile homes are placed in a Mobile Home Park is leased from the owner of the facility. 
j. Mobile Home Subdivision 
Division of a tract of land into lots that meet all the requirements of the City of Chadron's subdivision regulations for the location of mobile homes. Generally, a lot within a Mobile Home Subdivision is owned by the owner of the mobile home placed upon such lot. 
k. Retirement Residence 
A building or group of buildings which provide residential facilities for more than four residents of at least sixty­two years of age, or households headed by a householder of at least sixty­two years of age. A retirement residence may provide a range of residential building types and may also provide support services to residents, including but not limited to food service, general health supervision, medication services, housekeeping services, personal services, recreation facilities, and transportation services. The retirement residence may accommodate food preparation in independent units or meal service in one or more common areas. Retirement residences may include additional health care supervision or nursing care. 
305 Civic Use Types 
Civic use types include the performance of utility, educational, recreational, cultural, medical, protective, governmental, and other uses which are strongly vested with social importance. 
a. Administration 
Governmental offices providing administrative, clerical or public contact services that deal directly with the citizen, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include federal, state, county, and city offices. 
b. Cemetery 
Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematoria, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
c. Clubs 
Uses providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities for a private, non­profit or non­commercial association, primarily for use by members and guests. 
d. College and University Facilities 
An educational institution of higher learning which offers a course of study designed to culminate in the issuance of a degree certified by a generally recognized accrediting organization. 
e. Convalescent Services 
A use providing bed care and in­patient services for persons requiring regular medical attention but excluding a facility providing surgical or emergency medical services and excluding a facility providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or communicable disease. Typical uses include nursing homes. 
f. Cultural Services 
A library, museum, or similar registered non­profit organizational use displaying, preserving and exhibiting objects of community and cultural interest in one or more of the arts and sciences. 
g. Day Care Services: State Classifications and Definition of Limited and General Types 
The zoning provisions of this regulations recognize the facility classification system established by the State of Nebraska as follows: 
1. Day Care: Center ­Licensed (Type 1). A facility licensed by the State of Nebraska providing care for children: 
a. 
Age eleven or younger from more than one family; 

b. 
On the average of less than 12 hours per day, but more than 2 hours per week. 

c. 
For compensation, either indirectly or directly; 

d. 
On a regular basis; 

e. 
In lieu of parental supervision; 


f. 
Licensed by the State of Nebraska for not more than twenty­two (22) children. 


2. Day Care: Center ­Licensed (Type II). A facility licensed by the State of Nebraska providing care for children: 
a. 
Age eleven or younger from more than one family; 

b. 
On the average of less than 12 hours per day, but more than 2 hours per week. 

c. 
For compensation, either indirectly or directly; 

d. 
On a regular basis; 

e. 
In lieu of parental supervision; 


f. 
Licensed by the State of Nebraska for more than twenty­two (22) children. 


3. Day Care Family­Licensed. A facility licensed by the State of Nebraska providing care for more than four (4) but not more than eight (8) children: 
a. 
Age eleven or younger from more than one family; 

b. 
On the average of less than 12 hours per day, but more than 2 hours per week; 

c. 
For compensation, either directly of indirectly; 

d. 
On a regular basis; 

e. 
In lieu of parental supervision; 



4. Day Care: Group Day Care Home ­Licensed. A facility licensed by the State of Nebraska in the business of providing care to not more than twelve (12) children under the following circumstances: 
a. 
Age eleven or younger from more than one family; 

b. 
For less than 12 continuous hours per child per day; 

c. 
For compensation, either directly of indirectly; 

d. 
On a regular basis; 

e. 
In lieu of parental supervision; 


f. 
By persons other than their parents/guardians. 


Day Care Services (Limited) 
This Use Type includes all classifications of day care facilities regulated by the State of Nebraska that operate providing care for not more than eight (8) children. This term includes nursery schools, preschools, day care centers for children or adults, and similar uses but excludes public and private primary and secondary educational facilities. 
Day Care Services (General) 
This Use Type includes all classifications of day care facilities regulated by the State of Nebraska that operate providing care for more than eight (8) children. This term includes nursery schools, preschools, day care centers for children or adults, and similar uses but excludes public and private primary and secondary educational facilities. 
i. Detention Facilities 
A publicly operated or contracted use providing housing and care for individuals legally confined, designed to isolate those individuals from the community. 
j. Emergency Residential Services 
A facility or use of a building to provide a protective sanctuary for victims of crime or abuse, including emergency housing during crisis intervention for victims of rape, abuse, or physical beatings. 
k. Group Care Facility 
A facility licensed or approved by the State of Nebraska or other appropriate agency, which provides for the care and short or long­term, continuous multi­day occupancy of more than three unrelated persons who require and receive therapy or counseling on site as part of an organized and therapeutic ongoing program for any of the purposes listed below. Such facilities shall exclude those uses defined as group homes. Group Care Facilities include facilities which provide for the: 
1 . Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from, the handicaps of physical disability. 
2. 
Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from, the handicaps of emotional or mental disorder; or of mental retardation if such facility has an overnight occupancy of more than eight persons. 

3. 
Rehabilitation from the effects of drug or alcohol abuse. 

4. 
Supervision while under a program alternative to imprisonment, including but not limited to pre­release, work­release, and probationary programs. 


l. Group Home 
A facility licensed by the State of Nebraska in which at least four but no more than eight persons, not including resident managers or house parents, who are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption reside while receiving therapy, training, or counseling for the purpose of adaptation to living with or rehabilitation from cerebral palsy, autism, or mental retardation. 
m. Guidance Services A use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative, or similar services to persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction, or similar condition on a daytime care basis. 
n. Health Care 
A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an out­patient basis including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration and services to out­patients, employees, or visitors. 
o. Hospital 
A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons primarily on an in­patient basis, including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration, and services to out­patients, employees, or visitors. 
p. Maintenance Facilities 
A public facility supporting maintenance, repair, vehicular or equipment servicing, material storage, and similar activities including street or sewer yards, equipment service centers, and similar uses having characteristics of commercial services or contracting or industrial activities. 
q. Park and Recreation Services 
Publicly­owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities, and open spaces. 
r. Postal Facilities 
Postal services, including post offices, bulk mail processing or sorting centers operated by the United States Postal Service. 
s. Primary Educational Facilities 
A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary school level in the branches of learning study required to be taught in schools within the State of Nebraska. 
t. Public Assembly 
Facilities owned and operated by a public agency or a charitable non­profit organization accommodating major public assembly for recreation, sports, amusement, or entertainment purposes. Typical uses include civic or community auditoriums, sports stadiums, convention facilities, fairgrounds, incidental sales, and exhibition facilities. 
u. Religious Assembly 
A use located in a permanent building and providing regular organized religious worship and religious education incidental thereto (excluding private primary or private secondary educational facilities, community recreational facilities, day­care facilities, and incidental parking facilities). A property tax exemption obtained pursuant to Property Tax Code of the State of Nebraska shall constitute prima facie evidence of religious assembly use. 
v. 
Safety Services 

w. 
Secondary Educational Facilities 


Facilities for conduct of public safety and emergency services including police and fire protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services. 
A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the junior high or high school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the schools of the State of Nebraska. 
x. Utilities 
Any above ground structures or facilities, other than lines, poles, and other incidental facilities, used for the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil, energy media, communications, electronic or electromagnetic signals, or other services which are precedent to development and/or use of land. 
306 Office Use Types 
Office use types include uses providing for administration, professional services, and allied activities. These uses often invite public clientele but are more limited in external effects than commercial uses. 
a. General Offices 
Use of a site for business, professional, or administrative offices. Typical uses include real estate, insurance, management, travel, or other business offices; organization and association offices; banks or financial offices; or professional offices. 
b. Financial Services 
Provision of financial and banking services to consumers or clients. Walk­in and drive­in services to consumers are provided on site. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan associations, savings banks, and loan companies. An ATM (Automatic Teller Machine) which is not accompanied on­site by an office of a its primary financial institution is considered a "General Retail Services" Use Type. 
c. Medical Offices 
Use of a site for facilities which provide diagnoses and outpatient care on a routine basis, but which does not provide prolonged, in­house medical or surgical care. Medical offices are operated by doctors, dentists, or similar practitioners licensed for practice in the State of Nebraska. 
307 Commercial Use Types 
Commercial uses include the sale, rental, service, and distribution of goods; and the provision of services other than those classified under other use types. 
a. Agricultural Sales and Service 
Establishments or places of business engaged in sale from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers, farm equipment, pesticides and similar goods or in the provision of agriculturally­related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. Typical uses include nurseries, hay, farm implement dealerships, feed and grain stores, and tree service firms. 
b. Automotive and Equipment Services 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in sale and/or service of automobiles, trucks, or heavy equipment. The following are considered automotive and equipment use types: 
1. 
Automotive Rental and Sales: Sale or rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, 

motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include new and used car dealerships; motorcycle dealerships; and boat, trailer, and recreational vehicle dealerships. 

2. 
Auto Services: Provision of fuel, lubricants, parts and accessories, and incidental services to motor vehicles; and washing and cleaning and/or repair of automobiles, non­commercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing of equipment and parts. Typical uses include service stations, car washes, muffler shops, auto repair garages, tire sales and installation, wheel and brake shops, and similar repair and service activities but exclude dismantling, salvage, or body and fender repair services. 

3. 
Body Repair: Repair, painting, or refinishing of the body, fender, or frame of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, boats, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar vehicles or equipment. Typical uses include body and fender shops, painting shops, and other similar repair or refinishing garages. 

4. 
Equipment Rental and Sales: Sale or rental of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, mobile homes, and similar heavy equipment, including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include truck dealerships, construction equipment dealerships, and mobile home sales establishments. 

5. 
Equipment Repair Services: Repair of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses include truck repair garages, tractor and farm implement repair services, and machine shops, but exclude dismantling, salvage, or body and fender repair services. 


c. Bed and Breakfast 
A lodging service that provides overnight or short­term accommodations to guests or visitors, usually including provision of breakfast. Bed and breakfasts are usually located in large residential structures that have been adapted for this use. For the purpose of this definition, bed and breakfasts are always owned and operated by the resident owner of the structure, include no more than ten units, and accommodate each guest or visitor for no more than 7 consecutive days during any one month period. 
d. Business Support Services 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale, rental or repair of equipment, supplies and materials or the provision of services used by office, professional and service establishments to the firms themselves but excluding automotive, construction and farm equipment; or engaged in the provision of maintenance or custodial services to businesses. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops or hotel equipment and supply firms, janitorial services, photography studios, and convenience printing and copying. 
e. Business or Trade Schools 
A use providing education or training in business, commerce, language, or other similar activity or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college or university, or public or private educational facility. 
f. Campground 
Facilities providing camping or parking areas and incidental services for travelers in recreational vehicles or tents, which accommodate each guest or visitor for no more than 7 consecutive days during any one month period. 
g. Cocktail Lounge 
A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, and similar uses other than a restaurant as that term is defined in this section. 
h. Commercial Recreation (Indoors) 
Private businesses, or other organizations which may or may not be commercial by structure or by nature, which are primarily engaged in the provision or sponsorship of sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators. The preponderance of activities occur within enclosed structures. Typical uses include movie theaters, private dance halls, or private skating facilities. 
i. Commercial Recreation (Outdoors) 
Private businesses, or other organizations which may or may not be commercial by structure or by nature, which are primarily engaged in the provision or sponsorship of sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators. The preponderance of activities occur outside of enclosed structures. Typical uses include driving ranges, commercial race tracks, and drive­in theaters. 
j. Communications Services 
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but excludes those classified as Utilities. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunication service centers, telegraph service offices, or film and sound recording facilities. Broadcast towers, and their minor ancillary ground structures are classified as "Miscellaneous Use Types." 
k. Construction Sales and Services 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail or wholesale sale, from the premises, of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures other than retail sale of paint, fixtures and hardware. This use type excludes those uses classified under Automotive and Equipment Services. Typical uses include building materials sales, or tool and equipment rental or sales. 
l. Consumer Services 
Establishments which provide services, primarily to individuals and households, but excluding Automotive Use Types. Typical uses include automated banking machines, appliance repair shops, watch or jewelry repair shops, or musical instrument repair shops. 
m. Convenience Storage 
Storage services primarily for personal effects and household goods within enclosed storage areas having individual access but excluding use of such areas as workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing, or commercial activity. Typical uses include self­storage or mini­warehousing (sometimes referred to as “u­store­its”). 
n. Food Sales 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food or household products for home consumption. Food sales establishments may include the sale of non­food items. However, the sale of non­food items may account for no more than 33% of the sales are of the Food Sales establishment. Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy shops. 
1. 
Convenience Food Sales: Establishments occupying facilities of less than 10,000 square feet; and characterized by sales of specialty foods or a limited variety of general items, and by the sales of fuel for 

motor vehicles. 

2. 
Limited Food Sales: Establishments occupying facilities of less than 10,000 square feet; and characterized by sales of specialty foods or a limited variety of general items, but excluding the accessory sale of fuel for motor vehicles. Typical uses include delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, candy shops, small grocery stores. 

3. 
General Food Sales: Establishments selling a wide variety of food commodities, using facilities larger than 10,000 square feet. Typical uses include supermarkets. 


o. Funeral Services 
Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the human dead for burial, and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral homes or mortuaries. 
p. Gaming Facilities 
Establishments engaged in the lawful, on­site operation of games of chance that involve the risk of money for financial gain by patrons. Gaming facilities shall include the accessory sale of liquor and food, pursuant to licensing regulations of the City of Chadron or the State of Nebraska. 
q. Retail Services 
Sale or rental with incidental service of commonly­used goods and merchandise for personal or household use but excludes those classified more specifically by these use type classifications. Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores, furniture stores, or establishments providing the following products or services: 
Household cleaning and maintenance products; drugs, cards, stationery, notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics, and specialty items; flowers, plants, hobby materials, toys, and handcrafted items; apparel jewelry, fabrics and like items; cameras, photograph services, household electronic equipment, records, sporting equipment, kitchen utensils, home furnishing and appliances, art supplies and framing, arts and antiques, paint and wallpaper, hardware, carpeting and floor covering; interior decorating services; office supplies; mail order or catalog sales; bicycles; and automotive parts and accessories (excluding service and installation). General Retail Services include: 
1. 
Limited Retail Services: Establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities of 5,000 square feet or less for any single establishment or 10,000 square feet or less for a multi­tenant facility. Typical establishments provide for specialty retailing or retailing oriented to Chadron and a local market. 

2. 
General Retail Services: Establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities of more than 5,000 square feet for any single establishment or more than 10,000 square feet for a multi­tenant facility. Typical establishments provide for general purpose retailing oriented to Chadron and its immediate vicinity. 


r. Kennels 
Boarding and care services for dogs, cats and similar small mammals or large birds; or any premises on which three or more animals included under this definition over four months of age are kept and maintained. Typical uses include boarding kennels, ostrich raising facilities; pet motels, or dog training centers. 
s. Laundry Services 
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, cleaning or dyeing services other than those classified as Personal Services. Typical uses include bulk laundry and cleaning plans, diaper services, or linen supply services. 
t. Liquor Sales 

Establishments or places of business engaged in retail sale for off­premise consumption of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include liquor stores, bottle shops, or any licensed sales of liquor, beer or wine for off­site consumption. 
u. Lodging 
Lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board, but not meeting the classification criteria of Bed and Breakfasts. Typical uses include hotels, apartment hotels, and motels. 
v. Personal Services 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of services of a personal nature. Typical uses include beauty and barber shops; seamstress, tailor, or shoe repair shops; photography studios; or dry cleaning stations serving individuals and households, driving schools, health or physical fitness studios, reducing salons, dance studios, tattoo parlors, handicraft and hobby instruction. 
w. Pet Services 
Retail sales, incidental pet health services, and grooming and boarding, when totally within a building, of dogs, cats, birds, fish, and similar small animals customarily used as household pets. Typical uses include pet stores, small animal clinics, dog bathing and clipping salons,and pet grooming shops, but exclude uses for livestock and large animals. 
x. Research Services 
Establishments primarily engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature. Typical uses include electronics research laboratories, space research and development firms, testing laboratories, or pharmaceutical research labs. 
y. Restricted Businesses 
Any business activity which offers the opportunity to view sexual activities or view or touch anatomical areas for entertainment purposes in a manner that offends contemporary standards in the community of Chadron, depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, and lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. This category includes the sale or viewing of visual or print materials that meet these criteria. Typical uses include retail services or stores which are distinguished by an emphasis on activities or materials that emphasize sexual content; businesses which offer live performances characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas; and adult theaters. 
z. Restaurants 
A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages; including the sale of alcoholic beverages when conducted as a secondary feature of the use, producing less than 50 per cent of the establishment's gross income. 
1. 
Restaurant (Drive­in or Fast Food): An establishment which principally supplies food and beverages in disposable containers and is characterized by high automobile accessibility and on­site accommodations, self­service, and short stays by customers. 

2. 
Restaurant (General): An establishment characterized by table service to customers and/or accommodation to walk­in clientele, as opposed to Drive­in or Fast Food Restaurants. Typical uses include cafes, coffee shops, and restaurants. 


aa. Stables and/or Riding Academies 
The buildings, pens and pasture areas used for the boarding and feeding of horses, llamas, or other equine not owned by the occupants of the premises. This use includes instruction in riding, jumping, and showing or the riding of horses/equine for hire. 
bb. Surplus Sales 
Businesses engaged in the sale of used or new items, involving regular, periodic outdoor display of merchandise for sale. Typical uses include flea markets and factory outlets or discount businesses with outdoor display. 
cc. Trade Services 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of services that are not retail or primarily dedicated to walk­in clientele. These services often involve services to construction or building trades and may involve a small amount of screened, outdoor storage in appropriate zoning districts. Typical uses include shops or operating bases for plumbers, electricians, or HVAC (heating , ventilating, and air conditioning) contractors. 
dd. Vehicle Storage (Long­term) 
Long­term storage of operating or non­operating vehicles for a period exceeding 30 days. Typical uses include storage of private parking tow­aways or impound yards but exclude dismantling or salvage. Short­term storage of 30 days or less constitutes a Commercial Use Type. 
ee. Vehicle Storage (Short­Term) 
Short­term storage of operating or non­operating vehicles for a period of no more than 30 days. Typical uses include storage of private parking tow­aways or impound yards but exclude dismantling or salvage. Long­term storage beyond 30 days constitutes an Industrial Use Type. 
ff. Veterinary Services 
Veterinary services and hospitals for animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals, pet cemeteries, and veterinary hospitals for livestock and large animals. 
308 Parking Use Types 
a. Off­Street Parking 
Parking use types include surface parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within a privately or publicly owned off­street parking facility. 
b. Parking Structure 
The use of a site for a multi­level building which provides for the parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis, other than as an accessory to a principal use on the same site. 
309 Industrial Use Types 
Industrial use types include the on­site extraction or production of goods by non­agricultural methods, and the storage and distribution of products. 
a. Agricultural Industries Establishments or uses engaged in the large­scale storage or processing of agricultural products and supplies that cannot be otherwise categorized as light, general, or heavy industries, some of which may involve storage of potentially hazardous materials. Typical uses include grain elevators and anhydrous ammonia storage facilities. 
b. Construction Yards 
Establishments housing facilities of businesses primarily engaged in construction activities, including incidental storage of materials and equipment on lots other than construction sites. Typical uses are building contractor's yards. 
c. Custom Manufacturing 
Establishments primarily engaged in the on­site production of goods by hand manufacturing, within enclosed structures, involving: 
1. 
The use of hand tools, or 

2. 
A single kiln not exceeding 8 KW or equivalent. 


This category also includes the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those goods produced on site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, custom jewelry manufacturing, candle making shops. 
d. Light Industry 
Establishments engaged in the manufacture or processing of finished products from previously prepared materials, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution. These establishments are characterized by having no major external environmental effects across property lines and include no unscreened or un­enclosed outdoor storage. Typical uses include commercial bakeries, dressed beef processing plants, soft drink bottling, apparel assembly from fabrics, electronics, manufacturing, print shops and publishing houses. 
e. General Industry 
Enterprises engaged in the processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or fabrication of materials and products from prepared materials or from raw materials without noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across property lines. 
f. Heavy Industry 
Enterprises involved in the basic processing and manufacturing of products, predominately from raw materials, with noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across property lines; or a use or process engaged in the storage of or processes involving potentially or actually hazardous, explosive, flammable, radioactive, or other commonly recognized hazardous materials. 
g. 
Recycling Collection 

h. 
Recycling Processing 

i. 
Resource Extraction 


Any site which is used in whole or part for the receiving or collection of any post­consumer, non­durable goods including, but not limited to glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, aluminum, tin, or other recyclable commodities. 
Any site which is used for the processing of any post­consumer, non­durable goods including, but not limited to glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, aluminum, tin, or other recyclable commodities. 
A use involving on­site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources, excluding the grading and removal of dirt. Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, mining. 
j. Salvage Services 
Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their original forms. Typical uses include automotive wrecking yards, junk yards, or paper salvage yards. 
k. Warehousing (Enclosed) 
Uses including storage, warehousing, distribution, and handling of goods and materials within enclosed structures. Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, and van and storage companies. 
l. Warehousing (Open) 
Uses including open air storage, distribution, and handling of goods and materials. Typical uses include monument yards, materials yards, open storage. 
310 Transportation Use Types 
Transportation use types include the use of land for the purpose of providing facilities supporting the movement of passengers and freight from one point to another. 
a. Aviation Facilities 
Landing fields, aircraft parking and service facilities, and related facilities for operation, service, fueling, repair, storage, charter, sales, and rental of aircraft, and including activities directly associated with the operation and maintenance of airport facilities and the provision of safety and security. 
b. 
Railroad Facility 
Railroad yards, equipment servicing facilities, and terminal facilities. 


c. 
Transportation Terminal 


Facility for loading, unloading, and interchange of passengers, baggage, and incidental freight or package express, including bus terminals, railroad stations, public transit facilities. 
d. Truck Terminal 
A facility for the receipt, transfer, short term storage, and dispatching of goods transported by truck. 

311 Miscellaneous Type Uses 
a. Alternative Energy Production Devices 
The use of a site for the production of energy utilizing methods that do not involve the oxidation, combustion, or fission of primary materials. Typical uses include solar collector fields, installations which generate energy by harnassing the natural heat of the earth or of geological features, or water­powered mills or generating facilities. 
b. Broadcasting Tower A structure(s) for the transmission or broadcasting of radio, television, radar, or microwaves, ordinarily exceeding the maximum height permitted in its zoning district or utilizing antennas or satellite dishes for commercial broadcasting. 
c. Amateur Radio Tower 
A structure(s) for the transmission or broadcasting of electromagnetic signals by FCC­licensed Amateur Radio operators. 
d. Construction Batch Plant 
A temporary demountable facility used for the manufacturing of cement, concrete, asphalt, or other paving materials intended for specific construction projects. 
e. Wind Energy Conservation System (WECS) 
Any device which converts wind energy to a form of usable energy, including wind charges, windmills, or wind turbines. 
f. Landfill (Non­putrescible Solid Waste Disposal) 
The use of a site as a depository for solid wastes that do not readily undergo chemical or biological breakdown under conditions normally associated with land disposal operations. Typical disposal material would include ashes, concrete, paving wastes, rock, brick, lumber, roofing materials and ceramic tile. 
g. Landfill (Putrescible and Non­putrescible Solid Waste Disposal) 
The use of a site as a depository for any solid waste except hazardous and toxic waste as defined by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency and/or the State of Nebraska. Typical disposal material would include non­putrescible wastes; and putrescible wastes such as vegetation, tree parts, agricultural wastes (garbage) and manure. 

4 ARTICLE FOUR 
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 401 Purpose 
Article Four presents the Zoning District Regulations. Zoning Districts are established in the Zoning Regulations to promote compatible land use patterns and to establish site development regulations appropriate to the purposes and specific nature of each district. 
402 Establishment of Districts 
The following base districts and overlay districts are hereby established. Table 4­1 displays the purposes of these districts. 
BASE ZONING DISTRICTS  DISTRICT NAMES  
AG  Agricultural District  
RR  Rural Residential District  
R­1  Low­Density Residential District  
R­2  Urban Family Residential District  
R­3  Multiple­Family Residential District  
MH  Mobile Home Residential District  
LC  Limited Commercial/Office District  
CC  Community Commercial District  
DC  Downtown Commercial District  
GC  General Commercial District  
LI  Limited Industrial District  
GI  General Industrial District  
OVERLAY DISTRICTS  

MU 
Mixed Use District 
PUD Planned Unit Development District 
403 Application of Districts 
A base district designation shall apply to each lot or site within the city and its planning jurisdiction. A site must be in one base district. 
Overlay districts may be applied to any lot or site or any portion thereof, in addition to a base district designation. The Mixed Use and Public Use Districts may stand alone as a base district. 
404 Hierarchy 
References in the Zoning Ordinance to less intensive or more intensive districts shall be deemed to refer to those agricultural, residential, commercial, and industrial base zoning districts established in Section 4­2, and shall represent a progression from the AG Agricultural District as the least intensive to the GI General Industrial District as the most intensive. The Overlay Districts shall not be included in this reference. 
405 Development Regulations 
For each Zoning District: Purposes are set forth in Table 4­1; Uses permitted are set forth in Table 4­2; Development Regulations are set forth in Tables 4­2 and Site Development Regulations are presented in Table 4­3. 
Supplemental Regulations may affect specific land uses or development regulations in each zoning district. The applicable Supplemental Regulations are noted in Table 4­2. 
406 Zoning Map 
a. Adoption of Zoning Map 
Boundaries of zoning districts established by this Zoning Regulations shall be shown on the Zoning Map maintained by the City Clerk. This map, together with all legends, references, symbols, boundaries, and other information, shall be adopted as a part of, and concurrent with these Regulations. Said Zoning Map shall be prominently displayed in the council chambers and/or an area accessible to the public at Chadron City Hall. 
b. Changes to the Zoning Map 
The Zoning Map may be changed from time to time by ordinance, following the procedure set forth by Article Twelve. Such changes shall be reflected on the Zoning Map. The City Clerk shall keep a complete record of all changes to the Zoning Map. 
407 Interpretation of District Boundaries 
The following rules shall apply in determining the boundaries of any zoning district shown on the Zoning Map. 
a. 
Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be considered the district boundaries. 

b. 
Where district boundaries are indicated as within street or alley, railroad, or other identifiable rights­of­way, the centerline of such rights­of­way shall be deemed the district boundary. 

c. 
Where a district boundary divides a property, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the Zoning Map. 

d. 
The City Council shall determine any other uncertainty regarding district boundaries not covered in this section. 


408 Vacation of Streets and Alleys 
Whenever a public street or alley is vacated, the zoning district adjoining each side of such right­of­way shall be extended out to the former centerline. 
Table 4­1 Purposes of Zoning Districts  
Symbol  Title  Purpose  
AG  Agricultural District  The AG District provides for and preserves the agricultural and rural use of land, while accommodating very low density residential development generally associated with agricultural uses. This district is designed to maintain complete agricultural uses within the Chadron extra­territorial jurisdiction. In addition, land included in the Urban Reserve in the Comprehensive Development Plan should be retained in the AG district to prevent premature or inappropriate development.  
RR  Rural Residential  This district provides for the rural residential use of land, accommodating very low and low density residential environments. The district’s regulations assure that density is developed consistent with: land use policies of the Chadron Comprehensive Plan regarding rural subdivisions; levels of infrastructure; and environmentally sensitive development practices. The district also accommodates developments that merge urban living with rural life.  
R­1  Low­Density Residential  This district is intended to provide for low­density residential neighborhoods, characterized by single­family dwellings on relatively large lots with supporting community facilities and urban services. Its regulations are intended to minimize traffic congestion and to assure that density is consistent with the carrying capacity of infrastructure.  
R­2  Urban Family Residential  This district is intended to provide for medium­density residential neighborhoods, characterized by single­family dwellings on small to moderately sized lots and low­density, duplex, and townhouse development. It provides special regulations to encourage innovative forms of housing development. It adapts to both established and developing neighborhoods, as well as transitional areas between single­family and multi­family neighborhoods. Its regulations are intended to minimize traffic congestion and to assure that density is consistent with the carrying capacity of infrastructure.  
Symbol  Title  Purpose  
R­3  Multiple­Family Residential  This district is intended to provide locations primarily for multiple­family housing, with supporting and appropriate community facilities. It also permits some non­residential uses such as offices through a special permit procedure, to permit the development of mixed use neighborhoods.  

MH  Mobile Home  This district recognizes that mobile home development,  
Residential  properly planned, can provide important opportunities for  
affordable housing. It provides opportunities for mobile home  
development within planned parks or subdivisions, along with  
the supporting services necessary to create quality residential  
neighborhoods.  
LC  Limited  This district reserves appropriately located area for office  
Commercial/Office  development and a limited variety of low­impact commercial  
facilities which serve the needs of residents of surrounding  
residential communities. The commercial and office uses  
permitted are compatible with nearby residential areas.  
Development regulations are designed to ensure compatibility  
in size, scale, and landscaping with nearby residences.  
CC  Community Commercial  This district is intended for commercial facilities which serve  
the needs of markets ranging from several neighborhoods to the  
overall region. While allowed commercial and office uses are  
generally compatible with nearby residential areas, traffic and  
operating characteristics may have more negative effects on  
residential neighborhoods than those permitted in the LC  
District. CC Districts are appropriate at major intersections, at  
the junction of several neighborhoods, or at substantial  
commercial subcenters.  
DC  Downtown Commercial  This district is intended to provide appropriate development  
District  regulations for Downtown Chadron. Mixed uses are  
encouraged within the DC District. The grouping of uses is  
designed to strengthen the town center’s role as a center for  
trade, service, and civic life.  

Symbol  Title  Purpose  
GC  General Commercial  This district accommodates a variety of commercial uses, some  
of which have significant traffic or visual effect. These  
districts may include commercial uses which are oriented to  
services, including automotive services, rather than retail  
activities. These uses may create land use conflicts with  
adjacent residential areas, requiring provision of adequate  
buffering. This district is most appropriately located along  
major arterial streets or in areas that can be adequately  
buffered from residential districts.  
LI  Limited Industrial  This district is intended to reserve sites appropriate for the  
location of industrial uses with relatively limited  
environmental effects. The district is designed to provide  
appropriate space and regulations to encourage good quality  
industrial development, while assuring that facilities are served  
with adequate parking and loading facilities.  

GI General Industrial 	This district is intended to accommodate a wide variety of industrial uses, some of which may have significant external effects. These uses may have operating characteristics that create conflicts with lower­intensity surrounding land uses. The district provides the reservation of land for these activities and includes buffering requirements to reduce incompatibility. 
Table 4­2 Permitted Uses by Zoning Districts 

Use Types  AG  RR  R­1  R­2  R­3  MH  LC  CC  DC  GC  LI  GI  Addl Reg  
Agricultural Uses  
Horticulture  P  P  602  
Crop Production  P  P  602  
Type I Animal Production  P  S  602  
Type II Animal Production  S  
Type III Animal Production  S  
Livestock Sales  S  P  

Residential Uses  
Single­Family Detached  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  S  603a  
Single­Family Attached  P  P  S  P  P  P  P  P  P  S  603b  
Duplex  p  P  P  P  P  
Two­Family  P  P  P  P  P  P  603d  
Townhouse  P  P  P  603c  
Multiple­Family  P  P  P  
Downtown Residential  P  
Group Residential  P  P  P  P  S  
Mobile Home Park  S  603e  
Mobile Home Subdivision  S  603f  
Manufactured Housing Residential  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  S  
Retirement Residential  S  P  P  S  S  

P=Uses Permitted by Right S=Uses Permitted by Special Permit Blank=Use Not Permitted 
Table 4­2 Permitted Uses by Zoning Districts 
Use Types  AG  RR  R­1  R­2  R­3  MH  LC  CC  DC  GC  LI  GI  Addl Reg  
Civic Uses  


P=Uses Permitted by Right S=Uses Permitted by Special Permit Blank=Use Not Permitted 
Table 4­2 Permitted Uses by Zoning Districts 

Use Types  AG  RR  R­1  R­2  R­3  MH  LC  CC  DC  GC  LI  GI  Addl Reg  
Office Uses  
General Offices  S  S  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Financial Services  S  S  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Medical Offices  S  S  P  P  P  P  P  S  

Commercial Uses  
Ag Sales/Service  S  S  S  P  P  P  
Auto Rental/Sales  S  P  P  
Auto Services  S  S  P  P  P  P  605a,b  
Body Repair  S  S  P  P  P  605a  
Equip Rental/Sales  S  P  P  P  
Equipment Repair  P  P  P  605a  
Bed and Breakfast  S  S  S  S  S  P  P  P  P  
Business Support Services  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Business/Trade School  P  P  P  P  
Campground  P  S  605d  
Cocktail Lounge  P  P  P  
Commercial Rec (Indoor)  S  S  P  P  P  P  
Commercial Rec (Outdoor)  S  P  P  P  
Communication Service  S  P  P  P  P  P  
Construction Sale/Service  S  S  P  P  P  
Consumer Service  P  P  P  P  P  
Convenience Storage  S  S  S  S  P  P  605e  

P=Uses Permitted by Right S=Uses Permitted by Special Permit Blank=Use Not Permitted 
Table 4­2 Permitted Uses by Zoning Districts 

Use Types  AG  RR  R­1  R­2  R­3  MH  LC  CC  DC  GC  LI  GI  Addl Reg  
Commercial Uses  
Food Sales (Limited)  P  P  P  P  
Food Sales (Convenience)  S  P  P  P  
Funeral Service  S  P  P  P  P  
Gaming Facility  P  P  P  
Kennels  P  S  S  P  
Laundry Services  S  P  P  P  
Liquor Sales  P  P  P  
Lodging  P  P  P  S  
Personal Improvement  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Personal Services  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Pet Services  S  P  P  P  P  
Research Services  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Restaurants (Drive­in)  P  S  P  S  P  S  S  
Restaurants (General)  P  P  P  P  P  S  S  
Retail Services (General)  P  P  P  P  
Retail Services (Limited)  P  P  P  P  
Restricted Business  
Stables  P  S  S  
Surplus Sales  S  P  P  P  P  
Trade Services  S  S  P  P  P  
Vehicle Storage (Long­term)  S  P  P  
eh. Storage (Short­term)  P  P  P  P  605c  
Veterinary Services  S  S  S  S  S  P  P  P  

P=Uses Permitted by Right S=Uses Permitted by Special Permit Blank=Use Not Permitted 
Table 4­2 Permitted Uses by Zoning Districts 

Use Types  AG  RR  R­1  R­2  R­3  MH  LC  CC  DC  GC  LI  GI  Addl Reg  
Parking Uses  
Off­Street Parking  S  P  P  P  P  
Parking Structure  S  P  S  P  P  

Industrial Uses  
Agricultural Industry  S  S  S  607  
Construction Yards  S  P  P  
Custom Manufacturing  S  P  P  P  P  607  
Light Industry  P  P  607  
General Industry  P  607  
Heavy Industry  S  607  
Recycling Collection  S  S  P  P  P  
Recycling Processing  P  P  
Resource Extraction  S  S  606a  
Salvage Services  S  606b  
Warehousing (Enclosed)  S  S  P  P  
Warehousing (Open)  S  P  

Transportation Uses  
Aviation  P  P  
Railroad Facilities  S  S  S  P  P  
Truck Terminal  S  S  P  
Transportation Terminal  S  S  P  P  P  P  P  

P=Uses Permitted by Right S=Uses Permitted by Special Permit Blank=Use Not Permitted 
Table 4­2 Permitted Uses by Zoning Districts 

Miscellaneous Uses  AG  RR  R­1  R­2  R­3  MH  LC  CC  DC  GC  LI  GI  Addl Reg  
Alternative Energy Production Devices  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  
Amateur Radio Tower  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Broadcasting Tower  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  
Construction Batch Plant  S  P  
Landfill (Non­Putrescrible)  
Landfill (Putrescible)  
WECS  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  
Note: Provisions of Sections 608 through 613 apply to all these types  

P=Uses Permitted by Right S=Uses Permitted by Special Permit Blank=Use Not Permitted 
Table 4­3: Summary of Site Development Regulations  
Regulator  AG  RR  R­1  R­2  R­3*  
Minimum Lot Area  2.5 Acres  1 Acre  8,000  (Note 3)  (Note 5)  
(square feet)  (Note 1)*  
Minimum Lot Width  150  75  75  60  60  
(feet)  (1­ (1­ 
family)  family)  
75  75  
(duplex)  (duplex,  
(Note 4)  multi­ 
family)  
(Note 4)  
Site Area per Housing Unit  
(square feet) by type of residential  
Single­Family  2.5 Acres  1 Acre  8,000  6,000  6,000  
Two­family, duplex  4,000  3,000  
Townhouse or Multi­family up to 4 units  3,000  2,000  
Multi­family with 5 or more units  
2 or more bedrooms  1,000  
0­1 bedrooms  700  

Minimum Yards (feet) 
Front Yard 50 30 30 25 20 Street Side Yard 25 20 20 15 15 Interior Side Yard 15 15 10% of 10% of 10% of 
lot width lot width lot width Rear Yard 50 25 20 20 20 Maximum Height (feet) 35 35 35 35 60 (Note 6) Maximum Building Coverage NA 25% 35% 40% 50% 
Maximum Impervious Coverage NA 35% 50% 60% 70% 
Floor Area Ratio NA NA NA NA NA 
­Notes Accompanying This Table Appear on Page 4­16 ­
Table 4­3 Summary of Site Development Regulations 
Regulator MH LC* CC* DC GC* 
Minimum Lot Area 

See 8,000 8,000 None 8,000 
Regulations 

(square feet) 
set forth in 
Section 
Minimum Lot Width 603(f) 70 70 NA 70 
(feet) 

Site Area per Housing Unit 

Same as NA 500 NA (square feet) R­3 
Minimum Yards (feet) 

Front Yard 
15 15 0 10 (Note 7) 
Street Side Yard 
15 15 0 10 Interior Side Yard 
10 00 0 Rear Yard 
20 00 0 
Maximum Height (feet) 35 45 No Limit No Limit 
Maximum Building Coverage 50% 60% 100% 80% 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 70% 80% 100% 90% 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio 1.00 1.00 3.00 1.00 
* Uses in the R­3, LC, CC, GC, LI, and GI Districts are subject to landscape and screening provisions contained in Article 8 ­Notes Accompanying This Table Appear on Page 4­16 ­
Table 4­3 Summary of Site Development Regulations 
Regulator LI* GI* 

Minimum Lot Area 8,000 8,000 
(square feet) 
Minimum Lot Width 70 70 

(feet) 
Site Area per Housing Unit NA NA 
(square feet) 
Minimum Yards (feet) 


Front Yard 15 15 
(Note 7) (Note 7) 
Street Side Yard (Note 7) (Note 7) 
Interior Side Yard 10 10 
Rear Yard 10 10 
Maximum Height (feet) None None 
Maximum Building Coverage 70% 85% 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 90% 100% 

Floor Area Ratio 1.0 2.0 
* Uses in the R­3, LC, CC, GC, LI, and GI Districts are subject to landscape and screening provisions contained in Article 8 
­Notes Accompanying This Table Appear on Page 4­16 ­
Notes to Preceding Pages: Table 4­3 
Note 1: 
The Comprehensive Plan of the City of Chadron includes a Land Development Policy regarding rural residential subdivision and development. Rural Residential uses situated within one of the designated rural development areas of the Comprehensive Plan may occur on minimum lot sizes below 1.0 acres, if such development is approved by the City as designed in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan, to ensure compatible installation of infrastructure and sanitary waste collection systems in the future. 
Note 2: 
See Section 603 for supplemental regulations governing single­family attached and townhouse residential use types. 
Note 3: 
6,000 square feet for single­family lots; 4,000 square feet per dwelling for duplex residential buildings; 3,000 square feet per dwelling for townhouse residential units. 
Note 4: 
See Section 603 for supplemental regulations regarding modifications of lot width for townhouse residential use type. 
Note 5: 
6,000 square feet for single­family lots; 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit for two­unit residential buildings; 2,000 square feet per unit for three­, or four­unit residential buildings; 1,000 additional square feet for each additional unit over four units. Density of multi­family residential may exceed this maximum, subject to approval of a Special Use Permit by the City Council, with the recommendation of the Planning Commission. 
Note 6: 
Height limit for residential structures. 65 feet for other permitted uses. 
Note 7: 
On streets designated as part of the Chadron’s ISTEA­eligible System outside of the DC District, front yard setbacks shall be the greater of the required setback of the district or 50 feet from the center line of the street or highway. 
ARTICLE FIVE 
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
501 	General Purpose Special Districts provide for base districts that allow multiple land uses and flexible development, with the requirement that a specific plan for the area be submitted by applicants. Overlay Districts are used in combination with base districts to modify or expand base district regulations. Overlay Districts are adapted to special needs of different parts of the City of Chadron. 
The Overlay Districts are designed to achieve the following objectives: 
a. 
To recognize special conditions in specific parts of the City which require specific regulation. 

b. 
To provide flexibility in development and to encourage innovative design through comprehensively planned projects. 


MU MIXED USE DISTRICT 
502 	Purpose The MU Mixed Use District is intended to accommodate projects which combine several compatible land uses into an integrated development. The MU District may also be used to pre­designate parts of the city which are appropriate for a mixture of residential, commercial, office, and accessory uses. The District permits mixing residential areas with workplaces and services. Development in the MU District must accommodate transportation systems, pedestrian and bicycle movement, and surrounding environments. All projects developed in an MU District are subject to a Special Use Permit process. 
503 	Permitted Uses 
Each ordinance establishing an MU District establishes the use types permitted within its boundaries. 
504 	Site Development Regulations 
a. 
The minimum area of any MU District is three acres. 

b. 
Prior to the issuance of any building permits or other authorization, all projects in the MU District shall receive approval by the City Council, following a recommendation by the Planning Commission, according to the Special Use Permit procedure set forth in Article 12. This approval may be granted for a specific plan for the development of an MU District in lieu of a plan for individual projects, provided that any subsequent developments are consistent with the specific plan. 

c. 
Applications for approval must contain at a minimum the following information: 


1. A detailed site map, including: 

(a) 
a boundary survey 

(b) 
site dimensions 


(c) 
contour lines at no greater than five foot intervals 

(d) 
adjacent public rights of way, transportation routes, and pedestrian or bicycle systems 

(e) 
description of adjacent land uses 


(f) 
utility service to the site and easements through the site 

(g) 
description of other site features, including drainage, soils, or other considerations that may affect development. 


2. A development plan, including: 

(a) 
a site layout, including the location of proposed buildings, parking, open space, and other facilities 

(b) 
location, capacity, and conceptual design of parking facilities 

(c) 
description of the use of individual buildings 

(d) 
description of all use types to be included in the project or area, and maximum floor area devoted to each general use 

(e) 
maximum height of buildings 



(f) 
schematic location and design of open space on the site, including a landscaping plan 

(g) 
vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan, including relationship to external transportation systems 

(h) 
schematic building elevations and sections if required to describe the project 

(i) 
grading plans 


(j) 
proposed sewer and utility improvements 

(k) 
location, sizes, and types of all proposed signage. 


3. Specific proposed development regulations for the project, including: 
(a) 
the specific use types permitted within the proposed district 

(b) 
maximum floor area ratios 

(c) 
front, side, and rear yard setbacks 

(d) 
maximum height 


(e) 
maximum building and impervious coverage 

(f) 
design standards applicable to the project. 


4. A traffic impact analysis, if required by the City. 
505 	Amendments 
The Administrative Official is authorized at his/her discretion to approve amendments to an approved development plan, provided that: 
a. 
A written request is filed with the Administrative Official, along with information specifying the exact nature of the proposed amendment. 

b. 
The amendment is consistent with the provisions of this section. 

c. 
The amendment does not alter the approved site regulations of the development plan and does not materially alter other aspects of the plan, including traffic circulation, mixture of use types, and physical design. 

d. 
Any amendment not conforming to these provisions shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for action. 


506­9 	Reserved 
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 
510 	Purpose The PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District is intended to provide flexibility in the design of planned projects; to permit innovation in project design that incorporates open space and other amenities; and to insure compatibility of developments with the surrounding urban environment. 
The PUD District may be used in combination with any base district specified in these regulations. The PUD District, which is adopted by the City Council with the recommendation of the Planning Commission, assures specific development standards for each designated project. 
511 Permitted Uses 
Uses permitted in a PUD Overlay District are those permitted in the underlying base district. A PUD also may be combined with an MU Mixed Use District to allow a combination of use types not anticipated by conventional base districts. 
512 Site Development Regulations 
Site Development Regulations are developed individually for each Planned Unit Development District but must comply with minimum or maximum standards established for the base district, with the following exceptions: 
a. 
Lot area and lot width are not restricted, provided that the maximum density allowed for each base district is not exceeded. 

b. 
Maximum building coverage shall be the smaller of the allowed building coverage in the base district, or 60 percent. 


513 Access to Public Streets 
Each PUD District must abut a public street or other right­of­way controlled by a public entity, subject to a written agreement, for at least 50 feet and gain access from that street or right­of­way. 
514 Application Process 
a. Development Plan 
The application for a Planned Unit Development District shall include a Development Plan containing the following information: 
1. 
A tract map, showing site boundaries, street lines, lot lines, easements, and proposed dedications or vacations. 

2. 
A land use plan designating specific uses for the site and establishing site development regulations, including setback height, building coverage, impervious coverage, density, and floor area ratio requirements. 

3. 
A site development and landscaping plan, showing building locations, or building envelopes; site improvements; public or common open spaces; community facilities; significant visual features; and typical landscape plans. 

4. 
A circulation plan, including location of existing and proposed vehicular and pedestrian, facilities and location and general design of parking and loading facilities. 

5. 
Schematic architectural plans and elevations sufficient to indicate a building height, bulk, materials, and general architectural design. 

6. 
A statistical summary of the project, including gross site area, net site area, number of housing units by type, gross floor area of other uses, total amount of parking, and building and impervious 


surface percentages. 
515 Adoption of District 
a. 
The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate each Planned Unit Development application. The City may impose reasonable conditions, as deemed necessary to ensure that a PUD shall be compatible with adjacent land uses, will not overburden public services and facilities and will not be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare. 

b. 
The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon each application. 

c. 
The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to PUD district applications. 

d. 
The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council for final action. 

e. 
The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon any Ordinance establishing a PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District. Proper notice shall mean the same notice established for any other zoning amendment, as set forth by Section 1204(e). 

f. 
An Ordinance adopting a Planned Unit Development Overlay Zoning District shall require a favorable simple majority of the City Council for approval. 

g. 
Upon approval by the City Council, the Development Plan shall become a part of the Ordinance creating or amending the PUD District. All approved plans shall be filed with the City Clerk. 


516 Amendment Procedure 
Major amendments to the Development Plan must be approved according to the same procedure set forth in Section 507. 
517 Building Permits 
The City shall not issue a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or other permit for a building, structure, or use within a PUD District unless it is in compliance with the approved Development Plan or any approved amendments. 
518 Termination of PUD District 
If no substantial development has taken place in a Planned Unit Development District for three years following approval of the District, the Planning Board shall reconsider the zoning of the property and may, on its own motion, initiate an application for rezoning the property. 
6 	ARTICLE SIX 
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS 
601 	Purpose The Supplemental Use Regulations set forth additional standards for certain uses located within the various zoning districts. These regulations recognize that certain use types have characteristics that require additional controls in order to protect public health, safety, and welfare. These regulations complement the use regulations contained in Article Four of these regulations. 
602 	Supplemental Use Regulations: Agricultural Uses 
Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a previous approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit issued under any local, State, or Federal ordinances or statute. 
a. 	Horticulture and Crop Production: Retail Sales 
Retail operation of garden centers or roadside stands associated with a primary agricultural use may be permitted in the AG District, subject to the following requirements: 
1. 	Garden Centers 
(a) 
A garden center is a building or premises used for the retail sale of plant materials or items useful in the growing or display of lawns, gardens, and plants. 

(b) 
Garden centers must conform to all site development regulations for the zoning district. 

(c) 
Any garden center adjacent to a residential district must maintain a 20­foot landscaped bufferyard, consistent with the standards established in Section 804. 


2. 	Roadside Stands 
(a) 
A roadside stand is a facility used on a temporary or seasonal basis for the retail sale of produce grown largely on adjacent or surrounding agricultural lands. 

(b) 
A roadside stand may be located within a required front yard but no closer than 40 feet to the edge of a traveled roadway. 

(c) 
A roadside stand may operate for a maximum of 180 days in any one year. 


b. 	
Type I Animal Production in the RR District 

1. 
Breeding and raising of small animals and fowl, such as birds, rabbits, chinchilla, and hamsters is permitted in the RR District, provided that any building housing such animals shall be at least 50 feet from any property line. 

2. 
Within the RR District, any lot of I acre and over may maintain one horse, llama, or other equine and/or hoofed animal and its immature offspring. Such a lot may have one additional animal for each additional two acres of lot area, up to a maximum total of three animals. 



c. 	
Type II Animal Production 


1. 	Location 
(a) 
Any new Type II Animal Production use established within two miles of the corporate limits of the City of Chadron shall be subject to approval of a Special Use Permit, as set forth in Section 1203. 

(b) 
No confinement area for the feeding or holding of livestock or poultry shall be located within 500 feet of the property lines of the parcel on which it is located; or within 1,000 feet of an existing residential structure other than that of the owner or operator of the facility. 


2. Operation 
(a) 
Livestock wastes within a confinement area shall be removed or disposed of by spraying or spreading on land promptly followed by discing or plowing; grinding or dehydrating in properly designed dehydrators; or stockpiling in a compost plant located at least two miles from a residential zoning district. 

(b) 
Insect and rodent control measures must be instituted for confined areas by removal or disposal of manure; or by other accepted insect or rodent control measures. 


3. Drainage 
(a) 
All ground surfaces within confinement areas shall be graded and compacted to insure proper drainage. 

(b) 
All ground surfaces within confinement areas shall be controlled so that no appreciable amount of soil and livestock waste is carried into any roadway ditch, drainage area, or other low­lying area. 


4. Pollution Control 
A confined area shall not produce a measurable increase in pollution in any public water­based recreational facility, public water supply, or in any waterway that is part of a public or private water supply. 
c. Type III Animal Production 
1. Location 
(a) 
No new Type III Animal Production use shall be permitted within two miles of the corporate limits of the City of Chadron. 

(b) 
Any new Type III Animal Production use otherwise proposed within the extra­territorial jurisdiction of the City of Chadron shall be subject to approval of a Special Use Permit, as set forth in Section 1203. 

(c) 
No new Type III Animal Production use shall be located within 500 feet of the property lines of the parcel on which it is located; or within 1,000 feet of an existing residential structure other than that of the owner or operator of the facility. 


2. Operation 
(a) 
Livestock wastes within a confinement area shall be removed or disposed of by spraying or spreading on land promptly followed by discing or plowing; grinding or dehydrating in properly designed dehydrators; or stockpiling in a compost plant located at least two miles from a residential zoning district. 

(b) 
Insect and rodent control measures must be instituted for confined areas by removal or disposal 


of manure; or by other accepted insect or rodent control measures. 
3. Drainage 
(a) 
All ground surfaces within confinement areas shall be graded and compacted to insure proper drainage. 

(b) 
All ground surfaces within confinement areas shall be controlled so that no appreciable amount of soil and livestock waste is carried into any roadway ditch, drainage area, or other low­lying area. 

(c) 
Water shall not be discharged or directed from a Type III animal production site onto adjacent properties, except in the event of a storm with a 4% probability of occurrence within a 24­hour period. 


4. 
Pollution Control 

A confined area shall not produce a measurable increase in pollution in any public water­based recreational facility, public water supply, or in any waterway that is part of a public or private water supply. 

5. 
General Standards 


(a) 
All aspects of the operation of a Type III Animal Production facility shall comply with the regulations and standards of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality or its successor agencies for feedlots. 

(b) 
In addition to other requirements, all applications for Special Use Permits for the establishment of a Type III Animal Production use shall include: certifications of plan review and approval by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality or its successor agencies; a site plan showing the location and maximum area of the confinement area; and a detailed description of operations, including maximum number and type of livestock to be confined, livestock waste removal or disposal plans, drainage plans, and pollution control measures. 


603 Supplemental Use Regulations: Residential Uses 
a. Zero­Lot Line Single­Family Detached Residential 
Within a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero for single­family detached residential use, subject to the following additional regulations: 
1. 
The side yard opposite to the zero yard must equal at least twice the normal required side yard. 

2. 
The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use. 

3. 
An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line facade is filed with the Dawes County Register of Deeds and the City Clerk at the time of application for a building permit. 


b. Single­Family Attached 
When permitted, the minimum side yard opposite the common wall shall be equal to twice the normal required side yard. 
c. 
Townhouse Residential 
Where permitted, townhouse residential is subject to the following regulations: 


1. 
The site area per unit must be 3,500 square feet in the R­3 District and 3,000 square feet in all other districts where permitted. 

2. 
The minimum width for any townhouse lot sold individually shall be 25 feet, except within an approved creative subdivision. 

3. 
Coverage percentages are computed for the site of the entire townhouse common development. 



d. 
Two­Family Residential 

1. 
The second dwelling unit shall be located to the rear of the site and shall be separated from the front dwelling unit by a minimum of 25 feet. 

2. 
The second dwelling unit shall be served by a driveway at least ten feet in width, leading from a public street adjacent to the lot. 



e. 
Mobile Home Parks in the MH District 


In the MH Mobile Home Residential District, which permits mobile home residential use, such use may be configured in a Mobile Home Park or Mobile Home Subdivision. Following the effective date of these Zoning Regulations, no mobile home shall be located outside of a Mobile Home Park or Mobile Home Subdivision. A Mobile Home Park is subject to approval of a Special Use Permit and compliance with the following regulations: 
1. 
Certification 

A certification of compliance with all ordinances and regulations regarding mobile home licensing, zoning, health, plumbing, electrical, building, fire protection and any other applicable requirements shall be required of all Mobile Home Parks. 

2. 
Minimum and Maximum Area 

A Mobile Home Park shall be considered to be one zoned lot. The contiguous area of a Mobile Home Park shall provide for a minimum of 2.5 acres. 

3. 
Density Requirements 


(a) 
The minimum gross site area per dwelling unit shall be 7,200 square feet. 

(b) 
The minimum size of an individual mobile home space shall be 4,000 square feet for single­wide mobile home units and 6,000 square feet for double­wide mobile home units. 

(c) 
Each mobile home space shall have a width of at least 40 feet wide and a length of at least 75 feet. 


4. Site Development Standards 
(a) 
Setbacks: Each Mobile Home Park shall have a minimum perimeter setback of 50 feet from all exterior lot or property lines. No space for a dwelling unit or any other structure shall be permitted in the required setback. 

(b) 
Setback landscaping: All area contained within the required setbacks except sidewalks and private drives shall be landscaped and screened in conformance with Section 8 of these regulations. Screening shall be provided in conformance with Section 8­for any common property line with another non­residential use. 

(c) 
Impervious Coverage: Impervious coverage for a Mobile Home Park shall not exceed 50 percent of the total site area. 

(d) 
Open Space: Each Mobile Home Park shall provide a minimum of 400 square feet of open recreational space per unit. Such space shall be provided at a central location accessible from all parts of the park by pedestrians. Required perimeter setbacks or buffers shall not be credited toward the fulfillment of this requirement. 

(e) 
Separation Between Mobile Home Units: The minimum separation between a mobile home unit and attached accessory structure and any other mobile home units and/or accessory structure shall be 25 feet. 

(f) 
Separation and Setbacks for Accessory Buildings: An accessory building on a mobile home space maintain a minimum rear and side yard setback of five feet. A minimum distance of ten feet shall be provided between any mobile home and an unattached accessory building. 


5. Street Access and Circulation Requirements 
(a) 
Access to Public Street: Each Mobile Home Park must abut and have access to a dedicated public street with a right­of­way of at least 60 feet. Direct access to a mobile home space from a public street is prohibited. 

(b) 
Vehicular Circulation: The Mobile Home Park must provide interior vehicular circulation on a private internal street system. Minimum interior street width shall be 25 feet. The street system shall be continuous and connected with other internal and public streets; or shall have a cul­de­sac with a minimum diameter of 90 feet. No such cul­de­sacs may exceed 300 feet in length. 

(c) 
Separation between Units and Circulation Areas: The minimum distance between a mobile home unit and any attached accessory structure and the pavement of an internal street or parking area shall be 20 feet. 

(d) 
Sidewalks: Each Mobile Home Park shall provide a sidewalk system to connect each mobile home space to common buildings or community facilities constructed for the use of its residents; and to the fronting public right of way. Sidewalk width shall be at least four feet. 

(e) 
Street and Sidewalk Standards: All internal streets and sidewalks shall be hard­surfaced. Electric street lighting is required along all internal streets. 

(f) 
Parking Requirements: Each Mobile Home Park must provide at least two off­street parking stalls for each mobile home space. 


6. Utilities 
a) All Mobile Home Parks shall provide individual units and common facilities with an adequate, piped supply of hot and cold water for both drinking and domestic purposes; and standard electrical service, providing at least one 120­volt and one 240­volt electrical service outlet to each mobile home space. 
(b) 
Complete sanitary and sewer service shall be provided within each Mobile Home Park in accordance with the Subdivision Chapter of the Land Development Regulations. 

(c) 
Properly spaced and operating fire hydrants shall be provided for proper fire protection within each Mobile Home Park in accordance with the Subdivision Chapter of the Land Development Regulations. 

(d) 
All electric, telephone, gas, and other utility lines shall be installed underground. 


7. 
Financial Responsibility: Each application for a Mobile Home Park shall include a demonstration by the developer of financial capability to complete the project; and a construction schedule. 

8. 
Completion Schedule: Construction must be begin on any approved Mobile Home Park within one year of the date of approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such construction shall be completed within two years of approval, unless otherwise extended by the Commission. 

9. 
All other uses and provisions of the Chadron Mobile Home Park regulations are incorporated herein by reference. These provisions include tie­down and other structural requirements included in the Chadron Municipal Codes. 


f. Mobile Home Subdivisions in the MH District 
1. 
Mobile Home Subdivisions shall be developed in accordance with all standards and requirements set forth in the Subdivision Chapter of the Land Development Regulations of Chadron. Site development regulations shall be the same as those required in the R­3 Zoning District. Each mobile home shall be considered a single­family detached residential unit for the purpose of determining applicable development regulations. 

2. 
Mobile home units within Mobile Home Subdivisions shall be built in accordance with the minimum design standards of the US Department of Housing and Urban Development and display a certification of such compliance. 


604 Supplemental Use Regulations: Civic Uses 
a. Clubs 
Clubs located adjacent to residential uses shall maintain a bufferyard of not less than 25 feet along the common boundary with such residential use. 
b. Day Care 
Day care facilities are permitted by Special Use permit in the GC and LI Zoning Districts only if incidental to a permitted primary use. 
c. 
Group Care Facilities and Group Homes 

1. 
Each group care facility or group home must be validly licensed by either the State of Nebraska or the appropriate governmental subdivision. 

2. 
Group homes are permitted in the DC District only on levels above street level except that a facility specifically designed for occupancy by disabled residents may be developed at street level, subject to approval of a special permit by the City Council with the recommendation of the Planning Commission. 



d. 
Heliports as an Accessory Use to Hospitals and Health Care Facilities 

1. 
Launching and landing areas for emergency helicopters are permitted as an accessory use for hospital and health care facilities, subject to approval of a Special Use Permit. 

2. 
All such facilities must comply with all regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration. 




e. Primary and Secondary Educational and Religious Assembly Facilities 
1. Buildings and parking shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from property lines. 
a. 
b. 

c. 

d. 

e. 


SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS 

Supplemental Use Regulations: 

2. Proposed facilities shall conform to all State and federal requirements. 
Commercial Uses 

Auto Repair, Equipment Repair, and Body Repair 
1. 
Where permitted in commercial districts, all repair activities must take place within a completely enclosed building. Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to Auto Repair and Body Repair, provided that such storage is completely screened so as not to be visible from residential areas or public rights­of­ways. Screening is subject to provisions of Article 8 of these regulations. 

2. 
Any spray painting must take place within structures designed for that purpose and approved by the Zoning Administrator. 


Auto Washing Facilities 
1. 
Each conveyor operated auto washing facility shall provide 100 feet of stacking capacity per washing lane on the approach side of the washing structure and stacking space for two vehicles on the exit side. 

2. 
Each self­service auto washing facility shall provide stacking space for three automobiles per bay on the approach side and one space per bay on the exit side of the building. 


Vehicle Storage 
Vehicle Storage includes the primary use of a site for storage of operating or non­operating vehicles. For the Vehicle Storage (Short­Term) use type, vehicles shall not be stored on the site for longer than 30 days. No dismantling or salvage of vehicles is permitted on the site. 
Campgrounds 
1. 
Minimum Size: Each campground established after the effective date of this title shall have a minimum size of one acre. 

2. 
Setbacks: All campgrounds shall maintain a 50­foot front yard setback and a 25­foot bufferyard from all other property lines. 

3. 
Each campground must maintain water supply, sewage disposal, and water and toilet facilities in compliance with all City ordinances; or, alternately, be limited to use by self­contained campers, providing their own on­board water and disposal systems. 


Convenience Storage 
When permitted in the AG, GC, and LI Districts, convenience storage facilities shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
1. 
The minimum size of a convenience storage facility shall be one acre. 

2. 
Activities within the facility shall be limited to the rental of storage cubicles and the administration and maintenance of the facility. 

3. 
All driveways within the facility shall have a minimum width of 25 feet. 

4. 
All storage must be within enclosed buildings and shall not include the storage of hazardous materials. 

5. 
No storage buildings may open into required front yards. 

6. 
Facilities must maintain landscaped bufferyards as required by Article Eight. 


606 Supplemental Use Regulations: Industrial Uses 
a. 
Resource Extraction 
Resource extraction, where permitted, is subject to the following additional requirements: 


1. 
Erosion Control: A resource extraction use may not increase the amount of storm run­off onto adjacent properties. Erosion control facilities, including retention and sediment basins, are required of each facility, if necessary, to meet this standard. 

2. 
Surface Drainage: The surface of the use may not result in the collection or ponding of water, unless specifically permitted by the City Council. 

3. 
Storage of Topsoil: Topsoil shall be collected and stored for redistribution following the end of the operation. 

4. 
Elimination of Hazards: Excavation shall not result in a hazard to any person or property. The following measures are required: 


(a) 
Restoration of slopes to a gradient not exceeding 33% as soon as possible. 

(b) 
Installation of perimeter safety screening. 

(c) 
Installation of visual screening adjacent to any property within a residential or public use district. 


5. Restoration of Landscape: The topography and soil of the resource extraction site shall be restored and stabilized within nine months of completion of the operation. The site shall be seeded, planted, and contoured in a way that prevents erosion. Alternately, the site may be used as a lake or body of water, subject to approval by the City Council with the recommendation of the City Council and the Natural Resources District. 

b. 
Salvage Services 


1. Screening: 
(a) 
The perimeter of each new facility shall be fully enclosed by opaque, freestanding fencing or screen walls. Minimum height of this enclosure shall be eight feet. Any such enclosure shall be constructed behind required landscaped bufferyards. 

(b) 
Each existing salvage services facility shall be screened from public right­of­way as provided above within one year of the effective date of these Zoning Regulations. 


2. 
Storage of materials within any salvage services facility may not be higher than the height of the surrounding screen fence or wall. 

3. 
No Salvage Services use may be established within 300 feet of the nearest property line of a residential zoning district or of any pre­established civic use. 


607 Performance Standards for Industrial Uses 
a. Industrial Uses in the LI District: Performance Standards 
The following performance standards apply to all industrial uses permitted within an LI Limited Industrial zoning district: 
1. 
Physical Appearance: All operations shall be carried on within an enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in operable condition may be stored outside. Normal daily inorganic wastes may be stored outside in containers, provided that such containers are not visible form the street. 

2. 
Fire Hazard: No operation shall involve the use of highly flammable gases, acid, liquids, or other inherent fire hazards. This prohibition shall not apply to the normal use of heating or motor fuels and welding gases when handled in accordance with the regulations of Dawes County and the City of Chadron. 

3. 
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels Adjacent to Residential Zoning Districts: No operation in the LI district shall generate sound levels in excess of those specified in Table 6­1 at the boundary of a residential district. All noises shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable because of intermittence, beat frequency, or shrillness. 

4. 
Sewage and Wastes: No operation shall discharge into a sewer, drainage way, or the ground any material which is radioactive, poisonous, detrimental to normal sewer plant operation, or corrosive to sewer pipes and installations. 

5. 
Air Contaminants: No material may be discharged into the air from any source in such quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of people or to the public in general; or to endanger the health, comfort, or safety of any considerable number of people or to the public in general; or to damage other businesses, vegetation, or property. 

6. 
Odor: The emission of odors determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be obnoxious to most people shall be prohibited. Such odors shall be measured at the property line of the operation. 

7. 
Gases: No release of noxious or poisonous gases shall be permitted except as provided in this section. Measurements of sulfur dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, or carbon monoxide shall not exceed 5 parts per million taken at the property line of the operation. 

8. 
Vibration: All machines shall be mounted to minimize vibration. No measurable vibration shall occur at the property line of the operation which exceeds a displacement of 0.003 inch. 

9. 
Glare and Heat: All glare generated by a use shall be shielded or directed so as not to be visible at the property line of the operation. No heat may be generated from an operation that raises the air temperature at the property line of the operation by more than five degrees Fahrenheit above the ambient air temperature. 

10. 
Storage of Chemical Products: If allowed by Special User Permit, any above or below ground storage of liquid petroleum products or chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature shall not exceed 150,000 gallons when stored on one lot less than one acre. Such storage shall not exceed 25,000 gallons in any one tank. Storage of liquid petroleum products or chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature in excess of 25,000 gallons shall be located at least 50 feet from any structure intended for human habitation and at least 200 feet from any Residential, Office, or Commercial zoning district. 


b. Industrial Uses in the GI District: Performance Standards The following performance standards apply to all industrial uses permitted within an GI Limited Industrial zoning district: 
1. 
Physical Appearance: Salvage services and similar uses and operations shall be screened from view from both streets and adjacent non­industrial properties as provided by Sections 606(b) and 805. 

2. 
Fire Hazard: All flammable substances involved in any activity established in the district shall be handles in conformance with the latest edition of the Fire Prevention Code published by the American Insurance Association, and other appropriate federal, state, and city statutes. 

3. 
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels Adjacent to Residential Zoning Districts: No operation in the GI district shall generate sound levels in excess of those specified in Table 6­1 at the boundary of a residential district. All noises shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable because of intermittence, beat frequency, or shrillness. 

4. 
Sewage and Wastes: No operation shall discharge into a sewer, drainage way, or the ground any material which is radioactive, poisonous, detrimental to normal sewer plant operation, or corrosive to sewer pipes and installations. 

5. 
Air Contaminants: No material may be discharged into the air from any source in such quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of people or to the public in general; or to endanger the health, comfort, or safety of any considerable number of people or to the public in general; or to damage other businesses, vegetation, or property. 

6. 
Odor: The emission of odors shall be controlled so as to minimize the escape of odors within the limits of technology or economic feasibility. 

7. 
Gases: No release of noxious or poisonous gases shall be permitted except as provided in this section. Measurements of sulfur dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, or carbon monoxide shall not exceed 5 parts per million taken at the property line of the operation. 

8. 
Vibration: All machines shall be mounted to minimize vibration. 

9. 
Storage of Chemical Products: Storage of liquid petroleum products or chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature in excess of 25,000 gallons shall be located at least 250 feet from any structure intended for human habitation and at least 1,000 feet from any Residential, Office, or Commercial zoning district. 


608 Maximum Permitted Sound Levels Adjacent to Residential Zoning Districts 
Table 6­1 displays the maximum permitted sound levels that may be generated by uses in the CC, GC, LI, or GI zoning districts where adjacent to residential zoning districts. All measurements shall be taken at or within the boundary between the originating district and the adjacent residential zoning district with a sound level meter meeting ANSI specifications for a Type II or better general purpose sound level meter. The A­weighted response shall be used. 
Table 6­1 
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels at Residential Boundaries 

Originating Zoning District  Time  Maximum One Hour Leq* (dbA)  
CC, GC, LI  7:00 a.m. ­10:00 p.m.  60  
10:00 p.m. ­7:00 a.m.  55  

GI 
7:00 a.m. ­10:00 p.m. 
65 

10:00 p.m. ­7:00 a.m. 
55 

* Leq is the constant sound level that, in a given situation and time period, conveys the same sound energy as the actual time­varying A­weighted sound. It is the average sound level and accurately portrays the sound the human ear actually hears. 
609 Supplemental Use Regulations: Accessory Uses 
a. Home­Based Businesses/ Home Occupations 
Home­based businesses and home occupations are permitted as an accessory use in residential units subject to the following conditions: 
1. External Effects: 
(a) 
There shall be no change in the exterior appearance of the building or premises housing the home occupation other than signage permitted within this section. 

(b) 
No noise, odors, bright lights, electronic interference, storage or other external effects attributable to the home occupation shall be noticeable from any adjacent property or public right of way. 

(c) 
The home occupation shall be carried on entirely within the principal residential structure and/or within a detached accessory building approved by the City in accordance with these zoning regulations. All "External Effects" criteria in items a. 1. (a), (b), (d), (e) and (f) of this subsection are applicable for the detached accessory building. 

(d) 
Mechanical or electrical equipment supporting the home occupation shall be limited to that which is self­contained within the structure and normally used for office, domestic or household purposes. 

(e) 
No outdoor storage of materials or equipment used in the home occupation shall be permitted, other than motor vehicles used by the owner to conduct the occupation. Parking or storage of heavy commercial vehicles to conduct the home occupation is prohibited. 

(f) 
No home occupation shall discharge into any sewer, drainageway, or the ground any material which is radioactive, poisonous, detrimental to normal sewer plant operation, or corrosive to sewer pipes and installations. 


2. 
Employees: The home occupation shall employ no more than one full time or part time employee on site other than the residents of the dwelling unit, provided that one off­street parking space is made available and used by that non­resident employee. 

3. 
Extent of Use: For all residential and agricultural zoning districts, a maximum percent floor area of 30% of the dwelling may be devoted to the home occupation, inclusive of any detached accessory buildings used for the home occupation. 

4. 
Signage: Signage shall be permitted consistent with the regulations of Article Ten. 

5. 
Traffic Generation 


(a) Deliveries or service by commercial vehicles or trucks over ten tons gross empty weight is prohibited for any home­based business located on a local street. 
6. Prohibited Home­Based Businesses/Home Occupations 
(a) 
Beauty and Barber Shops: Barber and beauty shops are prohibited as home occupations in residential districts. 

(b) 
Welding, or any use defined in Article Three as Automotive or Equipment Services are not permitted as home­based businesses. 


7. 	Each home­based business shall be registered with the Zoning Administrator, using a form developed by the Zoning Administrator to demonstrate compliance with the standards contained within this section. 
b. 
Permitted Accessory Uses: Residential Uses 
Residential uses may include the following accessory uses, activities, and structures on the same lot. 


1. 	
Private garages and parking for the residential use. 

2. 	
Recreational activities and uses by residents. 

3. 	
Home occupations, subject to Section 611(a) of these regulations. 

4. 	
Residential convenience services for multi­family uses or mobile home parks. 

5. 
Garage sales, provided that the frequency of such sales at any one location shall not exceed one during a continuous, two month period or four sales during any twelve month period. 



c. 	
Permitted Accessory Uses: Civic Use Types 


Guidance Services and Health Care use types are permitted in the GI General Industrial zoning districts only as accessory uses to a primary industrial use. 
d. 
Permitted Accessory Uses: Other Use Types 
Other use types may include the following accessory uses, activities, and structures on the same lot: 


1. 	
Parking for the principal use. 

2. 
Manufacturing or fabrication of products made for sale in a principal commercial use, provided such manufacturing is totally contained within the structure housing the principal use. 

3. 	
Services operated for the sole benefit of employees of the principal use. 



e. 	
Permitted Accessory Uses: Agricultural Use Types 

1. 	
Garden centers and roadside stands, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 6­2(a)(2). 

2. 
Other uses and activities necessarily and customarily associated with the purpose and functions of agricultural uses. 




611 	Supplemental Use Regulations: Outdoor Storage outside of the GI Zoning District 
Outdoor storage is prohibited in all zoning districts except the GI General Industrial zoning district, except as provided in this section. 
a. 
Agricultural Use Types 
Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to agricultural uses. 


b. 
Civic Use Types 
Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to Maintenance Facilities. 


c. 	
Commercial Use Types 

1. 	
Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to Agricultural Sales and Service; Auto Rentals and 

Sales; Construction Sales; Equipment Sales and Service; Stables and Kennels; and Surplus Sales. 

2. 
Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to Auto Services, Equipment Repair, and Body Repair, provided that such storage is completely screened at property lines by an opaque barrier, as set forth in Section 805. This provision shall apply to any Auto Services, Equipment Repair, or Body Repair use established after the effective date of these regulations. 



d. 
Industrial and Miscellaneous Use Types 

1. 
Light Industry within the DC Downtown Commercial District zoning district may not include outdoor storage. 

2. 
Outdoor storage is permitted where it is incidental to Light Industry outside of the DC Downtown Commercial District; General Industry; Heavy Industry; Resource Extraction; Salvage Services; Warehousing; and Construction Yards. Any such outdoor storage is subject to screening requirements set forth in Article Eight. 

3. 
Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to landfills. 




612 Supplemental Use Regulations: Temporary Uses 
a. Purpose 
These provisions are intended to permit occasional, temporary uses and activities, when consistent with the objectives of the Zoning Regulations and compatible with surrounding uses. They are further intended to prevent temporary uses from assuming the character of permanent uses. 
b. 
Permitted Temporary Uses 
The following temporary uses are permitted, subject to the regulations contained within these sections: 


1. 
Model homes or apartments, if contained within the development to which they pertain. 

2. 
Development sales offices. Such offices may remain in place until 90% of the lots or units within the development are sold and may not be located within a mobile home or manufactured home/structure. 

3. 
Public assemblies, displays, and exhibits. 

4. 
Commercial circuses, carnivals, fairs, festivals, or other transient events, provided that events are located on property owned by the sponsoring non­profit organization, or are located within a DC or more intensive zoning district. 

5. 
Outdoor art shows and exhibits. 

6. 
Christmas tree or other holiday­related merchandise sales lots, provided that such facilities are not located in a residential zoning district. 

7. 
Construction site offices, if located on the construction site itself. 

8. 
Outdoor special sales, provided that such sales operate no more than three days in the same week and five days in the same month; and are located in commercial or industrial zoning districts. 

9. 
Construction Batch Plants, provided that: 


(a) 
No plant may be located within 600 feet of a developed residential use, park, or school. 

(b) 
The facility is located no more than one mile from its job site. The Zoning Administrator may extend this distance to two miles, if such extension avoids use of local streets by plant­related vehicles. 

(c) 
The duration of the plant's operation does not exceed 180 days. 


10. Additional temporary uses that the Zoning Administrator determines to be similar to the previously described uses in this section. 

c. 
Required Conditions of All Temporary Uses 

1. 
Each site shall be left free of debris, litter, or other evidence of the use upon its completion or removal. 

2. 
The Zoning Administrator may establish other conditions which he/she deems necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses. 



d. 
Permit Application and Issuance 

1. 
An application to conduct a temporary use shall be made to the Zoning Administrator and shall include at a minimum a description of the proposed use; a diagram of its location; information regarding hours and duration of operation; and other information necessary to evaluate the application. 

2. 
The Zoning Administrator may authorize a temporary use only if he/she determines that: 




(a) 
The use will not impair the normal operation of a present or future permanent use on the site. 

(b) 
The use will be compatible with surrounding uses and will not adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare. 


3. 
The duration of the permit shall be explicitly stated on the permit. 

4. 
Decisions of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. 


7 ARTICLE SEVEN 

SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
701 Purpose 
The Supplemental Site Development Regulations recognize the existence of special conditions that cannot comply literally with the site development regulations set out for each zoning district. Therefore, these regulations qualify or modify the district regulations of this title and provide for specific areas of exception. 
702 Setback Adjustments 
a. Exceptions to Openness of Required Yards 
Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed from finished grade upward, except as specified herein. 
1. 
Architectural projections, including roofs which cover porches, enclosed porches, window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, flues and chimneys, and ornamental features may project three feet into a required yard. 

2. 
Terraces, patios, uncovered decks, and ornamental features which have no structural element more than two feet above or below the adjacent ground level may project ten feet into a required yard. However, all such projections must be set back at least three feet from an adjacent side lot line; or twenty feet from any street property line. 

3. 
Fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies opening to fire towers may project a maximum of 3 feet into required yards, provided that they do not obstruct the light and ventilation of adjacent buildings. 

4. 
For buildings constructed upon a front property line, a cornice may project into public right­of-way. Maximum projection is the smaller of four feet or five percent of the right-of-way width. 

5. 
In commercial districts, a canopy may extend into a required front yard, provided that the canopy is set back at least five feet from the front property line, covers less than fifteen percent of the area of the required front yard, and has a vertical clearance of at least eight feet six inches. 

6. 
Accessory buildings are subject to all site development regulations of its zoning district, except as provided below: 

(a) 
Side Yards: An accessory building may be located a minimum of 5 feet from the side lot line of the property if it is located between the rear building line of the principal building and the rear property line. 

(b) 
Front Yards: No accessory building may be located between the front building line of the principal building and the front property line. 

(c) 
Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard setback for accessory buildings shall be 8 feet. This minimum rear yard setback shall be increased to 15 feet if the accessory building requires vehicular access from an alley. Double-frontage lots shall require front-yard setbacks along both street frontages as set forth in Table 4-3. Easements may be incorporated into these required setbacks. No accessory building shall be located within any easement or right-of­way along the rear property line. 

(d) 
Street Yards: No accessory building shall be located within 20 feet from any street right­of-way line. 

(e) 
Height: In residential districts, the maximum height shall be 20 feet for a detached garage and 10 feet for any other accessory building. Maximum height for a detached garage and/or other accessory building in an RR District shall be 20 feet. 

(f) 
Separation from Other Buildings: Accessory buildings shall be separated as required by the Uniform Building Code. 

(g) 
Attached Accessory Buildings: Any accessory building physically attached to the principal building shall be considered part of the principal building and subject to the development regulations of its zoning district. 

(h) 
Effect on Adjacent Properties: If an adjacent lot is built upon, the accessory building must be entirely to the rear of the line of any principal building on such adjacent lot. No accessory building shall damage adjacent property by obstructing views, inhibiting solar access, or hindering ventilation. 

(i) 
Hazards: Any accessory use which creates a potential fire hazard shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any residential structure. Such uses include but are not limited to detached fireplaces, barbecue ovens, or storage of flammable materials. 

(j) 
No accessory building shall be built upon any lot until construction of the principal building has begun. 



7. 
Lamp posts with a maximum height of ten (10) feet may be located within required yards, provided they are set back at least five (5) feet from property lines. 

8. 
Flag poles up to maximum height of base district may be located within required yards, provided they are set back at least five (5) feet from property lines. 


c. Setback Adjustments 
1. Setbacks on Built-Up Blockfaces 

These provisions apply if forty percent or more of the buildings on that blockface have front yard setbacks different from those required for the specific district. 
(a) 
If a building is to be built on a parcel of land within 100 feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be the mean setbacks of the adjacent buildings. 

(b) 
If a building is to be built on a parcel of land within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, the minimum front yard shall be the setback of the adjacent building. 

(c) 
If a building is to be built on a parcel of land not within 100 feet of an existing building on either side, then the minimum front yard shall be the mean setback of all existing buildings on the blockface. 

(d) 
No setback adjustment pursuant to this section shall create a required front yard setback more than five feet greater than that otherwise required by the applicable zoning district. 


2. Corner Lots 

Required setbacks shall not reduce the buildable width of any corner lot to less than 24 feet. Appropriate setback adjustments shall be allowed to maintain this minimum width. 
d. Rear Yard Exceptions -Residential Uses 
When an irregular lot is used for residential purposes, the rear yard may be measured as the average horizontal distance between the building and rear lot line, provided that the minimum setback shall not be less than sixty percent (60%) of the rear yard required by the zoning district. 
e. Double Frontage Lots 
Residentially zoned double frontage lots on a major street, and with no access to that street may have a 25-foot minimum front yard setback along said street. All other double frontage lots must provide full front yard setbacks from each adjacent street. 
f. Antennas 
1. 
Antennas with a surface area over 6.3 square feet and which are accessory to a primary use and are designed to receive and transmit electromagnetic signals, or to receive signals from satellites, shall not be located within any front yard of the primary use. 

2. 
Such antennas shall be located no less than fifteen feet from the property line of an adjacent property within a residential zoning district. 


g. Vision Clearance Zones 
No structure, including a fence, shall be built to a height of more than three feet above the established curb grade on the part of the lot bounded by the street lines of the streets which intersect and a line connecting a point on each of such lines thirty feet from their point of intersection. No landscaping shall be planted in such area which will materially obstruct the view of drivers approaching the street intersection. 
703 Height Exceptions 
These provisions allow exceptions to the height limit of any zoning district in certain situations. 
a. Vertical Projections 
Chimneys, cooling towers, building mechanical equipment, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, grain elevators, non-parabolic receiving antennas, tanks, solariums, steeples, penthouses not exceeding 25 percent of total roof area, flag poles, stage towers or scenery lofts, and water towers may be built to any height in accordance with existing and future regulations. 
b. Amateur Radio Towers and Federal Communication Commission Pronouncements 
1. 
Radio towers, antennas and other appurtenances operated by licensed amateur radio operators, where permitted and when, may not exceed 75 feet in height. This height has been determined by the City to reasonably accommodate amateur service communications, and further represents the minimum practicable regulation to accomplish legitimate municipal land use regulation purpose, as recognized under published guidelines of the Federal Communications Commission. 

2. 
Special instances may require that amateur radio tower heights exceed 75 feet to achieve effective and reliable communications. In such cases, the City Council may grant a Special Use Permit to a licensed amateur radio operator for a specific tower height that exceeds 75 feet. In determining whether to grant such permission, the City Council shall consider the federal guidelines contained in PRB-1 (Amateur Radio Preemption, 101 FCC 2d (1985); codified at C.F.R. 

Section 97.15(e). 


3. 
Such radio towers shall not be located within any front yard of the primary use. 


c. Broadcast Towers 
Broadcast towers, when operated by a federally-licensed commercial or non-profit organization, may be built to any height in accordance with existing and future regulations. This exception does not apply to radio towers, antennas and other appurtenances operated by licensed amateur radio operators. 
d. Civic Buildings 
Buildings housing civic use types may be built to a maximum height of 60 feet. Such buildings located in residential districts shall be set back one foot in addition to required setbacks from each property line for each foot of height over the maximum height of the zoning district. 
e. Wind Energy Conservation Systems (WECS) 
1. 
The distance from all lot lines or any building or power line to any tower support base of a WECS shall be equal to the sum of the tower height and the diameter of the rotor. A reduction of this requirement may be granted as part of a Special Permit approval if the Planning Commission finds that the reduction is consistent with public health, safety, and welfare. 

2. 
The distance between the tower support bases of any two WECS shall be the minimum of five rotor lengths, determined by the size of the largest rotor. A reduction of this requirement may be granted as part of a Special Permit approval if the Planning Commission finds that the reduction does not impede the operation of either WECS. 

3. 
The WECS operation shall not interfere with radio, television, computer, or other electronic operations on adjacent properties. 

4. 
A fence six feet high with a locking gate shall be placed around any WECS tower base; or the tower climbing apparatus shall begin no lower than twelve feet above ground. 


f. Special Permit Uses 
The Planning Commission may grant an exception from the height limit for a zoning district for a special permit use, as part of its approval of that use. The limit or extent of this exception shall be a specific part of the special use permit. 
g. Federal Aviation Administration Rules 
No structure may be built in any zoning district which exceeds the maximum height permitted under the rules of the Federal Aviation Administration. These rules describe the glide angles and operational patterns for any airport within the planning jurisdiction of the City of Chadron. 
704 Fence Regulations 
a. Location Restriction 
Unless otherwise provided by this title or other sections of the Chadron Municipal Code, no fence shall be built on any lot or tract outside the surveyed lot lines, excluding public streets. 
b. Required Openings Unless otherwise provided by this title or other sections of the Chadron Municipal Code, any fence built 
on residential property within required front yards shall contain openings constituting no less than 50 percent of the surface area of the fence. 
c. Sight Obstruction 
No solid fence permitted or required by this title or other sections of the Chadron Municipal Code shall be built within a triangle formed by the adjacent side lines of two intersecting streets and a line connecting points 50 feet on each leg from their point of intersection; or otherwise in any manner create a traffic hazard or obstruction to visibility. 
d. Facing 
The finished surfaces of any fence shall face toward adjacent properties and street frontage. 
e. Effect on Adjacent Properties 
No accessory building shall damage adjacent property by obstructing views, inhibiting solar access, or hindering ventilation. 
f. Residential Fences 
Fences constructed within residential districts or on land used for residential purposes are subject to the following provisions. 
1. 
Height: The maximum height of a fence within a required front yard or street side yard setback shall be four feet. The maximum height for any fence outside of a required front yard shall be 6.5 feet. 

2. 
Exception for Street Side Yards: On corner lots, a fence built parallel to the street side yard line but set back in conformance with the required street yard setback may have a maximum height of six feet. 

3. 
Exception to Openness Requirement: Fences built on residential property other than in the front yard may exceed 50 percent closed construction. 

4. 
Exception for Front Yards of Double Frontage Lots: A fence built within the required front yard of a double frontage lot may be a maximum of six feet in height and may exceed 50 percent closed construction if such lot fronts a major street, as defined in the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Chadron; and if such frontage does not provide primary access to the property. 

5. 
Materials: Fences shall be constructed of wood, chain-link, PVC/ resin, stone or masonry materials only. Wood fences shall utilize standard building lumber or S2S lumber. Barbed wire and/or electrified fences are not permitted, and are defined as any fence that includes in its material barbs, blades, razors, electric current or other features specifically designed to injure or abrade an individual or animal who attempts to negotiate the fence. 

6. 
Residential Swimming Pools: A closed or privacy fence with a height of at least six feet with a locking gate shall be required as a perimeter fence around a below ground open residential swimming pool, or a permanent, above-ground swimming pool. 

7. 
Fences utilized to make the boundary between two properties should be located on the common property line. 


f. Other Fences 
Fences constructed in commercial and industrial districts are subject to the following special provisions: 
1. 
The maximum height of a fence for any permitted use in any non-residential zoning district shall be eight feet. 

2. 
Civic Uses in Residential Districts: The maximum height of fences installed as part of Primary and Secondary Educational Facilities or Park and Recreation Use Types within Residential Zoning Districts shall be eight feet. 

3. 
The Board of Adjustment may approve greater fence heights on a case-by-case basis if it concludes that such permission furthers the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Chadron. 

4. 
Barbed wire may be used in the construction of perimeter security fencing in an industrial district or for municipal facilities provided that the bottom strand of the wire shall be at least six feet above ground level. Barbed wire may be constructed for agricultural purposes in an AG or RR District. Electrified fences are not permitted within the corporate limits of the City of Chadron. 


g. Existing Fences 
Any existing fence lawfully built before the effective date of these Regulations may remain in place without change. Any replacement or change of such fence shall meet the requirements of this section. 
706 Appeals 
Denial, revocations, or cancellations of a building permit based on the provisions of this Section may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment, as set forth in Sections 1208 through 1210. 
8 	ARTICLE EIGHT 
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS 
801 	Purpose The Landscaping and Screening Regulations provide additional guidance on the development of sites within Chadron by addressing landscaping and screening requirements. They are designed to improve the appearance of the community; buffer potentially incompatible land uses from one another; and conserve the value of properties within the City of Chadron. 
802 	Applicability 
The provisions of this section shall apply to all new development on each lot or site upon application for a building permit, except for the following: 
a. 	
Reconstruction or replacement of a lawfully existing use or structure following a casualty loss. 

b. 
Remodeling, rehabilitation, or improvements to existing uses or structures which do not substantially change the location of structures, parking, or other site improvements. 

c. 
Additions or enlargements of existing uses or structures which increase floor area or impervious coverage area by less than 20 percent. Where such additions or enlargements are 20 percent or greater, these provisions shall apply only to that portion where the new development occurs. 


803 	Landscaping Requirements 
Landscaping shall be required adjacent to each street property line and within street yards as set forth in Table 8­1. 
804 	Landscaping Materials and Installation Standards 
a. 	Official List of Plant Materials 
All plant material installed in landscaped areas or bufferyards shall be consistent with the Official List of Plant Materials provided by the Chadron Tree Board through the office of the Zoning Administrator. All plant materials shall conform in size, species and spacing with this section of the regulations. 
b. 	Use of Inorganic Landscaping Materials 
No artificial trees, shrubs, plants or turf shall be used to fulfill the minimum requirements for landscaping. Inorganic materials, such as stone or decorative pavers, may be used provided that such material does not comprise more than 35% of the minimum required landscaped area. Other concrete and/or asphalt pavement surfaces may not be used within the minimum required landscaped area, except for walkways less than 5 feet in width. 
Table 8­1: Required Landscape Depth 
Depth of Landscaping Zoning District Adjacent to Street Property Line 
AG 35 feet 
RR 35 feet 
R­1 20 feet 
R­2, R­3 15 feet 
MH 35 feet 
LC 15 feet 
CC 10 feet 
DC No requirement 
GC 10 feet 
LI 15 feet 
GI No requirement 

805 Bufferyard Provisions 
These provisions apply when use is established in a more intensive zoning district (District A) which is adjacent to a less intensive zoning district (District B). The owner, developer, or operator of the use within District A shall install and maintain a landscaped bufferyard on his/her lot or site, as set forth in this section. Bufferyard requirements apply only to those districts indicated in Table 8­2. Bufferyards are not required of single­family, 2­family, duplex, or townhouse use types in the more intensive zoning district. 
a. The bufferyard dimensions set forth in Table 8­2 apply to zoning districts which share a common lot line or are adjacent but separated by an intervening alley. 

Notes to Table 8­2: Note 1: Applies to residential uses previously established in the zoning district. Note 2: Vertical screening only is required as set forth in Section 806. Note 3: Buffer requirements do not apply to single­family, duplex, or townhouse residential uses established in District A 
b. 
When a street separates adjacent zoning districts requiring a bufferyard, the size of the bufferyard shall be one­half the required bufferyard set forth in Table 8­2. 

c. 
Each required bufferyard must be entirely landscaped and free of paved areas, access ways, storage, or other disturbances. 


806 Screening Standards 
a. Application 
Screening is required between adjacent zoning districts indicated in Table 8­2 when one or more of the following conditions in the more intensive zoning district is directly visible from and faces toward the boundary of the less intensive zoning district. 
1. 
The rear elevation of buildings. 

2. 
Outdoor storage areas or storage tanks, unless otherwise screened. 

3. 
Loading docks, refuse collection points, and other service areas. 

4. 
Major machinery or areas housing a manufacturing process. 

5. 
Major on­site traffic circulation areas or truck and/or trailer parking. 

6. 
Sources of glare, noise, or other environmental effects. 


b. Opaque Barrier A six foot opaque barrier shall be provided which visually screens the conditions listed in Section 806 (a) from less intensive uses as follows: 
1. 
A solid wood, S2S lumber, and/or masonry fence or wall at least six feet in height. 

2. 
A landscaping screen, using evergreen or deciduous materials, capable of providing a substantially opaque, hedge­like barrier and attaining a minimum height of six feet within three years of planting. 

3. 
A landscaped earth berm with a maximum slope of three to one, rising no less than six feet above the existing grade of the lot line separating the zoning districts. 

4. 
Any combination of these methods that achieves a cumulative height of six feet. 


c. 
Location of Screening Wall 

1. A screening wall or fence shall be installed no closer to the less intensive zoning district than one­half the width of the required bufferyard. 

d. 
Screening: Effect on Drainage 
Screening shall not adversely affect surface water drainage. 


e. 
Permitted Interruptions of Screening 


Screening may be interrupted to provide access drives to service areas or for loading purposes to buildings. Such breaks or interruptions shall not exceed 20% of the length of the required screened area. 
807 Tree Plantings 
In any landscaped area required by the Minimum Depth Requirements, the Bufferyard Requirements, or the Parking Lot Interior Landscaping Requirements, one tree of an approved species listed on the Official List of Plant Materials shall be planted and maintained for each 500 square feet of required landscaped area. Existing trees approved for preservation shall be counted toward satisfaction of this requirement. An approved species list shall be obtained by the City of Chadron Tree Board. 
808 General Provisions 
a. Time of Application 
The provisions contained in this Article shall be applied for each individual lot or site when an application for a building permit on such lot is made. 
b. Maintenance of Required Landscaping 
Upon installation of required landscape materials, each owner shall take appropriate actions to ensure their continued health and maintenance. 
c. Obstruction of View 
Landscaping or screening installed in any landscaped area shall not obstruct the view from or to any driveway approach, street, alley, or sidewalk. 
d. Earth Berm Locations 
All earth berm locations shall be reviewed by the Public Works Director, or his/her designee to determine how the berms shall relate to drainage and public utilities. 
e. Exceptions A development may continue to comply with the bufferyard and screening requirements in effect at the time of issuance of its original permit, regardless of whether an adjacent lot or site is subsequently rezoned to a less intensive district which would otherwise require compliance with bufferyard or screening provisions. 

9 ARTICLE NINE 
OFF­STREET PARKING 
901 Purpose 
The Off­Street Parking Regulations require that developments provide parking in proportion to the need created by each use. The regulations further establish standards for the functional design of parking facilities. These regulations are intended to accommodate vehicles in a functionally satisfactory manner and to minimize external effects on neighboring properties. 
902 General Applications 
a. Applicability 
Off­street parking shall be provided for any new building constructed; for new uses or conversions of existing buildings; or for enlargements of existing structures. 
b. Exemptions 
Any use within the DC Downtown Commercial District is exempt from the off­street parking requirements provided by Section 9­3. Any off­street parking facility constructed in the DC District after the effective date of these regulations must comply with the design standards set forth in this Article. 
903 Schedule of Off­Street Parking Requirements 
Parking facilities for each use shall be provided in accord with the minimum requirements set forth in Table 9­1. 
a. 
Computation 

1. 
When a computation of required parking results in a fraction of 0.5 or greater, the requirement should be rounded up to the next whole number. 

2. 
Unless otherwise indicated, parking requirements are based on gross floor area. Gross floor areas for the purpose of this calculation exclude any interior space used for the parking or loading of vehicles. 

3. 
When parking requirements are computed on the basis of capacity, capacity shall be determined by the building code in effect for the City of Chadron at the time the use is established. 



b. 
Multiple Use Sites and Adjustments 

1. 
For sites with more than one use, the parking requirement shall be the sum of spaces required for each use, except as provided below. 

2. 
The Board of Adjustment may authorize an adjustment in the total parking requirement for separate uses located on the same site or for separate uses located on adjoining sites and served by the same parking facility. The Board shall consider at least the following criteria in determining approval of such an adjustment: 




(a) 
The characteristics and time of operation of each use, and differences in projected peak parking demand. 

(b) 
Potential reduction in total expected vehicle movements afforded by multiple uses of the parking facilities. 

(c) 
Functional design of the development and its parking facilities. 

(d) 
Evidence of a written agreement that provides for the joint use of parking facilities. 


904 	Parking Facility Location 
a. 	
Residential Parking Off­street parking for residential uses shall be located on the same lot or site as the use. 

b. 	
Non­residential Parking 


Off­street parking for non­residential uses shall be located on the same lot or site as the use, or within 300 feet of that use if the parking site is within a zoning district that permits the Off­Street Parking use type. Control of ownership or use rights to the remote off­street parking must be demonstrated as a condition of permission. 
Table 9­1 Minimum Off­Street Parking Requirements 
Agricultural Use Types  
Horticulture  1 space per 1,000 square feet of sales area.  
Crop Production  No requirement.  
Animal Production  No requirement.  
Commercial Feedlots  No requirement.  
Residential Use Types  
Single­Family Residential  2 spaces per dwelling unit.  
Duplex Residential  2 spaces per dwelling unit.  
Two­Family Residential  2 spaces per dwelling unit.  
Multi­Family Residential  1.5 spaces per efficiency or 1­BR unit; 2 spaces per other units; 1 space per 1 units for elderly housing.  
Group Residential  1 space for each two residents  
Mobile Home Residential  2 spaces per dwelling unit.  
Retirement Residential  2 spaces per independent living unit; 1 space for each 3 units of assisted living  
Civic Use Types  
Administration  1 space for 300 square feet.  
Cemetery  No requirement.  
Clubs  1 space per 4 person capacity in largest assembly space  
Colleges and Universities  1 space for every 4 students based on average enrollment during previous 5 years  
Convalescent Services  1 space for 4 beds.  
Cultural Services  1 space per 500 square feet of public area.  
Day Care Services  1 space per 5 person capacity + 1 space per employee of largest shift.  
Group Care Facility  1 space per 4 person capacity + 1 space per employee of largest shift.  
Group Home  1 space per 4 person capacity + 1 space per employee of largest shift.  
Guidance Services  1 space per 300 square feet.  
Health Care  1 space per 300 square feet + 1 space per employee of largest shift.  
Hospitals  1 space per 2 beds.  
Maintenance Facilities  See Schedule A.  
Parks and Recreation  No requirement.  
Postal Facilities  See Schedule A.  
Primary Education  1 space per employee of max shift  
Public or Religious Assembly  1 space per 4 person capacity in largest assembly space  
Secondary Education  1 space per employee of max shift + 1 space for each 3 11th and 12th grade  
Safety Services  1 space per employee of maximum shift + 1 stall per 1,000 sq. ft.  

Table 9­1 Minimum Off­Street Parking Requirements 
9­3 

Secondary Education  1 space per employee of max shift + 1 space for each 3 11th and 12th grade students.  
Utilities  1 space per employee of maximum shift.  
Commercial Use Types  
Agricultural Sales/Service  See Schedule A.  
Auto Rental and Sales  See Schedule A.  
Auto Service*  4 times service capacity.  
Body Repair*  5 spaces per repair stall.  
Business Support Services  1 space per 500 square feet.  
Campground  1 space per camping unit.  
Cocktail Lounge  1 space per 200 square feet.  
Commercial Recreation  1 space per 2 person capacity.**  
Communication Services  1 space per 500 square feet.  
Construction Sales  See Schedule A.  
Consumer Services  1 space per 200 square feet.  
Convenience Storage  1 space per 20 storage units.  
Equipment Sales/Service  See Schedule A.  
Food Sales (All Types)  1 space per 200 square feet.  
Retail Services  1 space per 200 square feet up to 2,000 square feet. 1 space for every 300 square feet over 2,000 square feet.  
Liquor Sales  1 space per 200 square feet.  
Lodging, Bed and Breakfast  1 space per unit + 1 space for each 200 square feet of public meeting area.  
Personal Improvement  1 space per 200 square feet.  
Personal Services  1 space per 500 square feet.  
Pet Services  1 space per 500 square feet.  
Restaurants (Drive­in)  1 space per 50 square feet of customer service area.  
Restaurants (General)  1 space per 3 person capacity in dining area.  
Stables/Kennels  1 space per employee + 1 stall per 5,000 sq. ft. of site area.  
Surplus Sales  See Schedule A.  
Veterinary Services  1 space per 500 square feet.  

* Auto Service and Body Repair subject to other restrictions applicable under these regulations: See Section 4: Use Types ­“Vehicle Storage”; also, Section 6: Supplemental Use Regulations, “Outdoor Storage.” 
** This standard may be reduced by up to 20% at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, if site plan review demonstrates that 
circulation and loading patterns accommodate adequate space for queuing and temporary parking by users during the peak hours of 
operation. 
Table 9­1 Minimum Off­Street Parking Requirements 
Office Use Types  
General Offices  1 space per 300 square feet.  
Medical Offices  3 spaces per staff doctor or dentist.  

Miscellaneous Use Types  
Broadcasting Tower  No requirement.  
Non­Putrescible Landfill  No requirement.  
All Landfills  No requirement.  

Industrial Use Types  
Agricultural Industries  See Schedule A.  
Light Industry  See Schedule A.  
General Industry  See Schedule A.  
Heavy Industry  See Schedule A.  
Railroad Facilities  See Schedule A.  
Resource Extraction  1 space per employee on largest shift.  
Salvage Services  See Schedule A.  
Warehousing  See Schedule A.  
Construction Yards  See Schedule A.  

Schedule A  
This schedule sets forth minimum off­street parking requirements for uses with elements that have different functions and operating characteristics  
Function of Element  Requirement  
Office or Administration  1 space per 300 square feet.  
Indoor Sales, Display or Service Area  1 space per 500 square feet.  
Outdoor Sales, Display or Service Area  1 space per 2,000 square feet.  
Equipment Servicing or Manufacturing  1 space per 1,000 square feet.  
Indoor or Outdoor Storage or Warehousing  1 space per 5,000 square feet.  

905 Parking for People with Disabilities 
Each off­street parking facility shall provide the number of parking spaces set forth in Table 9­2 
9­5 

designed and designated for use by people with disabilities. Parking spaces shall be van­accessible. Design criteria and dimensions are set forth in the Off­Street Parking Design Standards and the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Parking facilities for single­family, duplex, two­family, and mobile home residential uses are exempt from this requirement. 
Table 9­2 
Accessible Parking Requirements 
Number of Number of Required Number of Stalls Number of Required Accessible 
Stalls Accessible Spaces Spaces 

1­25 1 
201­300 

7 
26­50 

2 
301­400 

8 
51­75 

3 
401­500 

9 
76­100 

4 
501­1,000 

2% of total 
101­150 

5 

1,001 and over 
20, plus 1 for each 100 151­200 
6 stalls over 1,000 

Van Accessible Stalls: One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall be served by an access aisle with a minimum width of 96 inches and shall be designated as “Van Accessible.” 
906 Off­Street Parking Design Standards 
a. Dimensions 
1. 
Standard parking stalls shall be 9 feet wide and18 feet long. 

2. 
Parking facilities may provide up to 40% of their total stalls as designated compact stalls. Compact parking stalls shall be a minimum of 8.5 feet wide and 16 feet long. 

3. 
Spaces designated for the handicapped shall have a minimum width of 12 feet. Each handicapped space shall provide a barrier free route to an accessible building entrance, which shall not require users to walk or wheel behind parked cars. Such spaces shall be designated with an upright sign exhibiting the universal symbol for accessibility by the handicapped. All such paces shall be designed in compliance with the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 


b. Pavement and Drainage 
1. 
Off­street parking facilities shall be hard surfaced and maintained with materials sufficient to prevent mud, dust, or loose material. Hard surfaced materials may include concrete, asphalt, brick, or crushed aggregate. 

2. 
Off­street parking facilities shall be designed and built to prevent the free flow of water onto adjacent properties or public rights­of­way. 


c. Landscape and Screening Requirements 
Unless otherwise noted, each unenclosed parking facility of over 3,000 square feet shall comply with the following regulations: 
1. 
Each unenclosed parking facility shall provide a minimum landscaped buffer of ten feet along any street property line. 

2. 
Each parking facility that abuts a residential district shall provide a ten foot 

landscaped buffer along its common property line with the residential district. 

3. 
Any parking facility which abuts property in a residential district shall provide a fence, wall, landscape screen, or earth berm not less than four feet in height for the length of the common boundary. A grade change, terrace, or other site feature which blocks the sight line of headlights into a residential property may satisfy this requirement, subject to the determination of the Zoning Administrator. 

4. 
Each unenclosed parking facility of over 4,500 square feet within a street yard shall provide interior landscaped area equal to no less than 5 percent of the total paved area of the parking facility. Parking facilities within the GI District shall be exempt from this requirement. 

5. 
Interior landscaping shall be credited toward the satisfaction of overall landscaping requirements set forth in Article Eight. 


d. Entrances and Exits 
1. 
Adequate access to each parking facility shall be provided by means of clearly defined and limited driveways or access points. Such driveways shall be designed to direct non­residential traffic away from residential areas. 

2. 
Parking facilities other than driveways for single­family, duplex, two­family, or mobile home residential uses must permit vehicles to enter streets in a forward position. 


e. Safety Features 
1. 
Parking facilities shall be designed to provide visibility of and between pedestrians and vehicles when circulating within or entering or leaving the facility; and shall not create blind, hidden, or hazardous areas. 

2. 
Circulation patterns shall be designed in accord with accepted standards of traffic engineering and safety. 


f. Lighting 
Any lighting used to illuminate any off­street parking area shall be arranged to direct light A from adjoining properties in any residential district. 
g. Maintenance 
All parking facilities shall be maintained to assure the continued usefulness and compatibility of the facility. Acceptable maintenance includes keeping the facility free of refuse, debris, and litter; maintaining parking surfaces in sound condition; and providing proper care of landscaped areas. 
h. Adjustment 
For uses subject to Special Use Permit approval, the City Council may adjust the minimum requirements of this section, in order to provide design, usability, attractiveness, or protection to adjoining uses in a manner equal to or greater than the minimum requirements of this Article. 
907 Off­Street Loading 
a. Loading Requirement 
Any use which involves the receipt or distribution of freight, merchandise, supplies, vehicles, or equipment as part of its typical operation shall provide and maintain adequate space for off­street loading and circulation. Loading areas shall be designed to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and sidewalks. 
b. Schedule of Loading Spaces 
Loading spaces for each use requiring them shall be provided in accord with the minimum requirements set forth in Table 9­3. 
Table 9­3 Off­Street Loading Requirements 
Gross Floor Area of Use (square feet) Number of Required Loading Spaces 
5,000 or less None 
5,001 ­25,000 1 
25,001 ­75,000 2 
75,001 ­150,000 3 
Over 150,000 4 plus one for each additional 100,000 SF 

c. Design Standards 
1. 
Each loading space shall be at least 10 feet wide by 50 feet long, with a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. 

2. 
Paving of loading spaces and access areas shall be permanent, durable, and free of dust. 

3. 
Off­street loading areas are subject to the landscaping and buffering requirements for parking facilities set forth in this Article. 


908 Parking for Personal and Recreational Vehicles 
a. Applicability 
This section permits the parking of personal vehicles on a single lot in a residential district subject to specific conditions. Personal vehicles include: passenger cars; vans; pick­up trucks; camper shells, toppers, and other similar appurtenances intended for attachment to a personal vehicle; trailers under twenty feet in length, and boats. Trucks, tractor cab units, trailers, recreational vehicles, and vehicles over ten tons gross empty weight shall be defined as heavy commercial vehicles. 
b. Location of Parking 
1. 
Parking is permitted within any enclosed structure when such structure conforms to the regulations of its zoning district. 

2. 
Parking of personal vehicles is permitted on a hard­surfaced driveway (outside of an enclosed structure) within the front yard setback, but shall in no case encroach upon the public right­of­way. 

3. 
Parking of personal vehicles may occur in the rear yard setback (outside of an enclosed structure and not on the front yard hard surfaced driveway) if the Zoning Administrator determines that such parking conforms to the provisions of these Zoning Regulations, meets the following conditions: 


(a) 
The parking space is provided on a hard­surface connected by a hard surfaced route to a dedicated public right­of­way and/or alley. 

(b) 
The hard­surfaced parking does not exceed the maximum impervious coverage limit for the lot. 


5. Heavy commercial vehicles, including tractor cab units weighing more than 10 tons gross empty weight, and recreational vehicles shall not be parked on any lot within the R1, R2, R3, and MH residential zoning districts, except as provided below. 
c. Special Provisions for Recreational Vehicles and Boats 
Where permitted, parking and storage of recreational vehicles and boats is subject to the following additional conditions: 
1. 
Recreational vehicles and boats may not be permanently connected to utility lines. 

2. 
Recreational vehicles and boats may not be used for the storage of goods, materials, or equipment other than those items which pertain to the use of the vehicle. 


909 Supplementary Regulations: Storage and Parking of Unlicensed or Other Vehicles 
a. Storage of Vehicles 
The storage or keeping of motor vehicles not having a properly issued current motor vehicle registration and current motor vehicle license plate properly displayed, or in good operable condition, is prohibited on any lot, parcel or tract of land or part thereof, situated within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Chadron; provided that conformance with the following shall not constitute a violation of this section: 
1. 
The storage of no more than two unlicensed and/or unregistered motor vehicles in a fully­enclosed garage or in a fenced area hidden from view of a public street or adjacent residential property. 

2. 
The storage of operable off­highway farm or industrial vehicles on tracts zoned AG Agriculture or LI or GI industrial uses, and used in agricultural or industrial activity conducted on the premises. 

3. 
The storage, keeping or abandonment of parts, including scrap metals, from motor vehicles or machinery, or parts thereof, is prohibited on any lot, parcel or tract of land or part thereof, situated within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Chadron, except in enclosed buildings or garages or where otherwise permitted by these regulations. 

4. 
Parking, storage or keeping, other than in a fully enclosed garage of any non­operable motor vehicle is prohibited on any residential zoned lot, parcel or tract of land or part thereof, situated within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Chadron; provided, however, that automobiles that are non­operable by reasons of repair work being done thereon may be parked on the residential lot of the owner of said automobile within the Chadron Zoning jurisdiction under the following conditions: 

(a) 
The automobile is owned by the occupier of the premises and registered to him/her at that address. 

(b) 
Repair work is at all times conducted on a hard­surfaced driveway. 




b. Removal of Vehicles Before the City removes a vehicle suspected of being in violation of this section, by reason of it being inoperable, the City shall give the owner of the premises upon which the offending vehicle is situated a seventy­two hour warning notice. Notice shall be given by tagging the motor vehicle and by regular mail, postage pre­paid to the occupier of the premises on which the motor vehicle is situated. Any motor vehicle not removed from the premises within such seventy­two hour period shall be presumed to be inoperable and may thereafter be removed by the City. If he/she chooses, the owner may demonstrate operability of the vehicle by making special arrangements with the Chadron Police Department to demonstrate operability of the vehicle within said seventy­two hour period. If operability of the vehicle is satisfactorily demonstrated, the automobile need not be removed. 
10 ARTICLE TEN 

SIGN REGULATIONS 
1001 	Purpose The Sign Regulations provide standards for communicating information in the environment of the City of Chadron and its jurisdiction. The regulations recognize the need to protect public health, safety, and welfare; to maintain the city's attractive appearance; to provide for adequate business identification, advertising, and communication of information; and to encourage the fair enforcement of sign regulations. 
1002 	Definition of Terms 
The following definitions shall be used for terms contained in this chapter that are not otherwise defined in the Chadron Municipal Code or in this Zoning Ordinance. 
1. 
Abandoned Sign: A sign, including sign face and supporting structure, which refers to a discontinued business, profession, commodity, service, or other activity or use formerly occupying the site; or which contains no sign copy on all sign faces for a continuous period of six months. 

2. 
Attached Sign: A sign which is structurally connected to a building or depends upon that building for support 

3. 
Auxiliary Design Elements: Terms which describe secondary characteristics of a sign, including its method of illumination and other features within the bounds of its basic shape. 

4. 
Awning and Awning Sign: A temporary or movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and composed of non­rigid materials, except for a supporting framework. An awning sign is a message printed on such a shelter. 

5. 
Banner: Material with a printed message or graphic secured or mounted from a structure in such a way as to allow wind movement. 

6. 
Building Marker: An historic or commemorative plaque, or a building name or cornerstone carved into a masonry surface. 

7. 
Business Center Identification Sign: A sign which identifies a building or group of commercial buildings in single ownership or control, sharing parking and access. 

8. 
Canopy: A projecting non­movable structure cantilevered or suspended from a building, supported by the main structural members to which it is attached, and used only as a roof or fixed shelter. 

9. 
Canopy Sign: A sign which is attached or made an integral part of a canopy. 

10. 
Clearance: The distance from the bottom of a sign face elevated above grade and the grade below. 

11. 
Detached Sign: A sign which is self­supporting and structurally independent from any building. 

12. 
Directional Sign: A sign which serves only to designate the location or direction of any area or place. 

13. 
Double­Faced Sign: A sign consisting of no more than two parallel faces supported by a single structure. 

14. 
Electronic Information Sign: Any sign intended primarily to provide information of general community interest, including time, temperature, and other atmospheric conditions, date, news, traffic control, or 

commercial messages. 

15. 
Frontage: The length of a property line of any one premises abutting and parallel to a public street, private way, or court. 

16. 
Ground Sign: A detached on­premise sign built on a freestanding frame, mast, or pole(s) with a clearance no greater than 3 feet. 

17. 
Illumination: Lighting sources installed for the primary purpose of lighting a specific sign or group of signs. Illumination techniques referred to by these Regulations include: 

(a) 
Bare Bulb: Illumination of signs using unshielded bulbs. 

(b) 
Direct Illumination: Illumination of signs through flood lights whose luminous surface is visible to the normally located obvserver. 

(c) 
Flame: Use of open flame or torches as a light source. 

(d) 
Flashing: Use of an intermittent light source, including the illusion of intermittance through animation or other external light sources. Electronic information signs are excluded from this definition, except for any flashing mode of these signs. 

(e) 
Indirect: Use of a light source whose luminous surface is not visible to the normally located observer. 

(f) 
Internal: Use of a light source concealed or contained within the sign, and visible by shining through a translucent surface. 

(g) 
Neon or gas tube: Use of a light source supplied by passing electricity through a tube containing neon or other gas, bent to form letters, symbols, and other shapes. 



18. 
Marquee: A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and extending over public right­of­way. 

19. 
Maximum Permitted Sign Area: The maximum permitted combined area of all signs allowed on a specific property. 

20. 
Monument Sign: A freestanding sign with the appearance of a solid base. The width of such base shall be at least 75 percent of the width of the sign. 

21. 
Moving Sign: A sign which conveys its message through rotating, changing, or animated elements. 

22. 
Nonconforming Sign: A sign that was legally erected prior to the adoption of this chapter but which violates the regulations of this chapter. 

23. 
Off­Premise Sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, or service offered on a property other than that on which the sign is located. 

24. 
Pole Sign: A sign built on a freestanding frame, mast, or pole(s) with a clearance greater than 3 feet, and where the support encompasses less than 75% of the width of the sign. 

25. 
Portable Sign: Any sign supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to bases not permanently attached to the ground or a building and capable of being moved from place to place. 

26. 
Premise Identification Sign: An sign which pertains to the use of a premises and which contains information about the owner or operator of that use; the type of business being conducted or the principal band name of a commodity sold on the premises; and other information relative to the conduct of the use. 

27. 
Premises: A tract of one or more lots or sites which are contiguous and under common ownership or control. 

28. 
Projecting Signs: A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to and projects from a building face. 

29. 
Residential Sign: A small detached or attached sign located on a residential premise, conveying a message communicated by the owner of the property. 

30. 
Roof Sign: Any sign or part of sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof or on top of or above the parapet or cornice of a building. 

(a) 
Integral Roof Sign: A roof sign positioned between an eave line and the peak or highest point on a roof, substantially parallel to the face of a building. 

(b) 
Above­peak Roof Sign: A roof sign positioned above the peak of a roof or above a parapet or cornice. 



31. 
Sign: A symbolic, visual device fixed upon a building, vehicle, structure, or parcel of land which is intended to convey information about a product, business, activity, place, person, institution, candidate, or political idea. 

32. 
Sign Type: A functional description of the use of an individual sign. Includes owner identification, advertising, directional, electronic message, and temporary. 

33. 
Street Facade: Any separate external face of a building, including parapet walls and omitted wall lines, oriented to and facing a public street, private way, or court. Separate faces oriented in the same direction or within 45 degrees of one another are considered part of the same street facade. 

34. 
Temporary Signs: A sign, flag, banner, pennant, or valance constructed of light weight materials which is not permanently attached to building or land, and which is intended for display for a limited period of time. 

35. 
Wall Sign: A sign attached to and parallel with the side of a building. 

36. 
Window Sign: A sign painted on or installed inside a window for the purpose of viewing from outside the premises. 

37. 
Zone Lot: A parcel of land in single ownership that is large enough to meet the minimum zoning requirements of its zoning district and can provide such yards and other open spaces that are required by the site development regulations. 


1003 General Sign and Street Graphics Regulations 
a. Compliance 
Each sign or part of a sign erected within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Chadron must comply with the provisions of this chapter and of other relevant provisions of the City of Chadron's Municipal Code; and relevant building codes including the: 
International Building Code. 
International Plumbing Code. 
National Electric Code. 
Rules and Regulations Relating to the Control of Advertising in Areas Adjacent to the Interstate and 
Federal Aid Primary Highways (Nebraska Department of Roads) 

b. Resolution of Conflicting Regulations This chapter is not meant to repeal or interfere with enforcement of other sections of the City of Chadron's Municipal Code. In cases of conflicts between Code sections, State or Federal Regulations, the more restrictive regulations shall apply. 
c. 
Prohibited Signs 
The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts. 


1. 
Signs painted on or attached to rocks, trees, or other natural objects. 

2. 
Signs or sign structures which resemble or conflict with traffic control signs or devices, which mislead or confuse persons traveling on public streets, or which create a traffic hazard. 

3. 
Signs on or overhanging public property or public right­of­way, unless specifically authorized by the appropriate public agency. 

4. 
Signs which create a safety hazard by obstructing the clear view of pedestrians or vehicles, or which obscure official signs or signals. 

5. 
Abandoned signs. Any abandoned sign must be removed within six months of date of abandonment. 

6. 
Portable signs, including signs painted, mounted, or printed on parked vehicles and trailers, except as provided below. 

7. 
Signs that are not clean or in substantial good repair, or are not affixed to a sound structure. 

8. 
Signs advertising activities that are illegal under Federal, state, or local laws and regulations. 



d. 
Exempt Signs 
The following signs are permitted in any zoning district and are exempt from other provisions of this chapter. 


1. 
Bulletin boards for religious assembly or school uses, provided that they have a maximum sign area of 32 square feet and are not located in a required sign setback. 

2. 
Real estate signs. 


3. 
Official signs authorized by a government or govemmental subdivision which give traffic, directional, or warning information. 

4. 
Seasonal decorations for display on private or public property. 

5. 
On­premise construction signs. 


6. 
One temporary sign per zoned lot for grand openings or special events, provided that such sign remains in place for a maximum of seven days. 

7. 
Works of graphic art painted or applied to building walls which contain no advertising or business identification messages. 

8. 
Residential signs under 2 square feet in size. 

9. 
Neighborhood or subdivision identification signs under 50 square feet. 

10. 
Street numbers. 


11. 
Signs which are not visible from a public right­of­way, private way, or court or from a property other than that on which the sign is installed. 



e. 
Temporary and Civic Signs 

1. Temporary or portable signs for grand openings, sales, and special events are permitted in Commercial and Industrial zoning districts, subject to the following requirements: 
(a) 
Such signs are subject to the permit procedures set forth in this section. 

(b) 
The size of such signs does not exceed the limitations set forth in Table 10­3. 

(c) 
No more than one such sign is permitted at any single premises. 

(d) 
Temporary or portable signs may be present at any single premises for a maximum of 30 days per year. 


2. Temporary signs for non­profit civic campaigns or events, political campaigns, or other non­commercial events are permitted in any zoning district and are exempt from other provisions of this Article, subject to the following requirements: 
(a) 
Such signs are subject to the permit procedures set forth in this section. 

(b) 
Such signs are installed no earlier than 30 days before the date of the event or election and removed no later than 7 days after the date of the event or election. 

(c) 
The maximum size of such signs is 10 square feet when located in any residential and LC Limited Commercial zoning district; and 100 square feet in any other zoning district. 



f. 
Bufferyards 


No sign other than on­premise directional signs shall be placed within any bufferyard required by Article Eight, Landscaping and Screening Regulations, except bufferyards adjacent to intervening major streets. 
g. Vision­Clearance Area 
No sign may project into or be placed within a vision­clearance area defined by a triangle with legs of forty feet from the point at which the curbs or edges of two intersecting streets, private ways, or courts or an intersecting street, private way, or court and driveway, meet. 
1004 General Regulations: Basic Design Elements For On­premise Signs 
a. 
Wall Signs and Graphics 
Wall signs and graphics are subject to the following general regulations. 


1. 
A wall sign shall not extend more than 30 inches from the wall to which it is attached. 

2. 
A wall sign must be parallel to the wall to which it is attached. 

3. 
A wall sign may not extend beyond the corner of the wall to which it is attached, except where attached to another wall sign, it may extend to provide for the attachment. 

4. 
A wall sign may not extend beyond its building's roof line. 

5. 
A wall sign attached to a building on its front property line may encroach upon public right­of­way by no more than 18 inches. Such a wall sign shall provide minimum clearance of eight feet, six inches. 

6. 
For the purpose of calculating permitted sign areas pursuant to this chapter, signs painted on the walls of buildings shall be considered wall signs. 

7. 
Where permitted, canopy signs are counted as wall signs when calculating total permitted sign area. 



b. 
Projecting Signs and Graphics 
Projecting signs and graphics are subject to the following general regulations. 


1. The maximum projection of any projecting sign in the DC District shall be as follows: 
(a) 
4 feet over public sidewalks less than 12 feet wide; 

(b) 
6 feet over public sidewalks 12 feet wide or more, or over private property. No projecting sign in any other district may project by more than 24 inches into a required setback. 


2. 
A projecting sign may be no closer than two feet from the vertical plane of the inside curb line. 

3. 
Each projecting sign must maintain at least the following vertical clearances: 


(a) 
8 feet, 6 inches over sidewalks; except that a canopy may reduce its vertical clearance to 7 feet, 6 inches; 

(b) 
10 feet outside of parking areas or driveways, but within three feet of such areas; or within 50 feet of the right­of­way lines formed by a street intersection; 

(c) 
14 feet over parking lots; 

(d) 
18 feet over alleys or driveways. 



4. 
No projecting sign extending three feet or more from a property line may be located within 22 feet of any other projecting sign extending three feet or more from a property line. 

5. 
Projecting signs must minimize visible support structure and may not expose guy wires, cables, turnbuckles, angle iron, or other similar external support structure. 



c. 
Pole Signs 
Pole signs, where permitted, are subject to the following general regulations: 


1. Each pole sign must maintain at least the following vertical clearances: 
(a) 
8 feet, 6 inches over sidewalks; 


(b) 
10 feet for locations outside of parking areas or driveways, but within three feet of the edge of such areas; or within 50 feet of the right­of­way lines formed by a street intersection. 

(c) 
14 feet over parking lots; 

(d) 
18 feet over alleys or driveways. 



2. Permitted pole signs may revolve at a rate not to exceed six revolutions per minute. 

d. 
Roof Signs 


Roof signs are subject to the following regulations: 
1. 
Where permitted, integral roof signs may be used interchangeably with wall signs. 

2. 
Integral roof signs may not exceed the permitted height for pole signs. 

3. 
An integral roof sign must be mounted parallel to the wall of the building that it faces. 


1005 General Regulations: Other Design Elements 
a. 
Illumination 

1. Lighting, when installed, must be positioned in such a manner that light is not directed onto an adjoining property or onto a public street or highway. 

b. 
Marquees and Marquee Signs 

1. Signs placed on, attached to, or constructed on a marquee are subject to the maximum projection and clearance regulations of projecting signs. 

c. 
Banners 

1. 
A banner sign projecting from a building may not exceed the wall height of the building. 

2. 
Maximum projection for any banner is five feet with a minimum clearance of ten feet. 

3. 
Maximum size of a banner is the lesser of twice the permitted size of a projecting sign or 120 square feet. 



d. 
Clocks 
For the purposes of this chapter, clocks are not considered a moving sign. 



1006 Specific Regulations For Zoning Districts 
This Section sets forth regulations and design standards for signs and graphics for each zoning district. 
1007 Method of Measurement for Regulators 
a. Maximum Permitted Sign Area 
Maximum permitted sign area for a premises is set forth as a numerical limit or as a function of the frontage of the premises on a street or private way. For properties with frontage on more than one street or private way, the total frontage shall be calculated as the longest frontage plus one­half the length of all additional frontages. 
b. 
Sign Area 

1. 
Sign area includes the entire area within the perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the sign, excluding any structure essential for support or service of the sign, or architectural elements of the building. 

2. 
The area of double­faced signs is calculated on the largest face only. 

3. 
The sign area for ground signs, monument signs, and architectural sign bands is calculated as the area enclosing the extreme limits of the copy only. 

4. 
In the case of individual letters mounted to a wall, only the total area of the letters themselves is included within the sign area. 



c. 
Height 


The height of a sign is measured from the average grade level below the sign to the topmost point of the sign or sign structure. 
d. Setback 
The setback of a sign is measured from the property line to the supporting frame, mast, pole or base of the sign. 
1008 Permitted Sign Types by Zoning Districts 
Table 10­1 sets forth the sign types permitted within each zoning district of the City of Chadron. 
1009 Auxiliary Design Elements 
Table 10­2 sets forth auxiliary design elements permitted within each zoning district of the City of Chadron. 
1010 Maximum Permitted Sign Area 
Table 10­3 sets forth the maximum sign area permitted within each zoning district of the City of Chadron. 
1011 Permitted Signs by Numbers, Dimensions, and Location 
Table 10­3 sets forth the maximum permitted numbers of signs per premise; the maximum permitted dimensions of each sign; and the required setbacks for detached signs. 
1012 General Permit Procedures 
a. Applicability 
Any installation, modification, or expansion of any sign which is not exempt from the provisions of this Article shall be subject to the following permit procedure prior to installation. 
b. Maintenance of Valid Sign Permit 
The owner of a property containing signs requiring a permit under these regulations shall at all times maintain in force a sign permit for such property. Sign permits shall be issued for individual zoned lots. A sign permit may be revoked if the sign is not maintained in good condition. 
c. Sign Permit Applications 
All applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator in accordance with application specifications established by the Zoning Administrator. 
d. Application Fees 
Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by any applicable fees, which shall be established by the City Council from time to time by resolution. 
e. Action Within ten working days of the submission of a complete application for a sign permit, the Zoning Administrator shall either: 
1. 
Issue the sign permit, if the sign conforms to the provisions of this Article. 

2. 
Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application fails in any way to conform with the requirements of this Article. 


f. Permit Expiration 
If a sign is not constructed in accordance with an approved permit within six months of the date of approval, such permit shall lapse. 
g. Assignment of Sign Permits 
A current and valid sign permit shall be freely assignable to a successor as owner of the property or holder of a business license for the same premises. 
1013 Nonconforming Signs 
a. 
All permanent signs in place and lawfully established on the effective date of these Regulations shall be considered as legal nonconforming signs. The copy of such a sign may be changed from time to time, provided that the sign area shall not be enlarged beyond the sign area in existence on the effective date. 

b. 
Any nonconforming sign which presently is or becomes structurally damaged or deteriorated, or is altered by more than 50% of its replacement cost, shall be either removed or altered so as to comply with this Article. 

c. 
For business centers pre­existing on the effective date of these Regulations which do not conform to the total permitted sign area provisions of this Article, individual signs may be replaced, modified, or substituted prior to December 31, 2011. Each sign shall conform to the applicable regulations for individual signs and shall be installed so as to reduce the total amount of the nonconformance. 


1014 Discontinuance of Nonconforming Signs 
Within any zoning district, all on­premise signage must comply fully with the provisions of these Regulations, unless otherwise provided, within fifteen years of the effective date of these Regulations. 
Table 10­1: Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning Districts 

Sign Types  AG  RR  R­1  R­2  R­3  MH  LC  CC  DC  GC  LI  GI  
Detached Signs  
Residential  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  N  N  N  N  
Business Identification  P  P  P(C)  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Incidental  P(C)  P(C)  P(C)  P(C)  P(C)  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Ground  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Pole  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  P  N  P  P  P  
Off­Premise  P  P  P  P  Note 6  
Attached Signs  
Awning  N  N  N  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Banner  N  N  N  N  N  N  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Building Marker  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Canopy  N  N  N  N  N  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Business Identification  P  P(C)  P(C)  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Incidental  P(C)  P(C)  P(C)  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Marquee  N  N  N  N  N  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Projecting  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  P  P  P  P  P  
Roof, Integral  N  N  N  N  N  N  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Roof, Above Peak  N  N  N  N  N  N  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Wall  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Window  N  N  N  N  N  N  P  P  P  P  P  P  

Miscellaneous  
Flag  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Portable (On­Premise)  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  P  P  P  P  P  

Table 10­2 Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning Districts 

Sign Types  AG  RR  R­1  R­2  R­3  MH  LC  CC  DC  GC  LI  GI  
Design Element  

Illumination  
Indirect  P(C)  P(C)  P(C)  P(C)  P(C)  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Direct  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  
Internal  P(C)  P(C)  P(C)  P  P(C)  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Neon  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  P  P  P  P  P  
Flashing  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  P  P  P  P  P  
Flame  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  
Bare Bulb  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  

Other  
Electronic Information  N  N  N  N  N  N  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Moving  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  P  N  P  
Rotating  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  P  N  P  

P: Permitted for All Uses P(C): Permitted for Civic Uses N: Not Permitted 
Table 10­3: Permitted Signs by Maximum Permitted Area and District 
This Maximum Permitted Area for all signs on a premises excluding incidental signs, building marker signs, and flags shall not exceed the lesser of the following: 

Notes to Table 10­3 
Note 1: 
Maximum sign size is 200 square feet for civic or commercial uses, 2 square feet for residential uses, including home occupations. 
Note 2: 
Maximum sign size is 100 square feet for project identification signs; 32 square feet for civic uses, 2 square feet for residential uses, including home occupations. 
Note 3: 
Maximum sign size is 32 square feet for civic uses, 100 square feet for project identification signs for multi­family or mobile home developments and for non­residential uses when permitted, 2 square feet for residential uses, including home occupations. 
Note 4: 
On premises with primary residential use, maximum sign size is 75 square feet for project identification signs for multi­family developments, 2 square feet for residential uses, including home occupations. 
Note 5: 
In addition to its total permitted sign area, each premises used for a business center may have one detached center identification sign, subject to the following conditions: 
1. 
The maximum area for a center identification sign shall be 150 square feet. 

2. 
No center identification sign shall be within 300 feet of any other center identification sign or within 150 feet of any other detached sign on the same or adjacent premises. 

3. 
The sign shall display no more than the name and location of the business center. 

4. 
Each sign shall be subject to all other regulations for detached signs or graphics set forth in this Article. 


Note 6: 
Maximum sign size outside of the corporate limits but within the two­mile jurisdiction of the City of Chadron, shall not exceed 384 square feet. 
11 ARTICLE ELEVEN 
NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT 
1101 	Purpose Article Eleven shall be known as the Nonconforming Development Regulations. The purposes of these regulations are: 
a. 
To allow for reasonable use of legally created lots of record which do not meet current minimum requirements for their respective zoning districts. 

b. 
To provide for reasonable use of legally constructed structures which do not meet current site development regulations for their respective zoning districts. 

c. 
To allow for the reasonable continuation of legally established uses which do not meet current use regulations for their respective zoning districts. 

d. 
To limit the continuation and provide for the gradual replacement of nonconforming uses. 


1102 	Regulations Additive 
Regulations for nonconforming uses are in addition to regulations for nonconforming structures. In the event of a conflict, the most restrictive regulation shall apply. 
1103 	Nonconforming Lots 
a. Pre­Existing Lots of Record 
Nonconforming lots of record existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall be exempt, unless otherwise provided, from the minimum lot area and lot width requirements of each zoning district. Such lots may be developed with any use allowed by the regulations for the district and must comply with all other site development regulations set forth by the Zoning Regulations. 
b. Reductions Due to Public Acquisition 
If a portion of a legally existing lot in any district is acquired for public use, the remainder of this lot shall be considered a conforming lot. 
1104 	Nonconforming Structures 
These regulations apply to buildings and structures which were constructed legally under regulations in effect before the effective date of these Regulations. 
a. Continuation 
A lawful nonconforming structure existing on the effective date of this Title may be continued, repaired, maintained, or altered, subject to the provisions of this Section. 
b. 
Additions or Enlargements to Nonconforming Structures 

1. A lawful nonconforming structure may be added to or enlarged if the addition satisfies one or more of the following conditions: 
(a) 
The enlargement or addition, when considered independently of the existing building, 

complies with all applicable setback, height, off­street parking, and landscaping requirements. 

(b) 
The nonconforming building and impervious surface coverages on the site are not increased and the building, after the addition, conforms to height and off­street parking regulations applicable to its zoning district. 

(c) 
The addition projects no further into a required side yard setback than the existing building; the length of the side wall of the addition is the smaller of 25 feet or 50 percent of the length of the existing nonconforming side wall; and the enlarged building complies with building and impervious coverage, front and rear yard setbacks, and height regulations applicable to its zoning district. 


2. 
No permitted addition to a nonconforming structure may place a wall within ten feet of a window of an adjacent pre­existing residential structure. 

3. 
Nonconforming buildings shall be limited to one addition or enlargement pursuant to these regulations. 



c. 
Moving of Nonconforming Structures 


A lawful nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved in whole or in part to another location on its lot unless every part of the structure conforms to all site development regulations applicable to its zoning district. 
d. Repair of Nonconforming Structures 
A lawful nonconforming building damaged by fire, explosion, storm or other calamity, except flood damages, may be repaired and reconstructed provided there is no increase in the degree of nonconformity. 
e. 
Conversion of a Conforming Building 
A conforming building shall not be changed in any way that will result in a nonconforming development. 


f. 
Applicability of Landscaping and Screening Regulations 


A pre­existing structure, building, or development shall be exempt from Article Eight, Landscaping and Screening Regulations. However, any expansion of such structure, building, or development or any adjacent new development onto property that is or becomes vacant on or after the effective date of these Regulations shall be subject to Article Eight. 
1105 Nonconforming Uses 
a. Continuation of Nonconforming Uses 
Any nonconforming use lawfully existing on the effective date of these regulations may continue, subject to the limitations of this Section. 
b. 
Enlargement of Nonconforming Uses 
A building or structure housing a lawful nonconforming use may not be added to or enlarged. 


c. 
Abandonment of Nonconforming Use 


If any structure or property used as a lawful nonconforming use becomes vacant or unused for a continuous period of six months, any subsequent use must conform to all use regulations applicable to the property's zoning district. 
d. 
Change of Use 

1. A lawful nonconforming use may be changed only to a use type permitted in a zoning district that is equal to or less intensive than that normally required for the previous use. 

e. 
Allowance for Repairs 


Repairs and maintenance of a structure occupied by a nonconforming use may be made, provided that no structural alterations are made other than those required by law. 
f. Damage or Destruction of Structures 
Should a structure occupied by a lawful nonconforming use be damaged to the extent that the cost of restoration exceeds 50 percent of the replacement cost of the structure, the nonconforming use shall no longer be permitted. 
g. Nonconforming Uses and Conditional and Special Use Permits 
A lawful pre­existing use which would require a Special Use Permit in its zoning district shall be presumed to have the appropriate Permit and shall be considered a conforming use. The use shall be subject to the regulations governing lapses or revocation of Permits, set forth in Article Twelve. 
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

12 ARTICLE TWELVE 
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 
1201 Purpose 
The Administration and Procedures Provisions establish the methods for implementation of the Zoning Regulations. These provisions include procedures for reviewing specific uses within certain zoning districts; amending the Zoning Regulations; and granting variances. 
1202 Site Plan Review Procedure 
a. Purpose 
The Site Plan Review Procedure provides for the administrative review in addition to plan review required by other sections of the Chadron Municipal Code of projects that have potentially significant effects on traffic circulation or a significant effect on land uses in adjacent neighborhoods. The procedure provides for review and evaluation of site development features and possible mitigation of unfavorable effects on surrounding property. 
b. Administration 
The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee shall review, evaluate, and act on all site plans submitted pursuant to this procedure. An applicant may appeal a denial of any application to the Board of Adjustment. 
c. Uses Requiring Site Plan Review 
The following selected uses shall follow the Site Plan review procedure, unless they are otherwise subject to a Special Use Permit procedure for specific zoning districts. 
1. 
Multiple family developments with 12 or more dwelling units. 

2. 
Education Facilities 


3. 
All commercial use types listed in Table 4­2. 

4. 
Any use including drive­in services. 


5. 
Any industrial use adjacent to a residential zoning district. 


d. Application Requirements 
An application for a Site Plan Review may be filed by the owner(s) of a property or the owners' authorized agent with the Zoning Administrator. The application shall include the following information: 
1. 
Name and address of the applicant. 


2. 
Owner, address, and legal description of the property. 

3. 
A description of the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use. 

4. 
A site plan, drawn to a scale sufficient to permit adequate review and dimensioned as necessary, 


ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

showing the following information: 

(a) 
The date, scale, north point, title, name of owner, and name of person preparing the site plan. 

(b) 
The location and dimensions of boundary lines, easements, and required yards and setbacks of existing and proposed buildings and site improvements. 

(c) 
The location, size, and use of proposed and existing structures on the site. 

(d) 
The location of all proposed site improvements, including parking and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular access, sewers, sidewalks, utilities, service areas, fencing, screening, landscaping, and lighting. 

(e) 
Location of any major site feature, including drainage and contours at no greater than five foot intervals. 

(f) 
Any other information that may be required for review by the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee. 


e. Administrative Action and Appeal 
The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee must act upon each complete application within ten working days of filing. An applicant may appeal a denial to the Board of Adjustment within ten days of the action. The Board of Adjustment shall consider the appeal at the first available meeting after the filing of the appeal. 
f. 
Review and Evaluation 

1. 
The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee (or the Board of Adjustment in cases of appeal), shall review and approve the site plan based on the criteria established in Table 12­1 and conformance with applicable regulations in these Zoning Regulations. 

2. 
The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee (or the Board of Adjustment in cases of appeal), shall make the following findings before approval of the site plan: 


(a) 
The proposed development, together with any necessary modifications, is compatible with the criteria established in Table 12­1. 

(b) 
Any required modifications to the site plan are reasonable and are the minimum necessary to minimize potentially unfavorable effects. 

(c) 
The site plan conforms to the Zoning Regulations. 



g. 
Modification of Site Plan 


The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee (or the Board of Adjustment in cases of appeal), may require modification of a site plan as a prerequisite for approval. Required modifications may be more restrictive than base district regulations and may include, but not be limited to, additional landscaping or screening; installation of erosion control measures; improvement of access or circulation; rearrangement of structures on the site; or other modifications deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, community character, property values, and/or aesthetics. 
h. Term and Modification of Approval 
1. A Site Plan Approval shall become void two years after the date of approval, unless the applicant receives a Building Permit and diligently carries out development prior to the expiration of this period. 
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

2. 
The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, may approve an application to modify a previously approved site plan if he/she determines that the modification does not affect findings related to the criteria set forth in Table 12­1. 

3. 
The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee may revoke a Site Plan Approval if he/she determines that the development is not complying with the terms and conditions of the approval. Such revocation may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. 


i. Approval to Run With Land 
An approval pursuant to this section shall run with the land until the expiration date of such approval. 

1203 Special Use Permit Procedure 
a. Purpose 
The Special Use Permit Procedure provides for public review and discretionary City Council approval for uses within zoning districts which have unusual site development or operating characteristics that could adversely affect surrounding properties. 
b. Administration 
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the administration of the Special Use Permit Procedure. The Planning Commission shall review, evaluate, and act on each application. An applicant may appeal a denial of any application pursuant to this section to the City Council. In addition, a valid protest petition, meeting the requirements set forth in Section 1204d3 of these Regulations shall also initiate an appeal to the City Council. 
c. Application Requirements 
An application for a Special Use Permit may be filed with the Zoning Administrator by the owner(s) of a property or the owners' authorized agent. The application shall include the following information: 
1. 
Name and address of the applicant. 


2. 
Owner, address and legal description of the property. 

3. 
A description of the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use. 

4. 
Any graphic information, including site plans, elevations, other drawings, or other materials determined by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary to describe the proposed use to approving agencies. 


d. Approval Process 
The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each Special Use Permit and, following such public hearing, shall act on the application. 
e. Appeal Process 
1. A denial by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council by an applicant within ten days of the action. The appeal request must be submitted in writing to the Zoning Administrator. 
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

2. 
An approval by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council by the submittal of a valid protest petition, meeting the requirements set forth in Section 1204d3 of these Regulations, within ten days of the action. 

3. 
The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application and appeal documents, along with his/her recommendation and the record of the Planning Commission action, to the City Council. 

4. 
The City Council, after publication and public hearing, shall act on the appeal. 


f. 
Criteria for Review 

1. The Planning Commission shall review and approve the site plan based on the criteria established in Table 12­1 and conformance with applicable regulations in these Zoning Regulations. 

g. 
Scope of Approval 

1. 
The Planning Commission and/or City Council, in cases of appeal, may, at their discretion, apply a Special Use Permit to a specific owner or applicant. The approving agencies may establish special site development or operational regulations as a condition for approval of a Special Use Permit. 

2. 
The Planning Commission or City Council, in cases of appeal, shall not grant a Special Use Permit for any home occupation/homebased business which is otherwise prohibited under Section 611 of these Regulations. 



g. 
Lapse and Revocation of Permit 

1. 
A Special Use Permit shall become void two years after its effective date if the applicant has not carried out development or occupancy during that period. 

2. 
The Planning Commission may revoke a Special Use Permit should the operation of the use subject to such permit violate the conditions under which the permit was granted. 



h. 
Previously Approved Permits 


Any special use approved under regulations in effect before the effective date of these Regulations shall be considered to have a valid Special Use Permit, subject to requirements imposed at the time of its approval. 
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

Table 12­1: Criteria For Site Plan Review And Special Use Permits 

CRITERIA  APPLIES TO  
Land Use Compatibility  Site Plan Review  Special Use Permit  
Development Density  Site area per unit or floor area ratio should be similar to surrounding uses if not separated by major natural or artificial features.  X  
Height and Scale  
Height and Bulk  Development should minimize differences in height and building size from surrounding structures. Differences should be justified by urban design considerations.  X  X  
Setbacks  Development should respect pre­existing setbacks in surrounding area. Variations should be justified by site or operating characteristics.  X  X  
Building Coverage  Building coverage should be similar to that of surrounding development of possible. higher coverage should be mitigated by landscaping or site amenities.  X  X  
Site Development  
Frontage  Project frontage along a street should be similar to lot width.  X  X  
Parking and Internal Circulation  Parking should serve all structures with minimal conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles. All structures must be accessible to public safety vehicles. Development must have access to adjacent public streets and ways. Internal circulation should minimize conflicts and congestion at public access points.  X X X  X X X  
Landscaping  Landscaping should be integral to the development, providing street landscaping, breaks in uninterrupted paved areas, and buffering where required by surrounding land uses. Parts of site with sensitive environmental features or natural drainage ways should be preserved.  X  X  
Building Design  Architectural design and building materials should be compatible with surrounding areas or highly visible locations  X  
Operating Characteristics  
Traffic Capacity  Project should not obstruct traffic on adjacent streets. Compensating improvements will be required to mitigate impact on street system operations.  X  X  
External Traffic Effects  Project design should direct non­residential traffic away from residential areas.  X  X  
Operating Hours  Projects with long operating hours must minimize effects on surrounding residential areas.  X  X  

Table 12­1: Criteria For Site Plan Review And Special Use Permits 

CRITERIA  APPLIES TO  
Operating  Site Plan  Special Use  
Characteristics  Review  Permit  

12­5 

ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

Outside Storage  Outside storage areas must be screened from surrounding streets and less intensive land uses.  X  X  
Public Facilities  
Sanitary Waste Disposal  Developments within 500 feet of a public sanitary sewer must connect to sewer system. Individual disposal systems, if permitted, shall not adversely affect public health, safety, or welfare.  X  X  
Sanitary sewer must have adequate capacity to serve development.  X  X  
Storm Water Management  Development should handle storm water adequately to prevent overloading of public storm water management system.  X  X  
Development should not inhibit development of other properties.  X  X  
Development should not increase probability of erosion, flooding, landslides, or other run­off related effects.  X  X  
Utilities  Project must be served by utilities.  X  X  
Rural estate subdivisions should be located in designated areas which can accommodate utility and infrastructure installation consistent with the need to protect the environment and public health.  X  X  
Comprehensive Plan  Projects should be consistent with the City of Chadron’s Comprehensive Development Plan.  X  

ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

1204 Amendment Procedure 
a. Purpose 
The Amendment Procedures describe the methods by which changes may be made in the text of the Zoning Regulations (text amendment) and/ or the official boundaries of zoning districts (rezoning). 
b. 
Initiation of Amendments 

1. 
Text amendments may be initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council. 

2. 
Rezonings may be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent; the Planning Commission; or the City Council. 



c. 
Rezoning Application Requirements 


An application for a rezoning may be filed with the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee. The application shall include the following information: 
1. 
Name and address of the applicant. 


2. 
Owner, address and legal description of the property. 

3. 
A description of the reason for the rezoning application and the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use. 

4. 
Any graphic information, including site plans, elevations, other drawings, or other materials determined by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary to describe the proposed use to approving agencies. 


d. Amendment Process 
1. 
The Planning Commission, following ten days notice and publication, shall hold a public hearing on each proposed text or rezoning and, following such public hearing, shall recommend action to the City Council. A vote either for or against an amendment by a majority of all Planning Commission members shall constitute a recommendation to the City Council. A vote either for or against an amendment by less than a majority of all Planning Commission members shall constitute a failure to make a recommendation to the City Council. 

2. 
The City Council, after publication and public hearing, shall act on the proposed amendment. On applications which receive a recommendation of approval from the Planning Commission, a majority vote of those members either elected or appointed to the City Council is required for approval. On applications which receive a recommendation of denial from the Planning Commission, a majority vote plus one of those members either elected or appointed to the City Council is required for approval. 

3. 
Protest: If a valid protest petition opposing an amendment is filed with the City Clerk by eligible property owners, pursuant to Section 19­905 R.R.S. 1943 (Reissue 1991), a majority vote plus one of those members either elected or appointed to the City Council is required for approval. A valid protest petition must meet the following criteria: 


(a) 
Submission of the petition in the office of the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after the conclusion of the public hearing on the amendment by the Planning Commission. 

(b) 
Notarized signatures by at least one of the following: 


1) The owner or owners of at least 20% of the property proposed for rezoning. 
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

2) The owners of 20% of the total area, excepting public rights­of­way and public property, within the zoning jurisdiction of the city and within 300 feet of the proposed rezoning. 
e. Required Notice and Publication 
Prior to consideration of amending, supplementing, changing, modifying, or repealing these regulations by the governing body, notice of public hearings shall be provided by two of the three following methods, as determined by the City: 
1. 
Notice By Posted Sign: A notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property upon which action is pending. Such notice shall be not less than eighteen inches in height and twenty­four inches in width with a white background and black letters not less than one and one­half inches in height. Such posted notice shall be so placed upon such premises that is easily visible from the street and shall be so posted at least ten days before the date of such hearing. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, mutilate, destroy or change such posted notice prior to such hearing. 

2. 
Publication: At least ten days before the date of hearing, the City Clerk shall have published in a daily newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Chadron a Notice of the time, place and subject matter of such hearing. 

3. 
Notification by Mail: At least ten days prior to the date of hearing, the party initiating the rezoning request shall present the City Clerk a certified address list of those persons who own property within 300 feet of the subject site. The City Clerk shall mail notice of the time, place and subject matter of the hearing to such property owners at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. In addition, the City of Chadron shall provide for the following: 

4. 
Notification By Mail of School District: The City Clerk shall mail notice of the time, place and subject matter of any Planning Commission rezoning hearings to the School District Administrative Official and/or Chair of the Board of Education, within whose boundaries the subject site is located. The notification shall be submitted to the applicable official and/or Board of Education at least ten days prior to the date of such meeting. Each school district to be affected by such rezoning proposal shall be notified. 


1205 Extension of the Extra­Territorial Jurisdiction 
Upon the automatic extension of the two­mile Extra­Territorial Jurisdiction due to annexation, the City Council with the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall zone properties within the newly established Jurisdiction concurrent with adoption of the annexation ordinance. The zoning shall consider the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Chadron and the present use of the land. 
1206 Building Permits and Certificates of Zoning Compliance 
a. Administration and Enforcement 
The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce these regulations. The City Council may direct other persons to assist him/her. 
If the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee shall find that any of the provisions of these regulations are being violated, he/she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He/ she shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by these regulations to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
b. Building Permits Required 
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit therefore, issued by the administrative official. No building permit shall be issued by the administrative official except in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, unless he/she receives a written order from the Board of Adjustment in the form of an administrative review, special exception, or variance as provided by these regulations. 
c. Application for Building Permit 
All applications for building permits shall include plans if applicable in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the 
actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings 
already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. 

The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the administrative 
official, including existing or proposed building or alterations; existing or proposed uses of the building and 
land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; 
conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, 
and provide for the enforcement of these regulations. 
One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the administrative official, after he/ she shall have 
marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. One 
copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the administrative official. 

d. Certificates of Zoning Compliance for New, Altered or Non­Conforming Uses 
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefore by the administrative official stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of these regulations. 
e. 
Expiration of Building Permit 

1. 
If the work described in any building permit has not begun within 180 days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall be canceled by the administrative official; and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. 

2. 
If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within two years of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the administrative official, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained. 

3. 
The expiration date of a building permit may be established for a period longer than two years if established at the time that such permit is issued by the City. The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee may, at his/her discretion extend the expiration period of the building permit. 



f. 
Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans, Permits, and Certificates of Zoning Compliance 


Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the administrative official authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of these regulations, and punishable as provided by Section hereof. 
1207 Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses. 
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of zoning compliance, appeals, and other matters pertaining to these regulations. 
The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the administrative official, and may be altered or amended only by the City Council. 
Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
1208 Board of Adjustment 
a. 
Establishment 

1. 
A Board of Adjustment is hereby established to provide relief in situations of hardship or to hear appeals as provided by this Section. The Board shall consist of five regular members, plus one additional alternate member who shall attend and vote only when one member is unable to attend for any reason. 

2. 
Each member shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council for a three­year term and is removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. One member of the Board shall be appointed from the Planning Commission, and the loss of membership on the Commission by such member shall also result in his/her immediate loss of membership on the Board of Adjustment and the appointment of another Planning Commissioner to the Board. 

3. 
The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules and regulations in accordance with these regulations and the laws of the State of Nebraska pursuant to Sections 19­901 to 19­914 of Nebraska State Statutes. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such chairman, or, in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings and records shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The Board shall keep a record of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 



b. 
Procedure for Appeals 

1. 
Appeals shall be made to the Board of Adjustment through the office of the Zoning Administrator in written form as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and shall decide the appeal within 30 days of the date of the public hearing. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. 

2. 
The Board shall provide a minimum of ten days notice of a public hearing on any question before it. Notice of the hearing shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property on which the application has been made; by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Chadron; and by written notice to the appealing party. 

3. 
Upon the public hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The concurring vote of four out of five members of such board as so composed shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the appellant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any zoning ordinance, or to effect any 




ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

variation in such regulations. 

1209 Powers and Duties of the Board Of Adjustment 
The Board of Adjustment shall have only the following powers and duties: 
a. 
Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decisions or determination made by the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee in the enforcement of these regulations or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures 

b. 
Interpretation of Zoning Map: To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any zoning regulation, requests for interpretation of any map. 

c. 
Variances to Relieve Hardships Relating to Property: To authorize, upon appeal, variances from the strict application of these regulations where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of the zoning regulations; or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, such strict application would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardships upon the owner of such property. 


1. Requirements for Grant of a Variance. No such variance shall be authorized by the Board unless it finds that: 
(a) 
Strict application of the zoning regulations will produce undue hardship. 

(b) 
Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and in the same vicinity. 

(c) 
The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance. 

(d) 
The granting of such variance is based upon reason of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of convenience, profit, or caprice. 

(e) 
The condition or situation of the property concerned is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to these Zoning Regulations. 

(f) 
The granting of the variance will not cause substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of any Ordinance or Resolution. 


2. 
Findings by Board. The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of Section 1209c(l) have been met by the applicant for a variance. 

3. 
Conditions for Grant of Variance. 



(a) 
In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with these regulations. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable under Section 1214 of these regulations. 

(b) 
Under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of these regulations in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of these regulations in said district. 


ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

(c) No non­conforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and no permitted or non­conforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
e. Board has Powers of Zoning Administrator on Appeals: Reversing Decisions of Zoning Administrator 
In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken. 
The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision, or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under these regulations, or to effect any variation in the application of these regulations. 
1210 	Appeals from the Board of Adjustment. 
Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, officer, department, board or bureau of the city aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may seek review of such decision by the District Court for the County in the manner provided by the laws of the State and particularly by 19­912 R.R.S. 1943 (Reissue 1991), and amendments thereto. 
1211 	Duties of Zoning Administrator, Board of Adjustment, City Council, and Courts on Matters of Appeal. 
a. 
It is the intent of these regulations that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning Administrator, and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator, and that recourse from the decisions of Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law. 

b. 
Under these regulations the City Council shall have only the duties (1) of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments, or the repeal of these regulations as provided by law, (2) of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Section 12 of these regulations, and (3) of directing a city officer to appeal a decision of the Board of Adjustment. 


1212 	Severability Clause. 
Should any section or provision of this resolution be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the resolution as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
1213 	Complaints Regarding Violations. 
Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is allowed to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaints stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. He/she shall record properly such complaint immediately, investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this resolution. 
1214 	Penalties for Violation. 
a. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of the Zoning Regulations of the City of Chadron, Nebraska, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each offense, 
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

and any actual costs or expense incurred by the City as a result of said offense shall be taxed as costs as a part of the judgment of conviction. 
b. 
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 

c. 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 




Table of Contents 
1 ArticleOne:GeneralProvisions......................................... 1 2 ArticleTwo:Definitions ............................................... 5 3 ArticleTwo:ProceduresandAdministration.............................. 11 4 Article Four: Subdivision Design Categories and General Standards . . . . . . . . . . 21 5 ArticleFive:CirculationSystemDesign .................................. 24 6 ArticleSix:PublicImprovementsandInfrastructure ....................... 30 7 Article Seven: Improvement Financing and Guarantees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 
ARTICLE ONE 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 1­1 Title 
These regulations shall be known as the Subdivision Chapter of the Land Development Regulations of the City of Chadron. 
1­2 Authority and Purpose 
a. Authority 
These regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority granted the City of Chadron under Chapter 19, Article 9, Sections 19­901 through 19­929 and Chapter 16, Article 9, Sections 16­901 through 16­904, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, enabling cities to regulate the development of land within their jurisdictions and to promote good planning practice. 
b. Purposes 
The purposes of this Chapter are to: 

1. 
Serve the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city and residents of Chadron and its surrounding jurisdiction. 

2. 
Provide for the orderly development and growth of the city by prescribing rules and standards insuring the functional arrangement of streets, public improvements, open spaces, community facilities, and utilities. 

3. 
Promote the creation of well­planned and attractive residential, commercial, and industrial developments within the city and its jurisdiction. 

4. 
Avoid excessive costs to the taxpayers of Chadron or the residents of the jurisdiction of the city for the provision of public services and utilities, while maintaining high standards for these services. 

5. 
Protect the unique environment of the City of Chadron by avoiding environmental damage whenever feasible and appropriate; and by encouraging flexibility in the design of subdivisions. 

6. 
Provide the City of Chadron with the ability to grow incrementally through the eventual annexation of new developments. 


1­3 Relationship to the Comprehensive Development Plan 
a. 
The City of Chadron intends that this Subdivision Chapter and any amendments to it shall be consistent with the City's Comprehensive Development Plan. Should these regulations become inconsistent with the adopted Comprehensive Development Plan because of subsequent amendments to that plan, it is the City's intent to amend these regulations to bring it into conformance with the plan. 

b. 
The Subdivision Chapter shall supplement and facilitate the provisions of the Comprehensive Development Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, the Official Zoning Map, and the City of Chadron's Capital or General Fund Budget. 

a. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all property within the corporate limits of the City 


1­4 Jurisdiction and Applicability 
1­5 
1­6 
1­7 
1­8 
1­9 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

of Chadron and its two­mile extraterritorial jurisdiction as provided by Section 14, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943. 
b. No owner of real property within the City of Chadron and its jurisdiction may subdivide or plat such property into lots for buildings or any other use, streets, or other forms of dedication for public use without gaining approval pursuant to these regulations. In addition, no individual may sell, offer to sell, or construct buildings on any lots or parts of real property that are not subdivided as required by State law or these regulations. 
Amendment 
When necessary, these regulations may be amended through public hearing and recommendation by the Planning Commission to the City Council. The City Council shall then hold its own independent public hearing and action on amendments. 
Fees 
The City Council of the City of Chadron shall establish fees sufficient to recover costs incurred for the processing and review of subdivision applications and other procedures included within these regulations. 
Enforcement 
The Zoning Administrator shall enforce the provisions of these regulations and shall bring violations or lack of compliance to the attention of the Planning Commission and City Council, or other appropriate agency. 
Penalties 
a. Violation and Penalty 
1. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Chadron, Nebraska, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each offense, and any actual costs or expense incurred by the City as a result of said offense shall be taxed as costs as a part of the judgement of conviction. 

2. 
An owner, developer, or subdivider of property may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties provided in this section. 

3. 
Notwithstanding this section, the City and the Zoning Administrator shall have the right to take any lawful action necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of these regulations or any agreement pursuant to or other condition of an approval of a subdivision application. 


Interpretation, Conflict, and Severability 
a. 
The Subdivision Chapter of the Land Development Regulations shall be held to provide the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. If any provision of the Subdivision Chapter conflicts with any other provision of the Land Development Regulations, any other Ordinance of the City of Chadron, or any applicable State or Federal law, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 

b. 
Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a previous approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit issued under any local, State, or Federal ordinance or statute. 

c. 
If any chapter, section, subsection, clause, or phrase of this Subdivision Chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of these 


regulations or any other section of the City of Chadron's Land Development Regulations. 

2­1 
2­2 
2­3 
2­4 
2­5 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

DEFINITIONS 

ARTICLE TWO 
Purpose 
Article Two shall be known as the Definitions. The purpose of these provisions is to promote consistency and precision in the interpretation of the Subdivision Regulations. The meaning and construction of words as set forth shall apply throughout the Subdivision Regulations, unless where modified in a specific section or where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. 
Definitions of Terms 
For the purposes of these Subdivision Regulations , certain terms and words are hereby defined. Certain sections contain definitions which are additional to those listed here. Where terms are not specifically defined, their ordinarily accepted meanings or meanings implied by their context shall apply. 
A 
1. 
ADT or Average Daily Traffic: The average number of motor vehicles per day that pass over a given point or segment of street. 

2. 
Alley: A public or private right­of­way generally designed to provide secondary access to the side or rear of a property whose principal frontage is on another street. 

3. 
Applicant: An owner, developer, or subdivider submitting an application to divide property pursuant to these regulations. 

4. 
Approving Authority: The City Council of the City of Chadron or its designee. 

5. 
ASCE: The American Society of Civil Engineers. 


B 
1. 
Bicycle Lane and Path: A designated lane on a roadway or an exclusive path separated from a roadway, designed specifically to accommodate the physical requirements of bicycling. Bicycle paths are ordinarily designed to accommodate other forms of pedestrian recreation. 

2. 
Buffer: A landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct visual or other sensory effects of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another. 

3. 
Building Official: The designee of the City of Chadron who is responsible for the supervision and administration of the Uniform Building Code or any other locally adopted building code. 


C 
1. 
Cartway: The actual surface area of a road used to accommodate motor vehicles, including moving traffic lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes, and parking lanes. On a street with curbs, the cartway is measured from curbline to curbline. On streets without curbs, the cartway is measured from the edge of pavement to the opposite edge of pavement. 

2. 
Centerline Offset: The distance between the centerline of roads intersecting a common road from the same or opposite sides. 


2­6 
2­7 
2­8 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

3. 
Channel: The bed or banks of a natural stream or drainageway which convey the constant or intermittent flow of water, including storm run­off. 

4. 
Common Open Space: Land within or related to a development that is not individually owned or dedicated for public use, designed and generally intended for the common use of the residents of the development. 

5. 
Comprehensive Plan: The Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Chadron. 

6. 
Concept Plan: A preliminary presentation which includes the minimum information necessary, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, to be used for the purpose of discussion or classification of a proposed plat prior to formal application. 

7. 
Cul­de­sac: A local street with only one outlet and with an opposite end providing for the reversal of traffic. 


12. Curb: A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway, intended to define the edge of the cartway and to channel or control drainage. 
D 
1. 
Dedication: A grant of land to the City or another public agency for a public purpose. 

2. 
Design standards: Standards that set forth specific improvement requirements. 

3. 
Detention basin: An artificial or natural water collection facility, designed to collect surface or subsurface water and to control its rate of discharge, in order to prevent a net increase in the rate of water flow that existed prior to a development. 

4. 
Developer: The legal owner(s) or authorized agent of any land included in a proposed development. 

5. 
Development: A planning or construction project involving substantial improvement or change in the character and/or land use of a property. 

6. 
Divided street: A street with opposing lanes separated by a median strip, center island, or other form of physical barrier, which cannot be crossed except at designated locations. 

7. 
Drainage: The removal of surface or ground water from land by drains, grading, or other means. 

8. 
Drainage system: The system through which water flows from the land. 


E 
1. 
Easement: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 

2. 
Erosion: The wearing away of a land surface by water, wind, ice, or gravity. 


F 
1. 
Final Approval: The final official action of the City Council, upon a recommendation by the Planning Commission, permitting the filing of a subdivision with the Dawes County Register of Deeds and the conveyance of individual parcels and lots to subsequent owners. Final Approval follows the completion of detailed engineering plans, negotiation of subdivision agreements, posting of required guarantees, and other requirements of these regulations. 

2. 
Frontage: The length of a property line of any one premises abutting and parallel to a public street, 


private way, or court. 
2­9 G 
1. Grade: The slope of a street or other public way, defined as a percentage or ratio of vertical change in elevation to horizontal change in distance. 
2­10 H 2­11 I 2­12 J 2­13 K 2­14 L 
1. Lot: A parcel of property with a separate and distinct number or other identifying designation which has been created, assigned and recorded in the Office of the Dawes County Register of Deeds. Each individual lot is subject to the provisions of a particular Base Zoning District, and shall have a minimum frontage of 60 feet, except as provided in an approved Planned Unit Development. When a lot is used together with one or more contiguous lots in a common development, all of the lots used, including any lots used for off­street parking, shall be considered a single lot for purposes of these Zoning Regulations. 
(a) 
Corner Lot: A lot located at the junction of at least two streets, private ways or courts or of at least two segments of a curved street, private way or court, at which the angle of intersection is no greater than 135 degrees. 

(b) 
Double Frontage Lot: A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on two streets, private ways or courts. Primary access shall be restricted on a double frontage lot to the minor of the two streets or to the front lot line as determined at time of platting or as defined by these regulations. (Also known as a Through Lot) 

(c) 
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot. 

(d) 
Common Development Lot: When two or more contiguous lots are developed as part of a Planned Unit Development, these lots may be considered a single lot for purposes of these regulations. 


2. 
Lot Area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. 

3. 
Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance measured between the front and rear lot lines. 

4. 
Lot Line: A property boundary line(s) of record that divides one lot from another lot or a lot from the public or private street rights­of­way or easement. 


(a) Front Lot Line: The lot line separating a lot and a public or private street right­of­way or easement. 
1) For an interior lot, the lot line separating the lot from the right­of­way or easement. 
2) For a comer lot, the shorter lot line abutting a public or private street or easement. In instances of equal line dimension, the front lot line shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator, or as may be noted on a final plat. 
3) For a double frontage lot, the lot lines separating the lot from the right­of­way or easement of the more minor street. In cases where each street has the same classification, the front lot line shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator, or as may be noted on a final plat. 
(b) 
Rear Lot Line: The lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. 

(c) 
Side Lot Line: Any lot line that is neither a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street, private way or court is a street side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 


5. Lot Width: The horizontal distance measured between the side lot lines of a lot, at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required setback line. 
2­15 M 
1. 
Main: The principal artery of a system of continuous piping which conveys fluids and to which branches may be connected. 

2. 
Major subdivision: Any subdivision not defined and approved as a minor subdivision. 

3. 
Minor subdivision: A subdivision of land which creates no more than four lots from any single parcel of land; requires no extensions of streets, sewers, utilities, or other municipal facilities; and complies with all pre­existing zoning requirements following. 

4. 
Moving lane: Any traffic lane within a cartway where traffic movement is the primary or sole function. 


2­16 N 
2­17 O 
1. 
Off­site: Located outside the boundaries of the parcel that is the subject of an application. 

2. 
Open space: Any parcel or area of land or water that is essentially retained in an open state and set aside for public or private use. 


2­18 P 
1. 
Parking Lane: A lane located on the sides of streets, designated or allowing on­street parking of motor vehicles. 

2. 
Pavement: An impermeable, hard surface, typically asphalt, asphaltic concrete, concrete, or brick or other masonry paver units. 

3. 
Plat: A document, usually a map or maps, expressing the division of land into two or more lots or parcels, any one of which is ten acres or less. Plats include preliminary and final plats. 


(a) 
Preliminary Plat: A plat indicating the proposed layout of a development and related information, intended for the purpose of preliminary approval by approving authorities but not for filing with the Dawes County Register of Deeds. 

(b) 
Final Plat: The final map of the subdivision which is presented for Final Approval. The Final Plat contains detailed information and documentation and is designed to be filed with the Register of Deeds. 


2­19 R 
1. 
Right­of­way: A strip of land, generally linear, occupied or intended to be occupied by a system 

that conveys people, traffic, fluids, utilities, or energy from one point to another. Rights­of­way may include streets and roads, crosswalks, bicycle paths, recreational trails, railroads or fixed guideway transit, electric transmission lines, gas pipelines, water mains, or sewer mains. 

2. 
Rural Subdivisions: A residential subdivision located more than one­half mile past the corporate limits but within the two mile planning jurisdiction of the City; or outside of areas designated for future urban development by the Comprehensive Plan. 


2­20 S 
1. Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conducts sanitary wastes from a point of origin to a treatment or disposal facility. In developing areas, sanitary sewers normally include interceptor, outfall, and lateral sewers. 
(a) 
Interceptor: A sanitary sewer that serves as a trunk, collecting sewage generated by a number of individual developments. 

(b) 
Outfall: A sanitary sewer that may be developed to connect an individual subdivision or development to an interceptor sewer. 

(c) 
Lateral or local: A pipe that connects individual buildings or groups of buildings to an outfall or interceptor sewer. 


2. 
Septic system: An underground system, utilizing a watertight receptacle to receive the discharge of sewage, which provides for the decomposition of wastes produced by development on a single lot. 

3. 
Sidewalk: A paved path provided for pedestrian use, usually located at the side of and detached from a road, but within the right­of­way. 

4. 
Storm Sewer: A conduit which conducts storm drainage from a development or subdivision, ultimately to a drainageway or stream. 

5. 
Street: A right­of­way, dedicated to public use, which provides a primary means of access to an abutting lot or parcel. 

6. 
Street hierarchy: The conceptual arrangement of streets based on function. The hierarchical approach classifies streets from courts or lanes, which provide private access to a limited number of lots, to arterials, which accommodate large volumes of high­speed, regional traffic. Street types contained within the hierarchy include: 


(a) 
Court or lane 

(b) 
Local 

(c) 
Collector 

(d) 
Minor Arterial 

(e) 
Major Arterial 



7. Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other units of land for title transfer or development, when one of the resultant lots is equal to ten acres or less. 
2­21 T 
2­22 U 
1. Urban Subdivision: A residential subdivision located within the corporate limits of the City of Chadron or less than 1/2 mile of such corporate limits; or within an area designated for future urban development by the Comprehensive Plan. 
2­23  V  
2­24  W  
2­25  X  
2­26  Y, Z  

ARTICLE THREE 
PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 
3­1 Purpose 
The purpose of this Article is to establish procedures for subdivision applications and for review and action on applications by the Planning Commission and the City Council. The procedures are designed to assure adequate review and consideration of subdivision applications, while providing for an orderly and expeditious approval process. The Article provides procedures for the approval of three types of subdivisions: Administrative Subdivisions, Minor Subdivisions, and Major Subdivisions. 
3­2 Administrative Subdivisions 
a. 	Scope 

The Administrative Subdivision procedure may be used to adjust an interior lot line or combine two or more lots without replatting providing the following conditions are met: 
1. 	In the case of an Administrative Lot Line Adjustment: 
(a) 
The lots involved must be designated within the same zoning district and the proposed adjustment will not create or result in a nonconforming lot or a violation of any section of the Chadron Municipal Code. 

(b) 
The lots involved must be existing platted lots. 

(c) 
The adjustment involves only a minor change in lot line location, and represents a change of less than 20% of the dimension of the lot. 

(d) 
The adjustment alters lot lines of no more than four lots without creating additional lots. 


2. 	In the case of an Administrative Platting or Lot Consolidation: 
(a) 
The lots involved must be designated within the same zoning district and the proposed platting or lot consolidation will not create or result in a violation of the zoning regulations. 

(b) 
The lots involved must be existing platted lots. 

(c) 
The lots must be under unified ownership. 

(d) 
The proposed platting creates no more than four lots, or the proposed consolidation consolidates no more than four lots into a lesser number of lots. 


3. 	
A lot is limited to only one instance an administrative adjustment, platting and/or consolidation. 

4. 
The subdivision is served by existing utilities and does not require the extension of streets, utilities, or public improvements. 

5. 	
Each lot resulting from the subdivision procedure will conform fully to all requirements of 


the zoning district that pertain to the lots; and each lot is developable according to the site development regulations of the zoning regulations. 
b. Application and Approval Procedure 

An application for an Administrative Subdivision may be approved under the following procedure: 
1. 
The applicant submits an application on a form established by the Planning Commission and including the supporting documents required for Administrative Subdivisions in Table 3­1. These documents shall include a plat of all lots and parcels that are affected by the action, prepared by a Licensed Surveyor. 

2. 
Following submission, the Zoning Administrator and City Engineer shall review each application according to the following criteria: 

(a) 
Compliance with the conditions contained in Section 3­2(a) above. 

(b) 
Consistency with the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Chadron. 

(c) 
Potential adverse environmental effects or effects on neighboring properties. 



3. 
Following such review, the Zoning Administrator may approve the Administrative Subdivision. Such approval shall be denoted by signed certificate of approval which must be filed along with the plat with the Dawes County Register of Deeds. 

4. 
The Zoning Administrator retains the right to disapprove or not act on the Administrative Subdivision application. In the event of such action, the application may proceed through the Minor or Major Subdivision process. If the subdivision complies with the conditions of a Minor Subdivision application, it may be directed to that approval process. Otherwise, the proposed subdivision shall be deemed a Major Subdivision and proceed through the appropriate review and action process. 

5. 
Following approval of an Administrative Subdivision, the subdivider must file the plat and certificate of approval with the Dawes County Register of Deeds. If the approved plat is not filed within 90 days of approval by the Zoning Administrator, such approval shall be null and void. 

6. 
The Zoning Administrator shall keep a complete and accurate record of all administrative subdivision approvals. 


3­3 Minor Subdivisions 
a. Scope 

The Minor Subdivision procedure may be used when a proposed subdivision meets all of the following conditions: 
1. 
The subdivision adjusts the lot lines of more than four lots without creating additional lots; or creates no more than four lots from any single parcel, tract, or lot. 

2. 
The subdivision is served by existing utilities and does not require the extension of streets, utilities, or public improvements. 

3. 
Each lot resulting from the subdivision procedure will conform fully to all requirements of the zoning district that pertain to the lots; and each lot is developable according to the site development regulations of the zoning ordinance. 

4. 
No part of the parcel has been the subject of a previous Minor Subdivision or Minor Subdivision approval. 


b. Application and Approval Procedure 

An application for a Minor Subdivision may be approved under the following procedure: 
1. 
The applicant submits an application on a form established by the Zoning Administrator and including the supporting documents required for Administrative Subdivisions in Table 3­1. These documents shall include a plat of all lots and parcels that are affected by the action, prepared by a Licensed Surveyor. 

2. 
Following submission, the Zoning Administrator and City Engineer shall review each application according to the following criteria: 

(a) 
Compliance with the conditions contained in Section 3­3(a) above. 

(b) 
Consistency with the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Chadron. 

(c) 
Potential adverse environmental effects or effects on neighboring properties. 

(d) 
Effects of the subdivision on public services. In order to determine this effect, the Zoning Administrator may submit the application to relevant school districts, utilities, and public safety agencies as required. 



3. 
Following such review, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the application along with his/her recommendation, to the Planning Commission. 

4. 
The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each Minor Subdivision and, following such public hearing, shall take action on the application. If the subdivision is approved by the Planning Commission, the approval shall be documented by a certificate of approval, executed by the Zoning Administrator and the Chairperson of the Planning Commission. This certificate shall be filed along with the approved plat with the Dawes County Register of Deeds. A record of all subdivisions and certificates of approval shall also be maintained by the City Clerk. 

5. 
The Planning Commission retains the right to disapprove or not act on the Minor Subdivision application. In the event of such action, the application may proceed through the Major Subdivision process. 

6. 
Following approval of a Minor Subdivision, the subdivider must file the plat and certificate of approval with the Dawes County Register of Deeds. If the approved plat is not filed within 90 days of approval by the Planning Commission, such approval shall be null and void. 

7. 
The Zoning Administrator shall keep a complete and accurate record of all Minor Subdivision approvals. 


3­4 Major Subdivisions 
a. Applicability 

The Major Subdivision procedures apply to all subdivisions which are not approved or eligible for approval under the Administrative or Minor Subdivision procedures. In general, these include subdivisions that: 1) are not approved under the Administrative or Minor Subdivision procedure; 2) create more than four lots; 3) require development or extension of public improvements. 
b. Stages in the Approval Process The approval process for Major Subdivisions consists of three stages: the pre­application stage, the preliminary plat approval stage, and the final plat approval stage. 

c. Pre­application Procedures 

1. 
Before filing an application for preliminary plat approval, the applicant shall meet with the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee, regarding general requirements and issues relating to the proposed subdivision. 

2. 
At the pre­application conference, the applicant shall submit a concept plan. The concept plan shall include: 

(a) 
A location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing and proposed streets and public facilities. 

(b) 
A schematic plan illustrating the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features and their relationship to existing and proposed site topography. 



3. 
Within fifteen working days, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the applicant about the consistency of the concept plan with the objectives and policies of the City's Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Regulations. 

4. 
The pre­application conference does not require a formal application or payment of a fee. 


d. Preliminary Plat Application 

1. 
Application Requirements 


After the pre­application conference, the applicant shall prepare and submit an application for preliminary plat approval. The applicant shall prepare and file 5 copies of a proposed preliminary plat, drawn to the scale of 1 inch equals 100 feet or larger. The minimum size of the plat drawing shall br 18 inches by 24 inches. In addition, one copy of the plat shall be submitted reduced to 8.5 by 11 inch format. The application for preliminary plat approval shall be submitted to the City Clerk at least 14 calendar days before the Planning Commission meeting at which the application will be considered. The application shall consist of a form established by the Zoning Administrator; the supporting documents required for Major Subdivisions in Table 3­1; and payment of a fee, the amount of which shall be determined by the City Council. 

2. 
Draft Subdivision Agreement 


The preliminary plat application shall include a draft of a subdivision agreement, following a format established by the Planning Commission. The subdivision agreement establishes the mutual responsibilities of city and subdivider, including financing of public improvements; the nature of performance bonds and guarantees that the developer will offer; and the financing arrangements proposed for the subdivision. 

3. 
Preliminary Plat Approval Procedure 

(a) 
After submission of a complete application for a preliminary plat, the Zoning Administrator and his/her staff shall review the application. As part of the review, the Zoning Administrator will circulate the application to the City Engineer, local utilities, the school district in which the subdivision is located, public safety agencies, and any other applicable provider of public services deemed necessary. Each reviewing agency shall submit written comments to the Zoning Administrator within a period which he/she establishes. 

(b) 
Following the comment period, the Zoning Administrator shall submit a written 

recommendation for action to the Planning Commission. 

(c) 
The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each Major Subdivision and, following such public hearing, shall take action on the application. The Planning Commission may recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the preliminary plat to the City Council. In addition, the Commission may delay action on the application in order to resolve outstanding issues. 

(d) 
Following action by the Planning Commission, the Chairman of the Commission shall transmit a written recommendation summarizing the Commission's action to the City Council 

(e) 
The City Council, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each Major Subdivision and, following such public hearing, shall take action on the application. 

(f) 
Approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council shall not constitute approval of a final plat. The approval shall be considered an expression of conditional approval to guide the preparation of a final plat, to be considered subsequently by approving authorities. The preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following rights: 




1) The general terms and conditions under which the plat was approved will not change. 
2) The applicant may submit for approval a final plat for the whole or a part of the preliminary plat on or before the expiration date of the preliminary approval. 
3) The preliminary plat approval shall stay in force for a period of one year from the date of approval by the City Council. The City Council may, at its discretion, establish a longer effective date for the preliminary plat approval. The City Council also may grant extensions to the effective period of a preliminary plat. 
4) Phased Subdivisions: The final plat may be submitted in phases, provided that no phase represents the lesser of 10 lots or 20% of the total number of lots in the entire approved preliminary plat. The initial phase of the final plat must be submitted according to the effective dates established in Section (3) above. In the event of a phased subdivision, the initial preliminary plat approval remains effective for a period not to exceed five years, unless otherwise extended by the City Council. 
e. Final Plat Application Process 

1. 
Application Requirements 


The applicant shall prepare and submit an application for final plat approval within one year of the preliminary plat approval, unless an extension has been granted by the City Council. The applicant shall prepare and file 5 copies of a proposed final plat, drawn to the scale of 1 inch equals 100 feet or larger. The minimum size of the plat drawing shall be 18 inches by 24 inches. In addition, one copy of the plat shall be submitted reduced to 8.5 by 11 inches format. The application for final plat approval shall be submitted to the City Clerk at least 14 calendar days before the Planning Commission meeting at which the application will be considered. The application shall consist of a form established by the Zoning Administrator; the supporting documents required for Final Plat Approval of Major Subdivisions in Table 3­1; and payment of a fee, the amount of which shall be determined by the City Council. 

2. 
Final Subdivision Agreement 



The final plat application shall include the final subdivision agreement to be executed between the City and the applicant. The terms of this agreement shall be acted upon along with action on 
the Final Plat. 

3. Final Plat Approval 

(a) 
The Zoning Administrator and Planning Commission shall review the final plat for consistency with the approved preliminary plat and for compliance with the Land Development Regulations and other applicable local, state, or federal statutes and regulations. If the final plat meets all conditions of the regulations and is substantially consistent with the terms of the preliminary plat approval, the Commission shall have no recourse but to approve the final plat. 

(b) 
If the Planning Commission finds in its review that the submitted final plat is inconsistent with the preliminary plat, does not comply with the conditions of relevant ordinances and statutes, or requires a waiver of any section of the Subdivision Chapter, it shall hold a public hearing on the final plat. Following such public hearing, the Commission shall transmit its recommendation on the final plat to the City Council. 

(c) 
The City Council, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each final plat and subdivision agreement and, following such public hearing shall take final action on the application. The City Council is further empowered to grant waivers of a section of the Subdivision Chapter after a waiver request has received a recommendation from the Planning Commission. 

(d) 
Performance Bond 



The subdivision agreement shall specify the amount of the performance bond for public improvements to be filed prior to receiving final plat approval or, alternately, shall contain a statement that required improvements have been satisfactorily completed. The performance bond, if required, must be presented in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney prior to final approval of the subdivision. 
f. Filing the Final Plat 

1. 
Following City Council approval of a final plat, the Chairman of the Planning Commission and the Mayor of the City of Chadron shall sign a certificate of approval, which shall be a part of the reproducible documents of the subdivision plat required with submission of the final plat. 

2. 
The passage of a resolution by the City Council accepting the plat shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area shown on the final plat. The applicant shall record the plat in the office of the Register of Deeds of Dawes County and shall file satisfactory evidence of such recording in the office of the City Clerk before the City shall recognize the plat as being in force. 

3. 
The subdivider must file the plat along with all applicable covenants and other documentation within 90 days of the execution of the plat by the Chairman of the Planning Commission and the Mayor. 


g. Plats Outside of Corporate Limits 

1. Authority Within Two Miles of City Limits 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 14 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, 1943, the subdivision provisions of the Land Development Regulations, and the provisions of the 
Municipal Code of the City shall govern all territory outside the corporate limits of the City but within two miles of such corporate limits, except to the extent that ordinances or resolutions of the City Council shall limit their application to an area less than two miles of such corporate limits. 
TABLE 3­1: Application Requirements 

ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION  MINOR SUBDIVISION  MAJOR SUBDIVISION  
Preliminary  Final  
PLAT INFORMATION  
Name, address of owner and applicant.  X  X  X  X  
Name, signature, license number, seal and address of engineer, land surveyor, architect, planner, and/or landscape architect,as applicable, involved in preparation of plat.  X  X  X  X  
Title block, denoting type of application, tax map sheet, legal description, and general location.  X  X  X  X  
Key map, showing location with reference to surrounding property, streets, current street names, city limits, and other features within 660 feet of the subdivision boundary.  X  X  
Present and proposed zoning.  X  X  
North arrow, date, and graphic scale.  X  X  X  X  
Proof that taxes are current.  X  X  X  X  
Signature blocks for Planning Commission Chairman, Administrative Official, and Mayor.  X  X  X  X  
Appropriate certification blocks.  X  X  X  X  
Monumentation.  X  X  X  
Metes and bounds description, including dimensions, bearings, curb data, tangent length, radii, arcs, chords, and central angles for all centerlines and ROW’s, and centerline curves on streets.  X  
Acreage of tract.  X  X  X  X  
Date of original and all revisions.  X  X  X  X  
Dimensioning of setbacks.  X  X  X  
Location, dimensions, and names of existing and proposed streets.  X  X  X  X  
All proposed lot lines, lot dimen­sions, and lot areas in square feet.  X  X  X  X  

TABLE 3­1: Application Requirements 

ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION  MINOR SUBDIVISION  MAJOR SUBDIVISION  
Preliminary  Final  
PLAT INFORMATION (cont.)  

Copy of any existing or proposed deed restriction or covenants.  X  Concept Plan  
Existing and proposed easements or land reserved for or dedicated to public use.  X  X  X  X  

Payment of application fees.  X  X  X  X  
ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION  
Property lines within 300 feet.  X  X  
All existing water courses, flood­plains, wetlands, habitat areas or other environmentally sensitive features within 300 feet.  X  X  X  
Survey of trees and wooded areas, (noting size and location of trees) and mature or environmentally sensitive vegetation.  X  X  
Existing ROW’s and easements within 300 feet.  X  X  X  X  
Topography at one foot contours.  X  X  
Existing site drainage system.  X  X  X  
Drainage calculations and percolation tests.  X  
IMPROVEMENTS AND CONSTRUCTION INFORMATION  
Proposed utility infrastructure plans including water, sanitary sewer, and storm water management.  General  Detailed  
Sediment/Soil Erosion Control Plan.  X  
Spot and finished elevations at all property corners.  X  
Construction details as required.  
Road and paving cross­sections.  X  
Proposed street names.  X  X  
New block and lot numbers.  X  X  X  X  

TABLE 3­1: Application Requirements 

ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION  MINOR SUBDIVISION  MAJOR SUBDIVISION  
Preliminary  Final  

Lighting plan and details.  Concept Plan  
Pedestrian circulation patterns and sidewalk or trail locations.  X  

Certifications and seals from licensed Land Surveyor.  X  X  
Improvement financing plan, including sources of funding (Private, assessments, public, Sanitary and Improvement Districts, and other sources).  X  
Draft subdivision agreement.  X  
Final subdivision agreement.  X  

ARTICLE FOUR 
SUBDIVISION DESIGN CATEGORIES AND GENERAL STANDARDS 
4­1 Purpose 
The purpose of this Article is to provide flexible design alternatives in order to assure that subdivisions in the Chadron area create functional and attractive environments, minimize adverse effects, and become assets to the city's urban and natural setting. The Article defines specific types of subdivisions that have varying design characteristics, applicable to various settings within the City of Chadron and jurisdiction. 
4­2 Site Design and Constraints 
a. Consideration of Plans 

The design of subdivisions shall consider all existing local and regional plans for Chadron and its Jurisdiction. These include the Comprehensive Development Plan for the City of Chadron. 
b. Grading Permit Required 

1. A Grading Permit is required for erosion and sediment control on all construction sites greater than 5 acres in size. Prior to grading or site disturbing activity, the developer shall apply to the Zoning Administrator for a grading permit. The application for a grading permit shall include: 
(a) 
A location map showing the location and extent of grading activity. 

(b) 
A Sediment and Erosion Control Plan. 


2. 
After submission of a complete application for a grading permit, the Zoning Administrator and his/her staff shall review the application. As part of the review, the Zoning Administrator shall circulate the petition to any agency with statutory authority for the management of drainageways and stormwater management. 

3. 
A grading permit shall be issued within ten working days if the Zoning Administrator has received assurances from applicable state agencies that the Sediment and Erosion Control Plan is compatible with statute, and further that it is compatible with the objectives and policies of the City's Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Regulations. If the submitted Sediment and Erosion Control Plan is deemed inadequate, the applicant will be given a list of mitigation measures that must be included to ensure conformance. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a grading permit to the applicant upon certification that mitigation measures will be taken as prescribed, consistent with applicable state and federal regulations regarding soil and sediment erosion, and environmental water quality. 


c. Preservation of Natural Features and Drainage Patterns 
1. 
To the maximum extent possible, development shall be located to preserve natural features of the site, to avoid areas of environmental sensitivity, and to minimize negative impact and alteration of natural features and drainage patterns. 

2. 
The subdivider shall give maximum consideration to the preservation of the following areas as open space, to the extent consistent with reasonable utilization of land: 


(a) 
Wetlands and other unique environmental areas, as defined in Section 404, Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 and delineated on wetlands maps prepared by the US Fish and Wildlife Service. Construction and fill activity shall be prohibited on wetlands in excess of one acre in size. Development and fill upon wetlands smaller than once acre in size should be avoided whenever possible, but regulated by permit authority of applicable state and federal agencies. 

(b) 
Slopes in excess of 15% as measured over a 10­foot interval. Development on slopes over 15% may be permitted only if an erosion and slope stabilization plan is submitted and approved with the development and if appropriate measures are taken in compliance with this approved plan. The City may, at its discretion, require the review and certification of such a plan by a licensed Professional Engineer. 

(c) 
Habitats of endangered species. Development shall avoid fill or disturbance of habitat sites as identified on federal or state lists administered by the US Fish and Wildlife Service of the US Department of the Interior, and applicable state environmental regulatory agencies. Developers are encouraged to preserve habitat areas as a connected open space consistent with the parks and greenways system designated in the Chadron Comprehensive Development Plan. 


d. General Guidelines for Subdivision Layout 
Subdivisions shall be designed to comply with the following overall performance objectives: 
1. 
Avoidance of adverse effects on ground water and aquifer recharge. 

2. 
Reduction and minimization of cut and fill. 

3. 
Avoidance or reduction of unnecessary impervious surfaces. 

4. 
Prevention of flooding and encroachment of water onto other properties. 

5. 
Provision of adequate access to lots, including alternative routes to lots and sites within the subdivision and minimization of cul­de­sacs over 300 feet. 

6. 
Mitigation of negative environmental effects on surrounding properties, including effects of shadow, noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities. 

7. 
Respect for the urban character and traditional layout of Chadron, including providing continuity to established street and community facility networks; establishing linkages and connections between new development and existing parts of the city; and preserving historically and architecturally significant sites and buildings, determined as those sites or districts either listed on or determined to be eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places, as determined by the State Historic Preservation Officer. 

8. 
Dedication of arterial, collector, and key local streets on the general 
alignments specified in the Comprehensive Development Plan. 



e. Site Design Objectives and Approval 

The Planning Commission and City Council shall take the above Site Design objectives into account during their review and approval of subdivision applications. 
ARTICLE FIVE 
CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN 
5­1 Purpose 
The purpose of this Article is to assure the development of functional and safe circulation patterns within new subdivisions, in order to encourage economical and effective movement of motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians; provide access for public safety vehicles; and encourage the development of circulation systems that enhance the quality of life within new and existing neighborhoods in the City of Chadron and its planning jurisdiction. 
5­2 General Standards 
The design of circulation systems should conform to the following general standards and requirements: 
a. Roadway System Design 

1. 
The road system shall be designed to permit safe and orderly movement of traffic, to meet but not exceed needs of the present and future served population; to be simple and logical; to respect natural features, topography, and landscape, and to present an attractive streetscape. 

2. 
The system shall conform with the City's Comprehensive Development Plan. For streets not shown on the Comprehensive Development Plan, the arrangement of streets shall provide for the logical extension of existing streets. 

3. 
The street network of a subdivision should provide for logical, continuous extensions of streets to subsequent, later developments. Such extensions shall make provision when necessary with a temporary turnaround with a radius of at least 50 feet. 

4. 
The system shall provide adequate traffic flow through a subdivision and provide at least two routes from each lot within the subdivision to the rest of the City, except as explicitly permitted by the approving authorities. Additionally, the system should be designed to discourage through traffic from using local streets. 


b. Pedestrian and Bicycle Systems 

1. 
A continuous pedestrian system shall be provided within each non­industrial subdivision, designed to conduct pedestrians between every point in the subdivision in a safe manner. 

2. 
In conventional subdivisions, the pedestrian system will ordinarily be provided by sidewalks placed parallel to and on both sides of each street, with exceptions permitted to preserve natural features, create visual interest, or maintain greenways and pedestrian ways proposed in the Chadron Comprehensive Development Plan. 

3. 
All aspects of the pedestrian system, including sidewalks and intersection crossings, must be designed to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 

4. 
Bikeways or recreational trails shall be required only if specifically indicated by the Comprehensive Development Plan. Any land dedicated for trail development shall be credited toward the satisfaction of pedestrian system and open space standards set forth by this ordinance. 


5­3 Street Hierarchy and Design a. Characteristics of the Hierarchy 
1. 
Streets shall be classified according to a street hierarchy with design tailored to function. 

2. 
The street hierarchy shall be defined by road function and projected average daily traffic (ADT), as calculated by trip generation rates prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers or other generally accepted standards. 

3. 
Each residential street shall be classified and designed to meet appropriate standards for its entire length. 

4. 
The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the approving agencies that the distribution of traffic created by the subdivision will not exceed the design capacity of the proposed street system and its individual segments. 

5. 
The categories, functions, and projected traffic loads of the street hierarchy are set forth in Table 5­1. 


b. Cartway Width 

1. 
Cartway width for each street classification is determined by parking and curbing requirements based on form or intensity of adjacent development. 

2. 
To promote economical development of streets, minimum cartway width should generally be used. Minimum cartway widths are set forth in Table 5­2. 


c. Curbs.Gutters, and Shoulders 

1. 
Curbing shall be required for the purposes of safety, drainage, and protection of the pavement edge, as set forth in Table 5­3. 

2. 
Requirements for curbs vary according to street function and the nature of adjacent development. Adjacent development is defined as urban or rural as follows: 

(a) 
Rural: Residential or predominately agricultural land use where average lot frontage exceeds 150 feet. 

(b) 
Urban: Residential land use where average lot frontage is less than or equal to 150 feet; or adjacent land uses include commercial, office, industrial, or civic use types. 



3. 
Where curbing is not required, edge definition and stabilization shall be provided. 

4. 
Where curbing is required, shoulders and drainage swales may be used only if soils or topography make the provision of shoulders preferable to curbs; or where the character of an area is preserved by the use of shoulders and drainage swales. 

5. 
Shoulders, when developed, shall be at least eight feet in width on each side for all streets; and located within right­of­way. Swale width is site­specific. Shoulders shall consist of stabilized turf or other acceptable material. 

6. 
All curbs shall provide ramps for accessibility by handicapped people consistent with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 

7. 
Curb construction shall follow standards established by the City of Chadron. 


d. Sidewalks 

1. 
Sidewalk requirements are determined by road classification and intensity of development, as set forth in Table 5­3. 

2. 
Where sidewalks are not otherwise required by Table 5­3, the City may require their installation if necessary to provide access to generators of pedestrian traffic or major community features; to continue a walk on an adjacent street; to link parts of the city; or to accommodate future development. 

3. 
In conventional development, sidewalks shall be placed generally parallel to streets within right­of­way. Exceptions are possible to preserve important natural features or to accommodate topography or vegetation; when applicant shows an alternative for a safe and convenient pedestrian system; or in creative subdivisions. 

4. 
In commercial areas, sidewalks may abut curb. 

5. 
Pedestrian rights­of­way at least 10 feet in width may be required through the center of blocks over 600 feet in length if deemed necessary by the approving authorities to provide access to schools or community facilities; or to maintain a continuous pedestrian network within and between subdivisions and districts of the City of Chadron and its jurisdiction . Such rights­of­way shall be dedicated to the public in the same manner as streets. 

6. 
Sidewalks shall provide a clear path free of any obstructions of at least five feet if developed adjacent to curb and four feet in width if set back from curb. 

7. 
All sidewalks shall be constructed according to current standards in use by the City of Chadron. Sidewalks shall be of concrete construction four inches thick except at points of vehicular crossing where they shall be six inches thick. Sidewalks shall be reinforced with a wire mesh or equivalent. 

8. 
All sidewalks, crossings, and other segments of a continuous pedestrian system must comply with standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 


e. Bikeways and Recreational Trails 

1. 
Bikeways and recreational trails shall be required in subdivisions only when specified as part of the comprehensive development plan. 

2. 
All paved off­street recreational trails shall be a minimum of eight feet in width for two­way traffic and comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. Surfacing of trails shall be acceptable to the City of Chadron. Gradients for bikeways and recreational trails should not exceed five percent, except for short distances. 

3. 
Recreational trails may satisfy part of the requirements of these regulations for sidewalks or open space. 

4. 
All residential streets shall utilize bicycle safe drainage grates at storm sewer inlets. 


f. Right­of­Way 

1. 
Measurement: The right­of­way of a street shall be measured from lot line to lot line, and shall be wide enough to contain the cartway, curbs or shoulder, sidewalks and sidewalk setbacks, other necessary graded areas, and utilities. 

2. 
Any right­of­way that continues an existing street shall be no less than that of existing street. 

3. 
The requirements for right­of­ways for functional categories of roads is set forth in Table 

5­3. 



4. 
Dedications: Dedications of right­of­way for collector, subcollector, community, or arterial streets shall be made consistent with the comprehensive development plan. 


g. Street Design Standards 
1. Pavement 

(a) All streets shall be paved to current standards utilized in the City of Chadron except: 
1) Local streets in rural subdivisions. Rural subdivisions may utilize 6­inch P.C.C.P. non­reinforced paving . Alternatively, streets may utilize a gravel or crushed rock surface of sufficient thickness and with an adequate base to provide a durable surface. This permission is subject to submission of a petition by the platting owners binding themselves and all succeeding property owners to agree that all paving would be completed by a special assessment project if the subdivision were annexed by the city. Such petition shall waive any required resolution of necessity, any applicable limitations of the amount which could be assessed against subdivision property owners including intersection costs, and other costs normally paid by the City in special assessment projects. 
2) Courts or lanes, which may utilize six­inch concrete, provided that such courts or lanes remain in private or private cooperative ownership. 
(b) Street pavement thickness shall relate to the role of the street in the hierarchy, subgrade conditions, and pavement type. 
2. 
Continuity of Arterial or Collector Streets 

No subdivision shall prevent the extension of arterial or collector streets through and beyond the subdivision. The subdivider may plan and design collector streets not designated in the Comprehensive Development Plan subject to the approval of the City Council. 

3. 
Cul­de­sacs 



(a) 
Cul­de­sac streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall not exceed 300 feet in length and shall be designed so that vision from entrance to end is not restricted. 

(b) 
The closed end of a cul­de­sac within a conventional subdivision shall have a turnaround with a street property line diameter of at least 130 feet in residential subdivisions. This diameter may be increased by the Planning Commission if deemed necessary in the case of a commercial or industrial subdivision. 


4. 
Street Grades 


Maximum permitted street grades are set forth in Table 5­2. In typical circumstances, the minimum permitted street gradient shall be 1.0%. In exceptional circumstances, the City Engineer may permit street gradients of less than 1.0%; however, under no circumstances may the gradient be less than 0.4%. 

5. 
Street Intersections 



(a) 
Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as possible, unless limited by topography, existing street alignments, or other clearly defined constraints. 

(b) 
In most cases, no more than two streets should intersect at a single intersection. 

(c) 
Local streets shall not provide intersections with major arterials. 

(d) 
New intersections along one side of an existing or proposed street shall, if possible, align with intersections on the other side of the street. Offsets between adjacent intersections shall measure at least 150 feet between centerlines. The use of T­intersections is encouraged on local streets within the interior of a subdivision. 

(e) 
Intersection design standards are set forth in Table 5­2. 


6. Block Size 

(a) The length, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be suited to the proposed land use and design of the proposed subdivision. Blocks within urban subdivisions shall not exceed 600 feet in length, unless necessitated by exceptional topography or other demonstrable constraints. Blocks within rural subdivisions shall not exceed 1,320 feet 
7. Other design standards shall be as set forth in Table 5­4. 
5­4 Lighting and Wiring 
a. Underground Wiring 

1. 
All electric, telephone, television, cable TV, and other communication lines shall be provided by underground wiring within easements or public right­of­way, except where in the opinion of the approving authorities, such location is not feasible. Poles for permitted overhead lines shall be placed in rear lot line easements; or in other locations designed to lessen their visual impact. 

2. 
New lots adjacent to existing overhead service may utilize that service; however, new local service connections shall be underground. 

3. 
Year­round screening of any above ground utility apparatus is required. Screening shall be consistent with the Landscape and Screening Standards set forth in Article Eight of the Zoning Chapter of the Land Development Regulations. 


TABLE 5­1: Street Hierarchy  
Residential Street Type  Function  
Private Lane or Court  Street providing private or controlled access to a limited number of residential units.  


Local 	Provides frontage to lots and carries traffic with origin or destination on street itself. Carries least traffic at lowest speed. East­west orientation provides best solar access. Local residential streets may include cul­de­sacs and sometimes do not interconnect with adjoining neighborhoods or subdivisions. 
Collector 	Conducts and distributes traffic between local streets and major streets in the community. Carries larger volume of traffic. Residential collectors interconnect and provide through access between residential neighborhoods. Collector streets should preserve one through traffic lane in each direction, without encroachment by parking. Collectors may be included in the city’s Surface Transportation Program system for federal aid. 
Minor Arterials 	Provides community wide access between residential neighborhoods and to other activity centers in Chadron, including downtown and major commercial facilities. Direct access may be provided to other arterial streets. Parking should generally be prohibited on other arterials. Other arterials should be excluded from residential areas. These streets are part of the Surface Transportation Program system for federal aid. 
Major Arterials 	Inter­regional road in the street hierarchy. Conveys traffic between activity centers, often at high speeds and with limited access. Should be excluded from residential areas. These streets are part of the Surface Transportation Program system for federal aid. 
TABLE 5­2: Cartway Width, Grade, and Intersection Standards 

Residential Street  Moving Lanes  Parking  Maximum  Cartway  Minimum  
Type  Restrictions  Grade  Width  Curb Radii  
(Note 1)  (Note 2)  
Cul­de­sac  Two 11­foot  Note 1  8%  (5%)*  22 feet  30 feet  
Urban Local  Two 11­foot  Note 1  8%  (5%)*  22 feet  25 feet  
Rural Local  Two 11­foot  Note 1  8%  22 feet  25 feet  
Collector  
No parking  Two 12­foot  No parking  All Types:  28 feet  All Types:  
One­side parking  Two 12­foot  One side only  8%  (5%)  32 feet  35 feet  
Two­side parking  Two 12­foot  No restriction  40 feet  40 feet  
Arterials  Note 2  Note 2  6%  Note 3  Note 3  

* Denotes Maximum Street Grade Within 50 Feet of an Intersection Note 1: If parking is proposed on street, increase the total width eight feet for parallel parking on each side. Note 2: Intersections shall be rounded at the curb line, with the street having the highest radius requirement as shown in Table 5­2 
determining the minimum standard for all curb lines. 
Note 3: Arterial street width, grade, and curb radii are determined by state standards and the designation of individual street or 
roadway segments. 

TABLE 5­3: Curb, Sidewalk, And Right­Of­Way Requirements 
Street Type Cartway Curb/ Sidewalk Minimum Total ROW Width Shoulder Sidewalk Setback (Note 1) 
Cul­de­sac  22 feet  Required  Required  6 feet  60 feet at  
approach  
100 feet  
diameter  
Local  
Rural  28feet  Not Required  Not Required  NA  80 feet  
Urban  28 feet  Curb  Both sides  6 feet  80 feet  
Collector  
Rural  28 feet  Not Required  Not Required  NA  80 feet  
Urban  
No parking  28 feet  Curb  Both Sides  8 feet  80 feet  
One­side parking  32 feet  Curb  Both Sides  8 feet  80 feet  
Two­side parking  36 feet  Curb  Both Sides  8 feet  80 feet  

Arterials 
Urban and Rural Note 2 Note 2 Note 2 8 feet 100 feet minimum 
Note 1: The lesser of the indicated dimension or placement of the inside edge of the sidewalk two feet from the property line of the adjacent property. 
Note 2: Arterial street width, grade, and curb radii are determined by state standards and the designation of individual street or roadway segments. 
TABLE 5­4 : Required Curve Radii 

Street Type Minimum radius of horizontal curbs Minimum sight distance on vertical curbs 

Lane or Court  70 feet  NA  
Local  135 feet  200 feet  
Collector  250 feet  300 feet  
Arterials  500 feet  350 feet  

ARTICLE SIX 
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
6­1 Purpose 
The purpose of this Article is to assure that all subdivisions developed in the City of Chadron and its jurisdiction are adequately furnished with necessary public services. These services include adequate water, waste management, and storm water drainage utilities; and park and open space resources. 
6­2 Water 
a. Connection 
1. 
All installations shall be properly connected to an approved and functioning community water system, constructed in conformance with the applicable design standards of the city. 

2. 
Depending on the number of units, residential subdivisions shall be connected to an existing public water supply system if such a system is available within the following distances: 


Size of Development Distance 
1 units 200 feet 
2 units 400 feet 
3 units 600 feet 
4 units 800 feet 
5­15 units 1,000 feet 
15 units and over 0.5 mile 

Developments with more than 15 units and located within 0.5 mile of an existing public water system must provide adequate justification as to why they are unable to connect to such a system. For developments with more than 15 units and located more than 0.5 mile from a public water supply, the water supply strategy shall be considered by the approving authorities on a case­by­case basis. 
3. All proposals for new water supplies, extensions, or main installation shall be approved by the City of Chadron. 
b. 
Capacity 

1. 
The water supply system shall be adequate to handle the necessary flow, based on complete development of the subdivision. 

2. 
The demand rates for all uses, including emergency fire demand, shall be included in the computation of total water demand. 

3. 
Fire protection shall be furnished for any development connected to the municipal water system. Computation of minimum fire flows shall be based on calculations of the American Insurance Association and National Board of Fire Underwriters. 

4. 
Hydrants spaced for necessary fire flow and provided with adequate means of drainage as approved by the City Engineer and Fire Chief. All lines serving hydrants shall be at least six inches in diameter, should be circulating lines, and should carry appropriate state approvals. 

5. 
Installation of water systems shall conform to community design standards in use within the City of Chadron. 

6. 
A certification from a registered Professional Engineer shall be filed with the City of Chadron certifying that the water supply system of the subdivision is designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Section; and all applicable standards of the State of Nebraska. This certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of "as­built" system plans. 

7. 
All state requirements shall be met and approvals from the Department of Health and Human Services shall be obtained for all water systems. 



c. 
Locator Tape 


Each installation utilizing PVC or other non­metallic material shall be marked by locator tape of a type approved by the City Engineer, located one foot below the surface of the ground. 
d. Private or Community Well Systems 
If the development does not meet the required criteria for connection to a public water system or for reasons of topography, economic feasibility, or other special condition proposes water service by a community and/or private well, the developer shall request a variance according the following provisions: 
1. 
The developer shall submit with the preliminary plat application an Economic Feasibility Study Report and an Environmental Impact Study report, prepared by a Professional Engineer, which documents the cost of providing city water service to the subdivision versus the cost of the proposed well system. 

2. 
If a well system is approved by the City with the preliminary plat approval, the system shall be designed and built in accordance with regulations of the City Engineer and the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services. Both agencies shall approve its construction before the City issues Certificates of Occupancy for any buildings in the subdivision. 

3. 
If a public water supply system is proposed to be provided to an area within a ten­year period from the time of platting, as indicated in an officially adopted document of the City or other authorized agency, the City may require installation of a capped system or dry lines. Alternately, the City may require a payment in lieu of the improvement, to be credited toward the extension and extension of the subdivision to a future public water supply. 

4. 
City approval to install a community and/or private well system shall be allowed subject to the following additional provisions: 

(a) 
The system, including all distribution lines, hydrants, valves, and appurtenances, shall remain the property of the Developer and/or Homeowners’ Association. 

(b) 
The developer and all successive lot owners shall agree to connect to the City water system if installed to the subdivision. Such connection shall not be required for ten years after the date of construction of the initial well system. 

(c) 
With connection to the City water system, all existing lot owners shall be required to disconnect from and abandon the pre­existing well system in conformance with all local and State standards and shall share equally in the cost of such disconnection. Disconnection and abandonment shall be completed within six months after connection to the City water system. 




Sanitary Sewers 

6­3 
a. 

b. 


SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

Connection 

1. 
All installations shall be properly connected to an approved and functioning sanitary sewer system prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 

2. 
Depending on the number of units, residential subdivisions shall be connected to an existing public sanitary sewer system if such a system is available, by gravity service, within the following distances: 


Size of Development Distance 
1 unit 200 feet 
2 units 400 feet 
3 units 600 feet 
4 units 800 feet 
5­15 units 1,000 feet 
15 units and over 0.5 mile 

Developments with more than 15 units and located within 0.5 mile of an existing public sanitary sewer system must provide adequate justification as to why they are unable to connect to such a system. For developments with more than 15 units and located more than 0.5 mile from a public sanitary sewer system, the waste disposal strategy shall be considered by the approving authorities on a case­by­case basis. 
3. 
If the City creates a benefit fund for the purpose of financing public extensions of sanitary interceptor sewers to newly developing areas, each subdivision to be benefitted by such extensions shall contribute to such a fund. Subdivisions within the city limits of Chadron at the time of platting; or subdivisions currently served by existing sanitary sewer service shall be exempt from this requirement. Contributions to the fund shall be computed on the basis of proportionate costs and benefits of necessary extensions. Assessments shall be made on a per lot basis for single­family development; a pre­unit basis for multi­family residential development; and a site area basis for non­residential development. 

4. 
All proposals for new public sanitary sewer systems or extensions of existing systems shall be approved by appropriate public agencies. 

5. 
All state requirements shall be met and approvals from the Department of Environmental Quality shall be obtained for all waste disposal systems. 


Capacity 

1. 
The sanitary sewer system shall be adequate to handle the necessary flow, based on complete development of the subdivision. 

2. 
Installation of sanitary sewer systems shall conform to community design standards in use within the City of Chadron. 

3. 
A certification from a registered Professional Engineer shall be filed with the City of Chadron certifying that the sanitary sewer system of the subdivision is designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Section; and all applicable standards of the State of Nebraska. This 


c. 

d. 


6­4 
a. 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of "as­built" system plans. 
Locator Tape 

Each installation utilizing PVC or other non­metallic material shall be marked by locator tape of a type approved by the City Engineer, located one foot below the surface of the ground. 
Private Wastewater Disposal Systems 

If the development does not meet the required criteria for connection to a public sanitary sewer system and gravity sewer service connections, or for reasons of topography, economic feasibility, or other special condition proposes service by a private wastewater disposal system, the developer shall request a variance according the following provisions: 
1. 
Subsurface or septic systems are not permissible on any lot created after the effective date of these regulations if the gross density of the subdivision is higher than one unit per 1.5 acres; if individual lots are smaller than one acre; or in any urban subdivision. 

2. 
The developer shall submit with the preliminary plat application an Economic Feasibility Study Report and an Environmental Impact Study report, prepared by a Professional Engineer, which documents the cost of providing city sewer service to the subdivision versus the cost of the proposed private disposal system. The preliminary plat application shall also show the proposed system for each lot and shall submit percolation tests for each lot, taken at the proposed adsorption field sites to determine the size of the field required for each lot. 

3. 
The City shall consider all these submittals in determining whether to permit installation of private wastewater disposal systems for the subdivision. 

4. 
If a private wastewater disposal system is approved by the City with the preliminary plat approval, the system shall be designed and built in accordance with regulations of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality. The developer’s Professional Engineer shall furnish the City with three certified copies of as­built plans showing service line locations and final sewer and maintenance access locations, lengths, elevations, and grades. 

5. 
If a sanitary sewer system is to be provided to an area within a ten­year period, as indicated in an officially adopted document of the City, the County, or other authorized agency, the City may require installation of a capped system or dry lines. Alternately, the City may require a payment in lieu of the improvement, to be credited toward the extension and extension of the subdivision of a future sanitary sewer system. 

6. 
City approval to install a community and/or private wastewater disposal system shall be allowed subject to the following additional provisions: 

(a) 
The developer and all successive lot owners shall agree to connect to the City sanitary sewer system if installed to the corner of their lot. Such connection shall not be required for ten years after the date of construction of the initial wastewater system. 

(b) 
With connection to the City sanitary sewer system, all existing lot owners shall be required to disconnect from and abandon the pre­existing sanitary sewer system in conformance with all local and State standards and shall share equally in the cost of such disconnection. Disconnection and abandonment shall be completed within six months after connection to the City sanitary sewer system. 




Design 

Storm Water Management 

1. All subdivisions shall have a storm water management system that is adequate to prevent the undue or unplanned retention of storm water on the site. Undue retention does not include: 
(a) 
Retention through planned facilities. 

(b) 
Retention not substantially different from pre­existing conditions. 


2. 
The design of the storm water management system shall be consistent with general and specific concerns and standards of the Comprehensive Development Plan and the drainage control programs of applicable public agencies. Design shall be based on environmentally sound site planning and engineering techniques. 

3. 
To the maximum degree possible, drainage from subdivisions shall conform to natural contours of land and not disturb pre­existing drainageways. 

4. 
Adjacent properties shall not be unduly burdened with surface water from the subdivision. Specifically: 

(a) 
There may be no unreasonable impediment of water from higher adjacent properties across the subdivision, causing damage to lower properties. 

(b) 
No action shall unreasonably collect and channel storm water onto lower properties. The volume or rate of post­development run off shall not exceed the amount of pre­development runoff, and is to be managed in a manner consistent with Nebraska statute and existing case law regarding such flows. 



5. 
Design shall use the best available technology to minimize off­site runoff, encourage natural filtration, simulate natural drainage, and minimize discharge of pollutants. Best available technology may include retention basins, swales, porous paving, and terracing. 

6. 
No surface water may be channeled into a sanitary sewer system. 

7. 
Where possible, a subdivision's drainage system shall coordinate with that of surrounding properties or streets. 

8. 
All storm water design shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. The preliminary plat submission must include preliminary drainage computations and demonstrations that the proposed storm water management system meets the requirements of this Section. A certification from a registered Professional Engineer shall be filed with the City of Chadron certifying that the storm water management system of the subdivision is designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Section; and all applicable standards of the State of Nebraska. This certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of "as­built" system plans. 


b. 
Erosion Control 

1. With the submission of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit an erosion control plan, prepared and certified by a licensed Professional Engineer, for any land disturbing activity. All grading activities must be carried out consistent with this approved erosion control plan. 

a. 
Purpose 


6­5 Parks and Public Facilities 
In order to serve the educational and recreational needs of new residents within the subdivisin and promote the public health, welfare, community character and property values, residential subdividers are required to donate resources to make improvements to the City of Chadron's parks system as a condition of subdivision approval. 
6­6 
6­7 
6­8 
6­9 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

Parks 
a. General Requirements 
The amount of park facilities for new residents is partly based on data and policy in the adopted City of Chadron Comprehensive Plan. The Plans reflect a local adaptation of standards of the National Recreation and Park Association (NRPA). The Comprehensive Plan is the result of a system­wide technical analysis and citizen participatory planning process, which identified near­term and long­range needs for the local parks system. 
Given these findings, the City of Chadron has determined the following: 
1. 
Park Dedication. If required by the city and consistent with the comprehensive development plan, a subdivision shall dedicate up to 0.04 acres per dwelling unit for parkland. Alternately, the subdivider shall pay a fee equivalent to the cost of 0.04 acres per unit, to be used specifically by the City for the acquisition and development of park and recreational facilities which directly benefit the subdivision. 

2. 
Location. Land donated for new parks shall be located based generally on the City's Comprehensive Plan and official map and shall specifically consider the design of each development and natural features present. The amount of land required shall not include wetlands, floodway, floodplain or storm water detention facilities. 

3. 
Combining Parks and Schools Lands. Whenever possible, and whenever in the best interests of the City and the affected school district, land dedicated for park and recreation sites shall be contiguous to land dedicate for a school site. Where the subdivision is less than forty (40) acres, park and recreation land to be donated should, where possible, and in the best interests of the City and the affected school district, be combined with donations from adjoining developments in order to promote usable park and recreation lands, and thereby minimize hardship on a particular subdivider. 


Reservation of Additional Lands 
The City Council may require reservation of sites to be purchased for schools and other civic facilities as a condition for approval of the subdivision. Where the Comprehensive Plan or the designation of the City calls for a larger amount of land in a particular subdivision or planned development for park and recreation use, or as additional public land that the subdivider is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the subdivider's contribution shall be reserved for subsequent acquisition by the City. Reservation of land for public acquisition shall be for a period not to exceed three years from the date that the plat is officially recorded. 
Topography and Grading 
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site and its surroundings must be suitable for its intended purposes. A subdivider shall allow the City to have access to the proposed sites for the purpose of conducting soil boring tests. 
Timing and Conveyance 
Unless otherwise determined through a Subdivision Agreement, a subdivider shall convey to the City (or such other governmental body, corporation or such owner as determined by the City) the land required under this Section at the time of final approval by the City Council of the subdivision or re­subdivision plat or final development plan, by the delivery of the following documents: 
a. 
A good and sufficient Trustee's or Warranty Deed conveying fee simple title free and clear of all liens and encumbrances (except liens or encumbrances dischargeable by cash accompanying said deed) except for current real estate taxes; 

b. 
A deposit of money equal to 100% of the most ascertainable taxes for the year, pro­rated to the date that the deed is delivered; 

c. 
A plat or survey containing thereon the legal description of the property to be conveyed and any other matters which may be required by the City Administrator, under as advised by the Zoning Administrator, City Attorney, and the consulting City Engineer. 


38 

6­10 Timing of Payment 
Cash contributions required under this Section shall be paid as follows: 
a. Fees Paid Prior to Final Plat 
Unless otherwise provided by the terms of a developer agreement entered into between the City and the subdivider, all fees required pursuant to this Section, including fees arising from the development of land located in the City's two­mile planning jurisdiction that may be subject of an intergovernmental agreement, shall be due and owing prior to the final plat approval by the City Council. 
However, if the subdivider's lands are the subject of an annexation agreement, payment shall be made at the times and in the manner provided in said annexation agreement. 
b. Procedures for Fee Collection and Administration 
It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer, or other official designated by the City Council to establish regulations and procedures for the collection and administration of the cash contributions required under this Section. 
6­11 Developer Agreements 
a. Developer Agreements May Establish Time and Manner of Compliance 
The City may enter into a Developer Agreement with any subdivider which sets forth the time and manner of compliance with the terms of this Section and implementation of any other provisions of these regulations. 
b. Prior Development Agreements 
If any developer agreement has previously been entered into between the City and a subdivider, and that Agreement remains in full force and effect, the provisions of that agreement shall control, and this Section shall have no force and effect, provided that the subdivider complies with the terms of such Agreement. However, if such subdivider is not complying with the terms of that Agreement then the provisions of this Section shall apply and the City shall utilize the criteria set forth herein to determine the appropriate exaction amount, less credits, if any. 
Further, if the development contemplated by a subdivider has either increased in number of units or has otherwise increased the demand for park and recreation facilities, then the developer Agreement previously entered into between the subdivider and the City shall be amended and the subdivider shall provide additional land, or a pro­rata fee, based on the provisions of this Section, less credits, if any. 
6­12 Easements 
a. 
Utility Easements 

1. Urban Subdivisions: Alley right­of­way and easements for utilities shall be provided for in the subdivision dedication allowing for the construction, maintenance, repair, and replacement of allies and utilities. Alley rights­of­way shall be at least 20 feet in width and easements shall be 15 feet in width, both centered on the rear lot lines, and shall be provided along: 
(a) 
All rear property lines. 



(b) 
Side property lines where necessary to provide a continuous easement. 


2. 
Easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots. Easements of lesser width may be approved if accepted by utility providers. Easements shall connect with easements on adjoining properties. 

3. 
Easements shall be approved in writing by any appropriate public or private utility provider intending to use such easement for their facilities. Such approval shall be submitted prior to final plat approval. 

4. 
Rural Subdivisions: Easements for utilities shall be placed within street rights­of­way, without requirements for additional utility easements. 



b. 
Drainage Easements 


Where a subdivision is crossed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, a storm water easement or drainage right­of­way shall be provided. It shall correspond generally with the extent of such watercourse, together with any additional construction or expansion necessary to allow it to conduct storm water adequately. Easements shall extend not less than 20 feet on each side from the centerline of the waterway. The total width of any easement shall be sufficient to cover the 100­year flood plain calculated for a fully developed upstream drainage basin. Parallel streets or parkways may be utilized to preserve such drainageways. 
c. 
Setback Requirements for Structures Adjacent to Creeks and Drainageways 

1. 
In addition to other applicable provisions of city ordinances, no persons shall be granted a permit for the construction of any structure, exclusive of fences, bank stabilization structures, poles signs, and non­related parking areas adjacent to any creek or stream unless such structure is located so that no portion whereof is any closer to the stream than will allow a maximum 3:1 slope between the water's edge (during normal flow conditions) of the stream and the closest point of the structure at­grade. 

2. 
An exemption from the provisions of Sub­section (1) above may be granted if all of the following conditions are met and required certification is filed with the City of Chadron: 

(a) 
Certification by a registered professional or engineer or architect that adequate bank stabilization structures or slope protection will be installed in the construction of said structure, having an estimated useful life equal to that of the structure, which will provide adequate lateral support so that no portion of the structure adjacent to the stream will be endangered by erosion or lack of lateral support. 

(b) 
Certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of "as­built" construction plans for the structure, as well as “as­built” plans of depicting any bank stabilization or slope protection measures or structures. 

(c) 
In the event that the structure is adjacent to any stream that has been channelized or otherwise improved by any agency of government, then such certification providing this exemption must take the form of a certification as to the adequacy and protection of the improvements installed by such governmental unit. 





d. 
Other Easements 


The subdivision shall provide easements for other public utilities that cross through it, in a form acceptable to the City or appropriate public agency. 
6­13 Dedications 
Before final plat approval is granted to the subdivision, dedications to public use of all streets, alleys, other public right­of­ways, or other parks and public lands shall be completed as required by these regulations. 
7­1 
7­2 
7­3 
7­4 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

ARTICLE SEVEN 
IMPROVEMENT FINANCING AND GUARANTEES 
Purpose 
The purpose of this Article is to ensure the equitable financing and proper installation and maintenance of required streets, utilities, and other improvements. The guarantee shall be structured to provide adequate assurances to the City while not adding unnecessary costs to the developer. 
Application 
This article applies to subdivisions which require the installation of streets, utilities, or other public improvements by the City or developer. 
Responsibility of Developer 
The developer shall be responsible for the installation and/or construction of all improvements required by these regulations and shall warrant the design, materials, workmanship, construction, and performance of such improvements for two years after the date of completion. 
Subdivision Agreement 
a. Condition for Approval of Plat 
As a condition for final approval, each subdivision plat must include a subdivision agreement entered into between the City of Chadron, the subdivider, and, if applicable, a Sanitary and Improvement District (the District). Additionally, no contract for the construction of public improvements involving a subdivision within the extraterritorial jurisdiction but outside the corporate limits of Chadron shall be awarded without the approval of such an agreement. 
b. Components of the Agreement 
The agreement shall include provisions for the financing and distribution of responsibilities among the City, the developer, and the District for land acquisition, design, and installation of public improvements. The agreement shall also state specifically how public services will be provided in the subdivision prior to annexation by the City. It shall further include a statement reflecting an understanding that the District is a temporary mechanism to finance public improvements and that it is the eventual intent of the District to be annexed by the City following satisfactory retirement of its general obligation debt. 
c. Rules for Distributing Improvement Costs 
Generally, the following rules shall be followed in distributing costs for public improvements: 
1. Public Costs 

Allowable public costs will be those items that have demonstrable benefit to the general public. These items may include: 
(a) 
Pavement width in excess of 32 feet for streets designated as collector or arterial streets in the Chadron Comprehensive Development Plan or any subsequent amendment thereof. On collector and arterial streets requiring a higher standard of paving than normal, the additional cost shall be borne by the City or other public agency. 

(b) 
The incremental cost of water mains over 8 inches. 

(c) 
Oversized storm sewers or drainage structures required to serve other areas in the watershed. Such expenses may also be assessed on an area basis to properties served by the improvement. 

(d) 
Sanitary outfall sewers or water lines outside of the limits of a subdivision that serve areas larger than that of the subdivision, provided that such extension is consistent with the sequencing of development specified in the Comprehensive Development Plan. 

(e) 
The additional costs of sanitary sewers over 8 inches in diameter, when such sewers are required by the City. 

(f) 
Park and recreation facilities consistent with the Comprehensive Development Plan. 

(g) 
Those costs required to be paid by the City for extension of water and sewer lines, pursuant to the Chadron Municipal Code. 


42 

2. Private Costs 

Allowable special assessment costs will be those items that have direct benefit primarily to adjacent properties. These items may include: 
(a) 
The entire cost of grading street rights­of­way. 

(b) 
All sanitary sewer lines serving the subdivision up to 8 inches and water lines serving the subdivision up to 8 inches. 

(c) 
All paving and street construction, including curbs and gutters, up to a cartway width of 32 feet. 

(d) 
A stormwater management system adequate to provide for the collection, retention, and removal of surface runoff, extending to the boundaries of the subdivision 

(e) 
Sidewalks as required by these regulations. Construction of sidewalks may be delayed until after completion of site grading and construction, but must be completed prior to occupancy of the structure. 

(f) 
The contract charge for underground electrical and gas service. 

(g) 
An iron rod and lot corner cap not less than one­half inch in diameter and 24 inches in length as follows: 


1) Set at the intersection of all lines forming angles in the boundary of the subdivision and at all street intersections. 
2) At lot corners and changes in direction of block and lot boundaries. 
(h) Those costs required to be paid by the developer for extension of water and sewer lines, pursuant to the Chadron Municipal Code. 
3. The developer in lieu of installing and constructing said improvements at the subdivider’s expense, may, along with 51% of the owners of property to be affected by such improvements, petition the Council to cause the construction of such improvements. This petition shall waive any required resolution of necessity, any applicable limitations of the amount which could be assessed against subdivision property owners including intersection costs, and other costs normally paid by the City in special assessment projects, pursuant to State Statute. 
7­5 Subdivisions Contiguous with City 
Unless otherwise provided as a specific part of the subdivision approval by the city, all subdivisions now or hereafter laid out adjoining or contiguous to the corporate limits of the city shall be included within such corporate limits and become a part of the City of Chadron. The residents of the subdivision shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges and subject to all laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City of Chadron. 
7­6 Performance Guarantees 
As a condition of the final approval of the plat and prior to its recording with the Dawes County Register of Deeds, the City Council shall require and accept the following: 
1. 
The furnishing of a performance bond, letter of credit, cash escrow, or other guarantee in a form acceptable to the City, in an amount not to exceed the estimated cost of the improvement installation. 

2. 
A specification of the time allowed for the installation of improvements. This period may be extended by the City Council. 

3. 
The performance guarantee amount and requirement, along with the permitted time for installation, shall be included within the Subdivision Agreement negotiated between the City and the Developer and approved with the Final Plat. 


7­5 Notification of Completion and Acceptance by City 
a. Notification 
Upon substantial completion of all required improvements, the developer shall notify the City Engineer in writing, as well as submitting a certification from a registered Professional Engineer, attesting to the adequacy of the installation. 
b. Inspection and Acceptance 
1. 
The City Engineer shall inspect all installations, and shall approve, partially approve, or disapprove the installation. Upon completion of improvements, the developer shall file a statement with the City Council and Zoning Administrator certifying that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily or listing the defects in the improvements. 

2. 
If the installation is approved, the City Engineer shall notify the Developer of acceptance in writing. Such acceptance shall release the developer from liability pursuant to the performance guarantee for the installation. The City has the right to retain up to 10% of the value of the performance guarantee for a period of up to one year from the date of acceptance to remedy any deficiencies which appear during that period. 

3. 
If improvements are not accepted or not completed within the specified time, the performance guarantee shall be forfeited and used by the City to complete satisfactory installation of improvements. 

4. 
No residential occupancy permits shall be issued for a subdivision unless the installation of improvements has been inspected and approved in full by the City Engineer. 




