
			
Preface
The Municipal Code of the City of Crete, Nebraska was originally codified in 1927. That volume contained Ordinance Nos. 1 to 55, which, at that time, were all of the ordinances of the City of Crete of a general and permanent nature. The Municipal Code has since been revised in-full four times: by Ordinance No. 196 in 1942; by Ordinance No. 447 in 1963; by Ordinance No. 953 in 1984; and, by Ordinance No. 1400 in 1998. Over the past twenty-some years, many new local laws have been enacted that have amended or created new code sections, and often these provisions have been wedged into the Code wherever there had been space. This has resulted in numerous direct conflicts, inconsistencies, and illogical groupings of topics and subject matter. In light of these issues and changes in technology, the City of Crete, with the assistance of Municipal Code Corporation, has transitioned to an online codification system. This Municipal Code shall be cited as the Crete Municipal Code or “CMC” as an acronym.

All sections of the Code are organized into chapters and articles by subject matter using a hyphenated and decimal numbering system that identifies the chapter, article, and section (example: 1-101.01). This set of numbers is designed to aid in searching through or referencing the Municipal Code and to assist in subsequent codification as new ordinances are added to the Municipal Code.

The total series of numbers (1-101.01) is the Section.
The first number in the sequence (1-101.01) designates the Chapter level.
The second number in the sequence (1-101.01) designates the Article level.
To outline, give structure, and ease references to specific provisions of a section, a numeric list order or pattern of ascending alphanumeric characters may be used. Any letters or numbers beyond the section level (1-101.01(1)) designate a Subsection or lower level.
The legislative history beneath a section’s content (Source:) identifies the specific laws enacted by the City Council that created or amended the code section. References to Nebraska Revised Statutes (State Law Reference:) indicate the enabling act or laws that grant the City Council its legislative power over the subject matter.

Vacant chapters, articles, or sections may be marked [Repealed] or [Reserved] to reflect legislative changes or ease code expansion.

The Municipal Code will be supplemented from time­ to ­time with amendments and additions. This online codification may not reflect all recent legislative changes or be the most current version of the laws enacted by the City Council. In the event of discrepancies between the online codification and the official hard copy or a written ordinance, the official hard copy or written ordinance governs.

THE MUNICIPAL CODE MAY NOT REFLECT RULES OR OTHER REGULATIONS PROMULGATED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE CODE, INCLUDING POLICIES, STANDARDS, AND TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS.

Chapter 1 Administrative
Article 1 General Administrative Provisions
Article 2 Elected Officials
Article 3 Appointed Officials
Article 4 Bonds And Oath
Article 5 Corporate Seal
Article 6 Meetings
Article 7 Ordinances
Article 8 Elections
Article 9 Fiscal Management
Article 10 Compensation
Article 11 Police Pension Plan
Article 12 Initiative And Referendum
Article 13 Pension Plan
Article 14 Penal Provision

Article 1 General Administrative Provisions
1-101 General Provisions; Corporate Existence
1-102 General Provisions; Service Of Process
1-103 General Provisions; Powers
1-104 General Provisions; Codification Of Ordinances
1-105 General Provisions; Emergency Succession Act

1-101 General Provisions; Corporate Existence
The City of Crete, Nebraska is hereby found and declared to be a city of more than five thousand (5,000) persons. The municipality shall be governed by the laws of Nebraska regulating cities of the first class.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-101



1-102 General Provisions; Service Of Process
All process affecting the Municipality may be served by personal, residence, or certified mail service upon the Chief Executive Official or the Clerk.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-115; 25-510.02



1-103 General Provisions; Powers
The Municipality is a body corporate and politic. It shall have the power to sue and be sued; to purchase, lease, lease with option to buy or acquire by gift or devise, and to hold real and personal property within or without the corporate limits of the Municipality, and real estate sold for taxes for the use of the Municipality in such manner and upon such terms and conditions as may be deemed in the best interests of the Municipality; and to exercise such other and further powers as may be conferred by law.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-201



1-104 General Provisions; Codification Of Ordinances
The Municipality shall have the power to revise the ordinances of the Municipality from time to time and publish the same in book form. The revision shall be evidenced by a general codification ordinance which shall embrace all ordinances preserved as changed or added to and perfected by revision and shall embrace all the ordinances of every nature preserved, and be a repeal of all ordinances in conflict with such revision. All ordinances in force at the time of the codification shall continue in force for the purpose of all rights acquired, fines, penalties, forfeitures, and liabilities incurred.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-247




1-105 General Provisions; Emergency Succession Act
In accordance with the terms and conditions of the Nebraska General Emergency Succession Act, the Governing Body hereby declares that it is necessary and advisable to invoke the provisions of the said Act in the Municipality. The provisions of the Act are binding on the office of the Municipal government, whether now in office or hereafter elected or appointed.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 84-1101 to 84-1116



Article 2 Elected Officials
1-201 Elected Officials; Qualifications And Prohibitions
1-202 Elected Officials; Enumerated
1-203 Elected Officials; Mayor
1-204 Elected Officials; City Council; President; Acting President
1-205 Elected Officials; City Council; Selection And Duties
1-206 Elected Officials; City Council; Organization
1-207 Elected Officials; Vacancy
1-207.01 Vacancy Due To Unexcused Absences
1-208 Elected Officials; Restrictions On Other Employment Or Elective Office

1-201 Elected Officials; Qualifications And Prohibitions
Elected officials shall be residents and qualified electors of the City. Except as an officer of a Public Power District, Public Power and Irrigation District, or Public Utility Company, Elected Officials shall hold no other elective office, any County office, nor any other office or employment of the Municipality. The acceptance of any County office by any elected Municipal official shall be a vacation of the Municipal office so held prior to such acceptance. Further, except as provided in Section 1-1004, such elected officials shall not be interested in the profits or emoluments of any contract, job, work or service for the City.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-305; 16-311; 70-624.04



1-202 Elected Officials; Enumerated
The electors of the Municipality shall elect a Mayor at large and one City Councilmember from each ward in each Municipal election year. Councilmembers shall be electors of the Municipality and residents of the ward from which they were elected. Terms of all elected officials shall commence on the first regular meeting in December of each election year.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-302.01



1-203 Elected Officials; Mayor
(1) The Mayor shall be elected to serve a four (4) year term of office. The Mayor shall preside at all the meetings of the City Council and shall have the right to vote when his vote shall be decisive and the City Council is equally divided on any pending matter, legislation, or transaction, and the Mayor shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to be a member of the Council. He shall have the superintending control of all the officers and affairs of the Municipality and shall take care that the State and Municipal law are complied with. He may administer oaths, and shall sign the commissions and appointments of all the officers appointed in the Municipality.

(2) The Mayor shall have the power to approve or veto any ordinance passed by the City Council, and to approve or veto any order, bylaw, resolution, award of or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim; provided, that any ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, award, or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim vetoed by the Mayor may be passed over his veto by a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to the City Council. If the Mayor neglects or refuses to sign any ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, award, or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim, and returns the same with his objection in writing at the next regular meeting of the Council, the same shall become law without his signature. The Mayor may veto any item or items of any appropriation bill and approve the remainder thereof. The item or items so vetoed may be passed by the Council over his veto as in other cases.

(3) Provided further, as to any measure or item which is subject to an imposed or required time limitation for approval or disapproval by the Council, the Mayor shall exercise his or her veto at the meeting at which such measure or item is passed and approved. As to any other measure or item passed and approved by the Council, if the Mayor does not exercise his veto at the meeting at which the measure or item is passed and approved, then such veto shall be exercised within ten (10) days immediately following its passage and approval by the City Council.

(4) After the Mayor has exercised his veto, the Council may pass such measure or item so vetoed over the Mayor's veto, if the veto is exercised during the Council Meeting at which it was passed and approved by the Council, at the same meeting or at a regular or special meeting of the Council within thirty (30) days after such veto was exercised.

(5) The veto of the Mayor and the reasons stated therefore when exercised after the meeting during which the measure or item was passed and approved by the Council shall be filed with the City Clerk by the Mayor and the same shall be made a part of the minutes and records of the City Council at its next regular or special meeting. If the Council passes the measure or item over the Mayor's veto by vote of two-thirds majority of all members elected to the Council, then such measure shall become law without his signature as aforesaid. If the measure or item is not passed over the Mayor's veto by vote of two-thirds majority of all the members elected to the City Council, then such veto shall stand and such measure or item as vetoed shall be of no force and effect.

(6) The Mayor shall communicate to the Council such information and recommend such measures as in his opinion may tend to improve the Municipality, and may have such jurisdiction as may be vested in him by ordinance over all places within two miles of the corporate limits of the Municipality for the enforcement of health or quarantine laws and the regulation thereof.

(7) The Mayor shall have the power after the conviction of any person to remit fines and forfeitures, and to grant reprieves and pardons for all offenses arising under the laws of the Municipality.

(8) In the event that there is a vacancy in the office of Mayor, or in the event the Mayor is absent or unable to fulfill the duties and obligations of his office, the President of the Council shall exercise the powers and duties of the office until the vacancy shall be filled, such disability is removed, or in the case of temporary absence, until the Mayor returns.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-312 to 16-316; 16-402; 16-404



1-204 Elected Officials; City Council; President; Acting President
The City Council shall elect one of its own body at the first meeting in December of each year who shall be styled the President of the Council and who shall preside at all meetings of the City Council in the absence of the Mayor. In the absence of the Mayor and the President of the Council, the City Council shall elect one of its own body to occupy his place temporarily, who shall be styled Acting President of the Council. Both the President of the Council and the Acting President of the Council, when occupying the position of the Mayor, shall have the same privileges as the other members of the City Council, and all acts of the President of the Council or Acting President of the Council while so acting shall be as binding upon the City Council and upon the Municipality as if done by the elected Mayor.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-402



1-205 Elected Officials; City Council; Selection And Duties
The members of the City Council shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term. One Councilmember from each ward shall be elected at each election so that terms are staggered. The City Council shall be the legislative division of the Municipal Government and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be authorized by law.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-534



1-206 Elected Officials; City Council; Organization
(1) Councilmembers of this Municipality shall take office and commence their duties on the first regular meeting date in December following their election. The newly elected Councilmembers who have qualified as prescribed by law together with the members of the City Council holding over shall assemble in a regular meeting at the hour and place hereinafter prescribed and perfect the reorganization of the City Council as herein provided, and all appointive offices in which the terms of incumbents are expired shall be filled by appointment. After the said meeting has been called to order, the Municipal Clerk shall report to the City Council the names of all City Councilmembers-elect who have qualified for their respective offices, and this report shall be spread upon the minutes of the meeting preceding the roll call.

(2) Each ward of the Municipality shall be represented by two Councilmembers. No person shall be eligible who is not at the time of his election an actual resident of the ward for which he or she is qualified, and should any City Councilmember move from the ward from which he or she was elected, his or her office shall thereby become vacant.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-302.01; 32-534; 32-560



1-207 Elected Officials; Vacancy
(1) Every elective office shall be vacant upon the happening of any of the events specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-560.

(2) Any vacancy in the office of Mayor shall be filled as otherwise provided in this Code. Any vacancy on the City Council resulting from causes other than expiration of the term shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council to hold office for the remainder of the term.

(3) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2), (5), or (6) of this section, vacancies in city elected offices shall be filled by the Mayor and City Council for the balance of the unexpired term. Notice of a vacancy, except a vacancy resulting from the death of the incumbent, shall be in writing and presented to the Council at a regular or special meeting and shall appear as a part of the minutes of such meeting. The Council shall at once give public notice of the vacancy by causing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city or by posting in three  public places in the City the office vacated and the length of the unexpired term.

(4) The Mayor shall, within four (4) weeks after the meeting at which such notice of vacancy has been presented or upon the death of the incumbent, call a special meeting of the Council or place the issue of filling such vacancy on the agenda at the next regular meeting at which time the Mayor shall submit the name of a qualified registered voter to fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term. The Council shall vote upon such nominee, and if a majority votes in favor of such nominee, the vacancy shall be declared filled. If the nominee fails to receive a majority of the votes, the nomination shall be rejected, and the Mayor shall, at the next regular or special meeting, submit the name of another qualified registered voter to fill the vacancy. If the subsequent nominee fails to receive a majority of the votes, the Mayor shall continue at such meeting to submit the names of qualified registered voters in nomination and the Council shall continue to vote upon such nominations until the vacancy is filled. The Mayor shall cast his or her vote for or against the nominee in case of a tie vote of the Council. All Council members present shall cast a ballot for or against the nominee. Any member of the Council who has been appointed to fill a vacancy on the Council shall have the same rights, including voting, as if such person were elected.

(5) The Mayor and Council may, in lieu of filling a vacancy in a City elected office as provided above, call a special city election to fill such vacancy.

(6) If vacancies exist in the offices of a majority of the members of the City Council, the Secretary of State shall conduct a special city election to fill such vacancies.

(7) No official who is removed at a recall election or resigns after the initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to fill the vacancy resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any other member of the same governing body during the remainder of his or her term of office.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998); 1412 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-560 to 32-572; 32-1308



1-207.01 Vacancy Due To Unexcused Absences
(1) In addition to the events listed in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-560 and any other reasons for a vacancy provided by law, after notice and a hearing, a vacancy on the City Council shall exist if a member is absent from more than five consecutive regular meetings of the council unless the absences are excused by a majority vote of the remaining members.

(2) The City Council shall take a vote on whether to excuse a member's absence from a meeting upon either a written request from the member submitted to the City Clerk or a motion of any other council member.

(3) If a councilmember has been absent from six consecutive regular meetings and none of the absences have been excused by a majority vote of the remaining members, the City Clerk shall include this as an item on the agenda for the next regular meeting. At that meeting, the council shall set a date for a hearing and direct the City Clerk to give the member notice of the hearing by personal service or first-class mail to the member's last-known address.

(4) At the hearing, the council member shall have the right to present information on why one or more of the absences should be excused. If the council does not excuse one or more of the member's absences by a majority vote at the conclusion of the hearing, there shall be a vacancy on the council.


Source: Ord. 1561 (2003)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-3101



1-208 Elected Officials; Restrictions On Other Employment Or Elective Office
(1) The Mayor and members of the Council shall hold no other elective or appointive office or employment with the City.

(2) For purposes of this section, (a) elective office means any office which has candidates nominated or elected at the time of a statewide primary election, any office which has candidates nominated at the time of a statewide primary election and elected at the time of a statewide general election, any office which has candidates elected at the time of a statewide general election, any office which has candidates nominated or elected at a city or village election, and any office created by an act of the Legislature which has candidates elected at an election and includes an office which is filled at an election held in conjunction with the annual meeting of a public body created by an act of the Legislature and (b) high elective office means a member of the Legislature, an elective office described in Article IV, Section 1 or 20, or Article VII, Section 3 or 10, of the Constitution of Nebraska, or a county, city, or school district elective office.

(3) No candidate for member of the Legislature or an elective office described in Article IV, Section 1 or 20, or Article VII, Section 3 or 10, of the Constitution of Nebraska shall be eligible to file as a candidate, to petition on the ballot as a candidate, to accept a nomination by a political party or by party convention, caucus, or committee to fill a vacancy, or to be a declared write-in candidate for more than one elective office to be filled at the same election except for the position of delegate to a county, state, or national political party convention. No candidate for any other high elective office shall be eligible to file as a candidate, to petition on the ballot as a candidate, to accept a nomination by a political party or by party convention, caucus, or committee to fill a vacancy, or to be declared a write-in candidate for more than one high elective office to be filled at the same election.

(4) Except as provided in subsection (5) or (7), no person shall be precluded from being elected or appointed to or holding an elective office for the reason that he or she has been elected or appointed to or holds another elective office.

(5) No person serving as a member of the Legislature or in an elective office described in Article IV, Section 1 or 20, or Article VII, Section 3 or 10, of the Constitution of Nebraska shall simultaneously serve in any other elective office, except that such a person may simultaneously serve in another elective office which is filled at an election held in conjunction with the annual meeting of a public body.

(6) Whenever an incumbent serving as a member of the Legislature or in an elective office described in Article IV, Section 1 or 20, or Article VII, Section 3 or 10, of the Constitution of Nebraska assumes another elective office, except an elective office filled at an election held in conjunction with the annual meeting of a public body. The office first held by the incumbent shall be deemed vacant.

(7) No person serving in a high elective office shall simultaneously serve in any other high elective office.

(8) Notwithstanding subsections (5) through (7), any person holding more than one high elective office upon September 13, 1997, shall be entitled to serve the remainder of all terms for which he or she was elected or appointed.


Source: Ord. 1409 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-305; 32-109; 32-603; 32-604



Article 3 Appointed Officials
1-301 Appointed Officials; Enumerated
1-302 Appointed Officials; Vacancy
1-303 Appointed Officials; Term Of Office
1-304 Appointed Officials; Creation Of Offices
1-305 Appointed Officials; Duties Prescribed
1-306 Appointed Officials; Reports
1-307 Appointed Officials; City Administrator
1-308 Appointed Officials; City Attorney
1-309 Appointed Officials; City Treasurer
1-310 Appointed Officials; Treasurer's Books And Accounts
1-311 Appointed Officials; Treasurer's Books
1-312 Appointed Officials; Treasurer's Annual Report
1-313 Appointed Officials; Treasurer's Warrants
1-314 Appointed Officials; Municipal Clerk, Duties
1-315 Appointed Officials; Merger Of Offices
1-316 Appointed Officials; Clerk-Treasurer Position Created
1-317 Appointed Officials; Deputy Clerk, Duties, Compensation
1-318 Appointed Officials; City Engineer
1-319 Appointed Officials; Special Engineer
1-320 Appointed Officials; City Physician
1-321 Appointed Officials; Public Works Director
1-321.01 Management Of Recreation Programs
1-322 Appointed Officials; Street Commissioner
1-322.01 Street State Incentive Payment; Compensation
1-323 Appointed Officials; Parks And Recreation Director
1-324 Appointed Officials; Chief Of Police
1-325 Appointed Officials; Community Service Officer
1-326 Appointed Officials; Fire Chief; Duties
1-327 Appointed Officials; Economic Development Program Director
1-328 Appointed Officials; Library Director

1-301 Appointed Officials; Enumerated
The Mayor may, by and with the advice and consent of a majority of the City Council, have such departments and appoint such officials as may be established by ordinance which shall include an Administrator, Finance Director, Clerk, Deputy Clerk, Library Director, Public Works Director, Police Chief, Recreation Director, Engineer, Attorney, Emergency Management Liaison Officer, and such other officials as may otherwise be required by law. All appointed officials may be removed at any time by the Mayor with the approval of the majority of the Council. All confirmations of appointments to such offices by the Council shall be made viva voce, and the concurrence of a majority shall be required. The vote by "yeas" and "nays" shall be recorded.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1480 (2000); Ord. 1994 (2017); Ord. 2075 (2019); Ord. 2077 (2019)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-308



1-302 Appointed Officials; Vacancy
Whenever any vacancy shall occur in an appointive office for any reason, the Mayor with the concurrence of the majority of the Council shall fill the office in the manner prescribed for the appointment of new appointed officials for the unexpired term.



1-303 Appointed Officials; Term Of Office
All officers appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council shall hold the office to which they may be appointed until the end of the Mayor's term of office and until their successors are appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed, or the ordinance creating the office shall be repealed; provided, that the term of office of the Chief of the Fire Department shall be for one year only.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-309



1-304 Appointed Officials; Creation Of Offices
The Governing Body may create any office that it may deem necessary for the good government and interest of the Municipality.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-308



1-305 Appointed Officials; Duties Prescribed
The Governing Body may regulate and prescribe by ordinance the powers, duties, and compensation of the officers of the Municipality not specifically delineated by state law.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-218



1-306 Appointed Officials; Reports
The Governing Body may require from any office of the Municipality at any time a report in detail of the transactions of his or her office or of any matters connected therewith.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-220



1-307 Appointed Officials; City Administrator
(1) The Mayor shall, with the consent of a majority of the members elected to the Council, appoint the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall be responsible for the daily operation and administration of city government through oversight and performance of relevant supervisory, administrative, and financial functions with the oversight of the Mayor. Under direction of the Mayor, the City Administrator shall serve as the Public Relations Officer to all city department heads, employees, appointees, contractors, and consultants.

(2) The City Administrator shall:

(a) Supervise and direct all department functions of the City.

(b) Be responsible for the prudent management of all departments and shall be accountable to the Mayor and City Council at all times.

(c) Provide direct control and supervision over the City Attorney, Public Works Director, City Clerk, Finance Director/City Treasurer, Library Director, Parks and Recreation Director, Economic Development Program Director, Media Specialist, Human Resource Director, Chief of Police, and Fire Chief. All employees of the City Administrator’s departments and subordinate departments shall obey the orders of the City Administrator and may be discharged on recommendation of the City Administrator to the Mayor as provided by city policy and this Code.

(d) Conduct annual performance evaluations and administer timely disciplinary actions.

(e) Oversee schedules, employee hours, all aspects of Human Resources, and manage vacations and time-off, with assistance of the Human Resource Director's Office.

(f) Recommend the appointment and compensation of employees and assistants as are necessary to perform the duties of his office and the various departments of the City. The compensation of appointees shall be approved and confirmed by the Mayor and Council before the City is bound to the acts of the City Administrator.

(g) Supervise and direct any contract employee, contractor, or consultant hired by the Mayor and Council, unless otherwise provided in the contract, city ordinance, or state statute.

(h) Ensure activities are performed according to city policies.

(i) Work with the Mayor on efficiency of all departments.

(j) Work directly with the Mayor and all department heads with budgeting, purchasing practices, and policies.

(k) Be responsible for all matters of general supervision and administration with respect to public utilities now owned, operated, or hereafter acquired by the City, together with the maintenance of the streets and alleys and the preservation and care of all property owned by the City, subject to instruction, direction, approval, or ratification of the Mayor and Council and in conformity with the provisions of this Code and the statutes of the State of Nebraska and the Government of the United States.

(l) Develop strategic plans, capital plans, and economic forecasts for the City to include prioritization of projects and activities, controlling costs, and preparing the City's long- and short-term improvement plans and recommendations, in conjunction with department heads.

(m) Develop and review studies and reports including analysis, research, and other information necessary to perform the duties of City Administrator.

(n) Manage and coordinate community and economic development activities with the Economic Development Program Director, NDED, Economic Development Advisory Board, CAIDC, Chamber of Commerce, and other groups to advance economic development activities for the benefit of the community.

(o) Attend City Council and various meetings and serve as a member of various committees to answer inquires and make recommendations pertaining to the functions of city government.

(p) Submit bimonthly reports to the Mayor and City Council regarding the status and progress of all major activities and operations.

(q) Provide reports, responses, and recommendations as directed by the Mayor and City Council.

(r) Ensure that inquiries from the general public, including economic development issues, citizens' complaints, and other requests for city services or information, are given priority and are responded to personally or referred to the appropriate city official for prompt resolution.

(s) Attend various seminars and conferences to maintain awareness and keep abreast of changes in municipal and public administration functions, responsibilities, and trends.

(t) Perform all other duties as directed or as may be necessary to fulfill the responsibilities of the position. The Mayor and City Council may assign duties from time to time additional to that prescribed herein.

(3) For performing the duties mentioned herein, or for other such duties as the Mayor and Council may from time to time designate, the City Administrator shall receive such compensation, payable out of the several funds to credit of the municipal activities under the City Administrator's jurisdiction, in regular installments as the Mayor and Council shall fix by ordinance. The City Administrator may be removed at any time by the Mayor with the approval of a majority vote of the members elected to the Council.


Source: Ord. 1850 (2013); Ord. 1853 (2013); Ord. 1873 (2013); Ord. 1953 (2015); Ord. 1994 (2017); Ord. 2042 (2018); Ord. 2073 (2019).

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-308



1-308 Appointed Officials; City Attorney
(1) The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Mayor, City Council, and other city officers, departments, and agencies. The City Attorney shall be under the direct supervision of the City Administrator and shall not engage in the private practice of law.

(2) The City Attorney shall: 

(a) commence, prosecute, and defend all suits and actions necessary to be commenced, prosecuted, or defended on behalf of the City or that may be ordered by the City Council;

(b) attend all meetings of the City Council and give them his or her opinion upon any matters submitted to him or her, either orally or in writing as may be required; 

(c) draw all ordinances, resolutions, contracts, and other documents requested by the Mayor and City Council or the City Administrator; and,

(d) correlate, administer, and maintain codified publications of all general and permanent ordinances enacted by the City Council.

(3) The City Attorney, in administering the codified publications, shall not alter the sense, meaning, or effect of any ordinance enacted by the City Council, but may:

(a) renumber or rearrange sections and parts of sections;

(b) change reference numbers to agree with renumbered or rearranged chapters, articles, sections, and parts of sections;

(c) substitute the proper chapter, article, or section numbers for the terms this chapter, this article, the preceding section, this ordinance, and like terms;

(d) strike out figures where they are merely a repetition of written words;

(e) change fonts, formatting, capitalization, and other typographical elements for the purpose of uniformity, legibility, and readability; and,

(f) correct manifest clerical or typographical errors.

(4) The Mayor and City Council shall have the right to pay the City Attorney additional compensation for legal services performed by him or her for the City or to employ additional legal assistance and to pay for such legal assistance out of the funds of the City.


Source: Ord. 2114, § 1 (2020)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-319



1-309 Appointed Officials; City Treasurer
(1) The Treasurer of the City shall be the custodian of and receive all money belonging to the City. He shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation and the debts and credits belonging thereto. The Treasurer shall collect all money receivable by the City on account of public utilities, duly accounting therefor. He shall, at the end of every month and as often as may be requested, render an account to the City Council, under oath, showing the state of the treasury at the date of such account, the amount of money remaining in each fund and the amount paid therefrom, and the balance of money in the treasury. He shall accompany such account with a statement of all receipts and disbursements, together with all warrants retained and paid by him, which warrants, with all vouchers held by him, shall be filed with his account in the Clerk's office. He shall produce and show all funds shown by such report to be on hand or satisfy the Council or its committee that he or she has such funds in his or her custody or under his or her control. If said Treasurer neglects or fails, for the space of ten days from the end of every month, to render his or her account, his office may, by resolution of the Mayor and Council, be declared vacant, and the Mayor shall appoint and the Council confirm some person to fill the vacancy.

(2) The Treasurer shall keep his or her books and accounts in such a manner as the Mayor and Council shall prescribe and shall keep a daily cash-book. All of the books and accounts of the Treasurer shall always be subject to inspection by the Mayor, members of the Council, and such other persons as they may designate. The Treasurer shall perform such other duties as are required of him by the laws of the City and the statutes of Nebraska.

(3) The Treasurer shall keep all money in his or her hands belonging to the City separate and distinct from his or her own money; and, he is hereby expressly prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, the corporation money or warrants in his or her custody and keeping same for his or her own use and benefit or that of any other person whomsoever. Any violation of this subsection shall subject the Treasurer to immediate removal from office by the City Council, and it may declare such office vacant. The Mayor shall appoint a successor, who shall be confirmed by the City Council, to hold office for the remainder of the term.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-318; 16-717; 16-719



1-310 Appointed Officials; Treasurer's Books And Accounts
The Treasurer shall give every person paying money into the treasury and his or her office a receipt therefor, which shall show the source from which such funds are derived, and shall, by distinct lines and columns, show the amount received to the credit of each separate fund, and whether same was paid in cash, in warrants, or otherwise, one of which copies the Treasurer shall deliver to the person making such payment and the other he shall retain in his or her office and file such copy with his or her monthly reports.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-318; 77-2209



1-311 Appointed Officials; Treasurer's Books
(1) The Treasurer shall daily, as moneys are received, foot the several columns of his or her cash book and of his or her register and carry the amounts forward, and at the close of each year, in case the amount of money received by the Treasurer is insufficient to pay the warrants registered, he or she shall close the account for that year in such register and shall carry forward the excess.

(2) Any Treasurer who shall fail regularly to enter upon his cash book the amounts so received and receipted for or who shall fail to keep his or her cash book footed from day to day for the space of three days shall forfeit for each offense the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), to be recovered in a civil action on his or her official bond by any person holding a warrant drawn on such Treasurer, one-half (1/2) to the person bringing such action and one-half (1/2) to the school fund of the County.

(3) The cash book, register, and retained receipts of the Treasurer shall at all times be open to the inspection of any person in whose name any warrants are registered and unpaid.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 77-2210 to 77-2212



1-312 Appointed Officials; Treasurer's Annual Report
(1) It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to prepare and publish annually, within sixty days following the close of the municipal fiscal year, a statement of the receipts and expenditures of funds of the City for the preceding fiscal year. Not more than the legal rate shall be charged and paid for such publication. Such publication shall be made in one legal newspaper of general circulation in the City.

(2) Any Treasurer failing or neglecting to prepare and publish such statement of receipts and expenditures shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be removed from office for such failure or neglect.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-1101; 19-1103; 19-1104



1-313 Appointed Officials; Treasurer's Warrants
(1) The Treasurer shall keep a warrant register, which shall show in columns arranged for that purpose the number, date, and amount of each warrant presented and registered, the particular fund upon which the same is drawn, the date of presentation, the name and address of the person in whose name the same is registered, the date of payment, the amount of interest, and the total amount paid thereon, with the date when notice to the person in whose name such warrant is registered as herein provided.

(2) On presentation of a warrant for payment to the Treasurer when there are insufficient moneys on hand to the credit of the proper fund to pay the same, it shall be the duty of the Treasurer to enter such warrant in his warrant register for payment in the order of its presentation, and he shall endorse on the warrant the words "registered for payment" with the date of registration and shall sign such endorsement, whereupon the warrant shall draw interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum from the date of registration until notice of payment shall be given the registered owner.

(3) The Treasurer shall neither directly or indirectly contract for or purchase any city warrant at any discount whatever upon the sum due on such warrant or order, and if he or she shall so contract for or purchase any such order or warrant, he or she shall not be allowed in settlement the amount of such order or warrant, or any part thereof, and shall also forfeit the whole amount due on such order or warrant.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 45-106; 77-2202; 77-2203



1-314 Appointed Officials; Municipal Clerk, Duties
(1) The Mayor shall with the consent of a majority of the Council appoint the Municipal Clerk. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to attend every meeting of the Council and keep a record of the proceedings thereof. Whenever required by the Mayor or requested by four members of the Council, he or she shall issue to the Chief of Police a notice to be delivered to the members of the Council of any special meeting thereof, and shall notify any and all committees of the Council of the business entrusted to them.

(2) The Clerk shall keep and carefully preserve all papers and books which may come into his possession as Clerk, filing and arranging them in a manner convenient for reference; provided, that after the period of time specified by the State Records Board, the Clerk may transfer such journal of proceedings of the Council to the state archives of the Nebraska State Historical Society for permanent preservation.

(3) The Clerk shall keep the seal of the City and duly attest thereby the Mayor's signature to all ordinances and all deeds and papers required to be attested, when ordered by the Governing Body. The Clerk shall keep all orders for money or warrants for the payment of money, and shall enter the same in numerical order in a book to be kept for that purpose.

(4) The office of the Clerk shall be responsible for keeping a full and correct account with each consumer of City utility services and shall issue proper receipts for all money collected from each consumer, one copy of which shall be retained by this office. The books and papers representing all transactions of this office, shall at all times, be open to the inspection of the Mayor and Council. This office shall make to the Mayor and Council a detailed monthly report as prescribed by the Mayor and Council. This office shall collect all money receivable by the City on account of public utilities, duly accounting therefor, and pay said sums forthwith to the Treasurer.

(5) All office personnel of the Clerk's office shall be under the supervision and control of the City Clerk. All of said employees shall obey the Clerk's orders and may be discharged on recommendation of the Clerk for inefficiency or for the general good of said office.

(6) Within thirty days after any meeting of the Council, the Clerk shall prepare and publish the proceedings of the Council in a legal newspaper, or more than one legal newspaper if directed by the Council. Said publication shall set forth a statement of the proceedings thereof and shall also include the amount of each claim allowed, the purpose of the claim, and the name of the claimant, except that the aggregate amount of all payroll claims may be included as one item.

(7) Between July fifteenth (15th) and August fifteenth (15th) of each year, the names of all employees and their current annual, monthly, or hourly salaries corresponding to such job titles shall be published. Each job title published shall be descriptive and indicative of the duties and functions of the position. The charge for the publication shall not exceed the rates provided for in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 23-122. The publication charge shall be paid and allowed as other claims against the General Fund.

(8) Wherever the Clerk is required to issue licenses, occupation tax receipts, or permits, the City Treasurer shall collect the amount required to be paid by the applicant therefor.

(9) The Clerk shall have such additional duties and receive such salary as the Governing Body may prescribe.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-317; 19-1102



1-315 Appointed Officials; Merger Of Offices
The Governing Body may at its discretion by ordinance combine and merge any elective or appointive office or employment, except Mayor and Councilmember, with any other elective or appointive office or employment so that one or more of such offices or employments may be held by the officer or employee at the same time. The offices or employments so merged and combined shall always be construed to be separate, and the effect of the combination or merger shall be limited to a consolidation of official duties only. The salary or compensation of the officer or employee holding the merged and combined offices or employments, or offices and employments, shall not be in excess of the maximum amount provided by law for the salary or compensation of the office, offices, employment, or employments so merged and combined.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-305; 16-318.01



1-316 Appointed Officials; Clerk-Treasurer Position Created
The appointed offices of Municipal Clerk and Municipal Treasurer are hereby combined and merged in accordance with the authority granted to the Governing Body by section 1-315.



1-317 Appointed Officials; Deputy Clerk, Duties, Compensation
The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, may appoint within the office of the Deputy Clerk, who shall have all the powers and duties of the Clerk except as otherwise shall be provided by ordinance. He or she shall receive such compensation as the Mayor and Council shall from time to time establish by ordinance. He or she shall be removable at any time by the Mayor with the consent of the members of the Council. He or she shall give such bond as may be required by the Mayor and Council. He or she shall be under the immediate supervision of the Clerk.



1-318 Appointed Officials; City Engineer
The Public Works Director shall serve as City Engineer. The City Engineer shall, when requested by the Governing Body, make or cause to be made estimates of the cost of labor and materials, which may be done or furnished by contract with the Municipality, and make or cause to be made all surveys, estimates, and calculations necessary to be made for the establishment of grades, building of culverts, sewers, electric light system, waterworks, power plants, public heating system, bridges, curbing, gutters, the improvement of streets, and the erection and repair of buildings. The City Engineer shall perform such additional duties as the Governing Body may require. It shall be the City Engineer’s duty to make or cause to be made a record of the minutes of any surveys made and of all work done for the Municipality and accurately make or cause to be made such plats, sections, profiles, and maps as may be necessary in the prosecution of any public work, which shall be public records and belong to the Municipality.


Source: Ord. 1736 (2009)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-320; 16-321



1-319 Appointed Officials; Special Engineer
The Governing Body may, whenever they deem it expedient, employ a special engineer to make or assist in making any particular estimate or survey. Any such estimate or survey shall have the same validity and serve in all respects as though the same had been made by the City Engineer.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-322



1-320 Appointed Officials; City Physician
The City Physician shall be a physician who resides permanently in the City. He shall be a member of the Board of Health of the City and shall be its medical adviser. He shall receive no compensation as a member of the Board of Health or any salary as City Physician but shall be allowed compensation for services so assigned to him and rendered to the City at the usual rates prevailing in the City for such services.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-238; 16-308



1-321 Appointed Officials; Public Works Director
(1) The Director of Public Works shall have the general charge, direction, and control over all employees, property, and facilities of the Municipal Electric, Water, and Sewer systems; the enforcement of building, electrical, and plumbing codes, zoning ordinances, and safety and health regulations; and, landfills, solid waste collection sites, and solid waste transfer stations of the Municipality.

(2) The Director of Public Works may also be appointed to perform the duties of Municipal Street Superintendent or Municipal Parks and Recreation Director, to perform the duties of each position as set forth in Crete City Code, and if so appointed, no separate Municipal Public Works Director, Municipal Street Superintendent, or Municipal Parks and Recreation Director shall be appointed. If the Director of Public Works is not appointed to fill either the Municipal Street Superintendent or the Municipal Parks and Recreation Director positions, as set forth herein, a separate Municipal Street Superintendent or Municipal Parks and Recreation Director shall be appointed as provided by Crete City Code.

(a) If appointed to act as Municipal Street Superintendent, the Director of Public Works shall have general charge, direction, and control over all employees, property, and facilities of the streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks, culverts, bridges, storm sewers, and drains.

(b) If appointed to act as Municipal Parks and Recreation Director, the Director of Public Works shall have general charge, direction, and control over all employees, property, and facilities of the Municipal Parks and Recreation Department, and he or she shall, at the request of the Parks and Recreation Board of Commissioners, make a detailed report to the Governing Body on the condition of the parks and swimming pools and shall direct their attention to such improvements, repairs, extensions, and additions.


Source: Ord. 1385 (1997); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1481 (2000); Ord. 1673 (2007); Ord. 1761 (2010)



1-321.01 Management Of Recreation Programs
If the Public Works Director is appointed to perform the duties of Municipal Parks and Recreation Director, a Recreation Program Coordinator, who shall work under the direct control and direction of the Public Works Director, shall be employed as a regular, at-will city employee by the City to coordinate and facilitate City recreation programs.


Source: Ord. 1762 (2010)



1-322 Appointed Officials; Street Commissioner
The Municipal Street Commissioner shall have the general charge, direction, and control of all work on the streets, sidewalks, culverts, and bridges of the Municipality, subject to the Committee on Streets and Grades, and shall perform such other duties as the Council may require. It shall be his responsibility to see that gutters and drains therein function properly and that the same are kept in good repair. He shall make a detailed report to the Governing Body on the condition of the streets, sidewalks, culverts, alleys, and bridges of the Municipality and shall direct their attention to such improvements, repairs, extensions, additions, and additional employees as he may believe are needed to maintain a satisfactory street system in the Municipality along with an estimate of the cost thereof. The Street Commissioner shall have the immediate control and supervision of the Municipal Landfill and of all dumping of garbage, refuse, waste, and rubbish thereon, subject to the direction of the Mayor. He shall have such other duties as the Governing Body may delegate to him.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-324



1-322.01 Street State Incentive Payment; Compensation
The appointed City Street Commissioner, if an employee of the City, shall receive additional compensation equal to the amount of the incentive payment paid to the City by the State of Nebraska for preparation of the annual One and Six Year Street Plans and Standardized System Annual Reporting (SSAR) report. Said payment may, at the direction of the Mayor, be divided between the Street Commissioner and other city employees if they prepare the SSAR report for the City.


Source: Ord. 1884 (2014)


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 39-2512; 39-2513



1-323 Appointed Officials; Parks And Recreation Director
The Parks and Recreation Director shall have the general charge, direction, and control over all employees, property, and facilities of the Municipal Parks and Recreation Department, and he or she shall, at the request of the City Administrator, make a detailed report to the Governing Body on the condition of the parks and swimming pools and shall direct their attention to such improvements, repairs, extensions, and additions. The Parks and Recreation Director shall have such other duties as the Mayor and Governing Body may require.


Source: Ord. 1674 (2007); Ord. 1760 (2010); Ord. 1874 (2013)



1-324 Appointed Officials; Chief Of Police
(1) The Chief of Police shall have the immediate superintendence of the police. The Chief of Police and the police officers shall have the power and it shall be their duty to arrest all offenders against the laws of Nebraska or of the City, by day or by night and in the same manner as a sheriff or constable, and keep them in the City Prison or other place to prevent their escape until a trial or examination may be had before the proper officer, and they shall have the same power as a sheriff and constable in relation to all criminal matters arising out of a violation of municipal law and all process issued by the County Court in connection with a violation of municipal law.

(2) The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such further number of regular police officers as may be duly ordered by resolution of the Council. The Chief of Police shall, subject to the direction of the City Administrator and Mayor, have control and management of all matters relating to the Police Department and its officers and members and shall have the custody and control of all property and books belonging to the Department. The Chief of Police shall have custody of all municipal property used by the city police, shall execute the orders of the Mayor, shall be a member of the Board of Health and the Secretary and quarantine officer thereof, shall have charge of traffic control on the city streets, shall make and file or cause to be made and filed complaints for violations of the ordinances of the City, and shall perform such other duties as are assigned to or required of him by the Mayor and Council or otherwise provided by law.

(3) The Chief may be removed from office by the Mayor, subject to the provisions of the Civil Service Commission of the City, or by the Civil Service Commission.


Source: Ord. 1954 (2015)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-225; 16-238; 16-323; 29-401



1-325 Appointed Officials; Community Service Officer
The Chief of Police, with the consent of the Mayor, may assign any number of nonsworn employees as may be deemed appropriate and necessary to the position of Community Service Officer. Said Community Service Officer’s duties will be limited to the enforcement of only those ordinances pertaining to the regulation of parking, animal regulation, nuisances, and dangerous property and is authorized to issue tickets and citations for violation of only those specific ordinances. Community Service Officers shall also have authority to perform the duties of a traffic officer only as the same pertains to the directions and control of traffic. Community Service Officers shall be under the direction of the Chief of Police and shall not be subject to the provisions of the Civil Service Code.


Source: Ord. 1537 (2002)



1-326 Appointed Officials; Fire Chief; Duties
(1) The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the Council. Said official shall hold office for a period of one year or until removed by the Mayor. The Fire Chief shall be appointed the first Tuesday in December of every even year.

(2) The Fire Chief shall, on the third Tuesday of December of each year, furnish or cause the secretary to furnish the Municipal Clerk a copy of the roster of the members of the Fire Department in good standing, and from month to month thereafter, the Fire Chief shall report any proposed additions or changes in the roster for proper action so that all members of the Fire Department shall be at all times covered by insurance or by such other lawful protection and benefits as may be provided under state or municipal law.

(3) The Chief of the Fire Department shall have under his control the property, implements, and apparatuses used by the Fire Department subject to the general and specific directives of the Governing Body through the City Administrator. The Fire Chief shall use all proper means for the extinguishment of fires, the protection of property, the preservation of order, the providing of rescue services, the providing of ambulance transfer services, and the enforcement of all laws relating to fires and fire protection which governs the Municipality. Upon the written consent and directive of the City Administrator, the Fire Chief shall cause the repair, improvement, or maintenance of the property of the Fire Department and shall personally supervise and approve of the same. No obligation, except in an emergency or when the expenditure is of a minor nature, shall be incurred on behalf of the Fire Department by the Fire Chief unless the obligation was previously authorized in writing by the City Administrator.


Source: Ord. 1957 (2015)



1-327 Appointed Officials; Economic Development Program Director
(1) An Economic Development Program Director may be employed by the City, as a regular, at-will city employee, to coordinate and facilitate the City's Economic Development Plan. The Director shall perform such duties as set and determined from time to time by the Mayor, City Council, and City Administrator of the City of Crete. Any person employed shall first be nominated by the Mayor and approved by the Council.

(2) For performing such duties as set forth herein or as may from time to time be designated, he or she shall receive such compensation, payable out of the funds to credit of the municipal activities under the Director's jurisdiction, in regular installments as the Mayor and Council shall fix by ordinance. The Director may be removed at any time by the Mayor with the approval of a majority vote of the members of the Council.


Source: Ord. 1787 (2011); Ord. 1851 (2013); Ord. 1854 (2013); Ord. 1955 (2015); Ord. 1978 (2016)



1-328 Appointed Officials; Library Director
(1) The Library Director shall be under the administrative supervision and direction of the City Administrator. The Library Director shall manage the Library Department in accordance with the City’s financial management processes and policies. The Library Director shall develop, plan, and administer the City Library services for the City of Crete and shall have general charge, direction, and control over all employees, property, and facilities of the City Library, and he or she shall, at the request of the City Administrator, make a detailed report to the Governing Body on the condition of the City Library.

(2) The Library Director shall attend all of the Library Board of Advisor’s meetings, but he or she shall not vote or be counted for quorum purposes. The Library Director shall advise and make recommendations to the Board on Library matters. The Library Director shall act as liaison between the Board and the City. When a vacancy for the Library Director occurs, the Library Board shall aid the City Administrator in the screening and selection of candidates for the position of Library Director. The City Administrator shall recommend the selected candidate to the Mayor for submission to the City Council for approval. Such candidate must be approved by a majority of the members of City Council. If the City Council does not approve such candidate, the Library Board and City Administrator shall have forty-five days in which to nominate a new candidate to fill the vacancy. In the event the Library Board does not nominate a new candidate within the forty-five day period who is approved by a majority of the members of City Council, the Mayor and City Council shall have the authority to fill the vacancy. The Library Director may be removed at any time by the City Administrator with the approval of the Mayor and a majority of the members of the City Council.


Source: Ord. 1994 (2017)



Article 4 Bonds And Oath
1-401 Bonds; Council Members
1-402 Bonds; Form
1-403 Bonds; By Whom Given, Amount
1-404 Oath; Municipal Office

1-401 Bonds; Council Members
(1) Each Councilmember before entering upon the duties of his office shall be required to give a bond to the Municipality with two or more good and sufficient sureties or some responsible surety company. If the bond is given by two sureties, they shall each justify that he is worth at least two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) over and above all debts and exemptions. Such bond amounts shall be on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk and shall be conditioned on the faithful discharge of the duties of the Councilmember. The bond will be further conditioned that if the Councilmember shall vote for any expenditure or appropriation of money or create any liability in excess of the amount allowed by law, the Councilmember and the sureties signing the bond shall be liable thereon. The bond shall be filed with the Clerk and approved by the Mayor. Upon approval, the City may pay the premium for such bond, Any liability sought to be incurred, or debt created in excess of the amount limited or authorized by law, shall be taken and held by any court of the State as the joint and several liability of the Councilmember voting for and the Mayor approving the same. Any such liability or debt shall not be an obligation upon the Municipality. Voting for or approving of such liability or debt shall be conclusive evidence of malfeasance in office. Any Councilmember voting for such an appropriation or any Mayor approving of the same, shall be removed from office.

(2) In the event that any Councilmember has not filed proper bond, as required herein, prior to entering upon the duties of his office, said office shall be declared vacant and shall be filled by appointment as provided in Section 1-207.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-304



1-402 Bonds; Form
(1)(a) All official bonds of officers of the city shall be in form joint and several and made payable to the city in such penalty as the Governing Body may fix.

(1)(b) In place of the individual bonds required to be furnished by municipal officers, a schedule, position, blanket bond or undertaking, or evidence of equivalent insurance may be given by municipal officers, or a single corporation surety fidelity, schedule, position, or blanket bond or undertaking, or evidence of insurance coverage covering all the officers, including officers required by law to furnish an individual bond or undertaking, may be furnished. The Municipality may pay the premium for the bond or insurance coverage. The bond or insurance coverage shall be, at a minimum, an aggregate of the amounts fixed by law or by the City Council and with such terms and conditions as may be required.

(1)(c) The penalty amount on any bond shall not fall below the legal minimum, when one has been set by the state, for each particular official.

(2) Official bonds, with the oath endorsed thereon, shall be filed in the City Clerk’s office within the following time:

(a) Of all appointed officers, within thirty (30) days after their appointment; and

(b) Of elected City officers, within thirty (30) days after the canvass of the votes of the election at which they were chosen.

(3) All official bonds of City officers shall be executed by the principal named in such bonds and by at least two sufficient sureties who shall be freeholders of the county in which such bonds are given, or any official bond of a City officer may be executed by the officer as principal and by guaranty, surety, fidelity, or bonding company as surety, or by two or more such companies. Only such companies as are legally authorized to transact business in this state shall be eligible to suretyship on the bond of a city officer.

(4) The City Clerk shall carefully record and preserve the bonds in his or her office and shall give certified copies thereof, when required, under the seal of his or her office, and shall be entitled to receive for the same the usual fee allowed by law for certified copies of records in other cases.

(5)(a) The approval of each official bond shall be endorsed upon such bond by the officer approving the same and no bonds shall be filed and recorded until so approved.

(5)(b) No bond shall be deemed to be given or complete until the approval of the City Council and all sureties are endorsed in writing on the instrument by the Mayor and City Clerk to the approval of the city council.

(6) All official bonds shall obligate the principal and sureties for the faithful discharge of all duties required by law of such principal and shall inure to the benefit of any persons injured by a breach of the conditions of such bonds.

(7) No official bond shall be rendered void by reason of any administrator, executor, or other officer from whom by law bond is or may be required.

(8) No city official shall be taken as security on the bond of any administrator, executor, or other officer from whom by law bond is or may be required.

(9) If any person elected or appointed to any office neglects to have his or her official bond executed and approves as provided by law and filed for record within the time limited by his section, the City Clerk shall immediately issue an order to such person to show cause why he or she has failed to properly file such bond and why his or her office should not be declared vacant. If such person properly files the official bond within ten (10) days of the issuance of the show cause order for appointed officials or before the date for taking office for elected officials, such filing shall be deemed to be in compliance with this section. If such person does not file the bond within the required time and sufficient cause is not shown within that time, his or her office shall thereupon ipso facto become vacant and such vacancy shall thereupon immediately be filled by election or appointment as the law may direct in other cases of vacancy in the same office.

(10) Any person appointed to fill a vacancy, before entering upon the duties of the office, must give a bond corresponding in substance and form with the bond required of the officer originally elected or appointed, as herein provided.

(11) When the incumbent of an office is reelected or reappointed, he or she shall qualify by taking the oath and giving the bond as above directed, but when such officer has had public funds or property in his or her control, his or her bond shall not be approved until he or she has produced and fully accounted for such funds and property. When it is ascertained that the incumbent of an office holds over reason of the nonelection or non-appointment of a successor or of the neglect or refusal of the successor to qualify, he or she shall qualify anew within 10 days from the time at which his or her successor, if elected, should have qualified.

(12) No person shall be surety for the same officer for more than two successive terms of the same office, but this provision shall not apply to incorporated surety companies.

(13) If the sureties on the official bond of any appointed officer of the City, in the opinion of the City Council, become insufficient, the Council may, by resolution, fix a reasonable time within which the officer may give a new bond or additional sureties to the satisfaction and approval of the Council, the office shall, by such failure, refusal, or neglect, become vacant and it shall be the duty of the Council to appoint a competent and qualified person to fill the office.


Source: Ord. 1797 (2011)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 11-103 to 11-118; 16-219



1-403 Bonds; By Whom Given, Amount
(1) The following elected and appointed officials and the employees of the City shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, and employment, each give bond or be provided with bond by the City for their respective offices and employment with good and sufficient surety or a corporate surety bond to be approved by the Mayor and Council in the sums as follows:

Council Member
$ 1,000.00
Treasurer
$25,000.00
Employees of the City
$25,000.00 Blanket Bond
(2) In the event any elected or appointed official has not filed proper bond as required herein, prior to entering upon the duties of their respective offices, said office shall be declared vacant and filled by appointment as provided in Section 1-207 or Section 1-302. Premiums of such bonds shall be paid by the City.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 11-104; 16-219



1-404 Oath; Municipal Office
(1) All officials of the Municipality, whether elected or appointed, except when a different oath is specifically provided herein, shall, before entering upon their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath which shall be endorsed upon their respective bonds:

"I ________ do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Nebraska against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, and without mental reservation, or for the purpose of evasion; and that I will faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the office of ________ according to law, and to the best of my ability. And I do further swear that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am in this position I will not advocate, nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence. So help me God."

(2) In the event that any elected or appointed official has not taken and subscribed the Oath of Office, as provided herein, prior to entering upon the duties of their respective office, said office shall be declared vacant and shall be filled by appointment as provided in Section 1-207 or Section 1-302.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 11-101



Article 5 Corporate Seal
1-501 Corporate Seal; Official

1-501 Corporate Seal; Official
The official Corporate Seal of the Municipality shall be kept in the office of the Municipal Clerk and shall bear the following inscription: "Seal, City of Crete, Nebraska." The Municipal Clerk shall affix an impression of the said official seal to all warrants, licenses, permits, ordinances, and all other official papers issued by order of the Governing Body and countersigned by the Municipal Clerk.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-115



Article 6 Meetings
1-601 Meetings; Defined
1-602 Meetings; Public Body Defined
1-603 Meetings; Public
1-604 Meetings; Closed Sessions
1-605 Meetings; Emergency Meetings
1-606 Meetings; Minutes
1-607 Meetings; Votes
1-608 Meetings; Notice To News Media
1-609 Meetings; Public Participation
1-610 Meetings; City Council
1-611 Meetings; Date Falling On Holiday
1-612 Meetings; Change In Office
1-613 Meetings; Organizational
1-614 Meetings; City Council Meeting Agenda
1-615 Meetings; Committee, Commission, And Board Meeting Agendas
1-616 Meetings; Parliamentary Procedure
1-617 Meetings; Recording Proceedings
1-618 Meetings; Videoconferencing, When Allowed
1-619 Meetings; Telephone Conference Calls; When Allowed

1-601 Meetings; Defined
Meetings, as used in this Article shall mean all regular, special, or called meetings, formal or informal, of a public body for the purposes of briefing, discussion of public business, formation of tentative policy, or the taking of any action.



1-602 Meetings; Public Body Defined
(1) Public Body as used in this Article shall mean:

(a) The Governing Body of the Municipality;

(b) All independent boards, commissions, bureaus, committees, councils, subunits, or any other bodies, now or hereafter created by Constitution, statute, ordinance, or otherwise pursuant to law; and

(c) Advisory committees of the bodies listed above.

(2) This Article shall not apply to subcommittees of such bodies unless a quorum of the Public Body attends a subcommittee meeting or unless such subcommittees are holding hearings, making policy, or taking formal action on behalf of their parent body.



1-603 Meetings; Public
(1) All public meetings, as defined by law, shall be held in a municipal public building which shall be open to attendance by the public. All meetings shall be held in the public building in which the Governing Body usually holds such meetings unless the publicized notice hereinafter required shall designate some other public building or other specified place.

(2) The advance publicized notice of all public convened meetings shall be simultaneously transmitted to all members of the Governing Body and to the public by a method designated by the Governing Body or by the Mayor if the Governing Body has not designated a method. Such notice shall contain the time and specific place for each meeting and either an enumeration of the agenda subjects known at the time of the notice or a statement that such an agenda kept continually current shall be readily available for public inspection at the office of the Municipal Clerk. Except for items of an emergency nature, the agenda shall not be altered later than twenty-four hours before the scheduled commencement of the meeting or forty-eight hours before the scheduled commencement of a meeting of the Governing Body scheduled outside the corporate limits of the Municipality. The Governing Body shall have the right to modify the agenda to include items of an emergency nature only at such public meetings.

(3) The minutes of the Municipal Clerk shall include the record of the manner and advance time by which the advance publicized notice was given, a statement of how the availability of an agenda of the then known subjects was communicated, the time and specific place of the meetings, and the names of each member of the Governing Body present or absent at each convened meeting. The minutes of the Governing Body shall be a public record open to inspection by the public upon request at any reasonable time at the office of the Municipal Clerk.

(4) Any official action on any question or motion duly moved and seconded shall be taken only by roll call vote of the Governing Body in open session. The record of the Municipal Clerk shall show how each member voted or that the member was absent and did not vote.



1-604 Meetings; Closed Sessions
(1) Any public body may bold a closed session by the affirmative vote of a majority of its voting members if a closed session is clearly necessary for the protection of the public interest or for the prevention of needless injury to the reputation of an individual and if such individual has not requested a public meeting. Closed sessions may be held for, but shall not be limited to, such reasons as:

(a) Strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining, real estate purchases, pending litigation, or litigation which is imminent as evidenced by communication of a claim or threat of litigation to or by the public body;

(b) Discussion regarding deployment of security personnel or devices;

(c) Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of criminal misconduct; or,

(d) Evaluation of the job performance of a person when necessary to prevent needless injury to the reputation of a person and if such person has not requested a public meeting. Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting for discussion of the appointment or election of a new member to any public body.

(2) The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open session. The vote of each member on the question of holding a closed session, the reason for the closed session, and the time when the closed session commenced and concluded shall be recorded in the minutes. The public body holding such a closed session shall restrict its consideration to matters during the closed portions to only those purposes set forth in the minutes as the reason for the closed session. The meeting shall be reconvened in open session before any formal action may be taken. For purposes of this section, formal action shall mean a collective decision or a collective commitment or proposal to make a decision on any question, motion, proposal, resolution, order, or ordinance or formation of a position or policy but shall not include negotiation guidance given by members of the public body to legal counsel or other negotiators in closed sessions authorized under subdivision (1)(a).

(3) Any member of the public body shall have the right to challenge the continuation of a closed session if the member determines that the session has exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a closed session or if the member contends that the closed session is neither clearly necessary for the protection of the public interest or the prevention of needless injury to the reputation of an individual. Such challenge shall be overruled only by a majority vote of the members of the public body. Such challenge and its disposition shall be recorded in the minutes.

(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any meeting be closed to the public. No person or public body shall fail to invite a portion of its members to a meeting and no public body shall designate itself a subcommittee of the whole body for the purpose of circumventing the provisions of this Article. No closed session, informal meeting, chance meeting, social gathering, or electronic communication shall be used for the purpose of circumventing the provisions of this Article.

(5) The provisions of this Article shall not apply to chance meetings or to attendance at or travel to conventions or workshops of members of a public body at which there is no meeting of the body then intentionally convened and there is no vote or other action taken regarding any matter over which the public body has supervision, control, jurisdiction, or advisory power.



1-605 Meetings; Emergency Meetings
(1) When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without reasonable advance public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated in the minutes and any formal action taken in such meeting shall pertain only to the emergency. Such emergency meetings may be held by means of electronic or telecommunication equipment.

(2) The provisions of section 1-608 shall be complied with in conducting emergency meetings. Complete minutes of such emergency meetings specifying the nature of the emergency and any formal action taken at the meeting shall be made available to the public by no later than the end of the next regular business day.



1-606 Meetings; Minutes
Each public body shall keep minutes of all meetings showing the time, place, members present and absent, and the substance of all matters discussed. The minutes shall be public records and open to public inspection during normal business hours. Minutes shall be written and available for inspection within ten working days or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever occurs earlier.



1-607 Meetings; Votes
(1) Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and seconded shall be by roll call vote of the public body in open session, and the record shall state how each member voted or if the member was absent or not voting. The requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be satisfied by the Municipality utilizing an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and nays of each member of the Governing Body to be readily seen by the public.

(2) The vote to elect leadership within a public body may be taken by secret ballot, but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be recorded in the minutes.



1-608 Meetings; Notice To News Media
The Municipal Clerk, Secretary, or other designee of each public body shall maintain a list of the news media requesting notification of meetings and shall make reasonable efforts to provide advance notification to them of the time and place of each meeting and the subjects to be discussed at that meeting.



1-609 Meetings; Public Participation
(1) Subject to the Open Meetings Act, the public has the right to attend and the right to speak at meetings of public bodies, and all or any part of a meeting of a public body, except for closed sessions called pursuant to section 1-604, may be videotaped, televised, photographed, broadcasted, or recorded by any person in attendance by means of a tape recorder, camera, video equipment, or any other means of pictorial or sonic reproduction or in writing.

(2) It shall not be a violation of subsection (1) for any public body to make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the conduct of persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising, photographing, broadcasting, or recording its meetings. A body may not be required to allow citizens to speak at each meeting but it may not forbid public participation at all meetings.

(3) No public body shall require members of the public to identify themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting nor shall such body require that the name of any member of the public be placed on the agenda prior to such meeting in order to speak about items on the agenda. The body may require any member of the public desiring to address the body to identify himself or herself.

(4) No public body shall, for the purpose of circumventing the Open Meetings Act, hold a meeting in a place known by the body to be too small to accommodate the anticipated audience.

(5) No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it holds its meeting in its traditional meeting place which is located in this state.

(6) No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it holds a meeting outside of this state if, but only if:

(a) A member entity of the public body is located outside of this state and the meeting is in the member’s jurisdiction;

(b) All out-of-state locations identified in the notice are located within public buildings used by members of the entity or at a place which will accommodate the anticipated audience;

(c) Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the public’s right to attend, hear, and speak at the meeting, including making a telephone conference call available at an instate location to members, the public, or the press, if requested twenty-four hours in advance;

(d) No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the public body’s meetings in a calendar year are held out-of-state;

(e) Out-of-state meetings are not used to circumvent any of the public government purposes established in the Open Meetings Act;

(f) Reasonable arrangements are made to provide viewing at other instate locations for a video conference meeting if requested fourteen days in advance and if economically and reasonably available in the area; and

(g) The public body publishes notice of the out-of-state meeting at least twenty-one days before the date of the meeting in a legal newspaper of statewide circulation.

(7) The public body shall, upon request, make a reasonable effort to accommodate the public’s right to hear the discussion and testimony presented at the meeting.

(8) Public bodies shall make available at the meeting or the instate location for a telephone conference call or video conference, for examination and copying by members of the public, at least one copy of all reproducible written material to be discussed at an open meeting. Public bodies shall make available at least one current copy of the Open Meetings Act posted in the meeting room at a location accessible to members of the public. At the beginning of the meeting, the public shall be informed about the location of the posted information.


Source: Ord. 1566 (2003); Ord. 1798 (2011)



1-610 Meetings; City Council
(1) Meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Council Chambers in City Hall and shall be open to the public. At any meeting of the City Council, a majority of the sitting members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

(a) Regular meetings shall be held on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at six o’clock (6:00) P.M.

(b) Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by the concurrence of any four members of the City Council. The call for and purpose of the meeting shall be filed with the City Clerk in writing. Upon receiving a written call for a special meeting, the City Clerk shall notify the Mayor or the Councilmembers of the special meeting, stating the time, date, and its purpose.

(2) Promptly at the hour and on the date set by law of each regular or special meeting, the members of the City Council, the Mayor, the City Clerk, and such other city officials that may be required shall take their regular stations in the meeting place. The City Clerk shall call the roll of Councilmembers and announce whether a quorum is present.

(a) If a quorum is present, the Council shall be called to order by the Mayor or by the President of the City Council if the Mayor is absent.

(b) If a quorum is present, but the Mayor and the President of the City Council are absent, the City Clerk shall call the meeting to order and the Council shall elect an acting President as the first order of business before proceeding with the scheduled agenda.

(c) If a quorum is not present, the Council shall adjourn to a later date or to compel the attendance of absent members.


Source: Ord. 1252 (1994);  Ord. 1400 (1998);  Ord. 1780, § 1 (2011); Ord. 2096, §1 (2019)



1-611 Meetings; Date Falling On Holiday
When the regular meeting date of the City Council shall fall on a legal holiday, the Mayor and Council shall meet at six o’clock (6:00) P.M. on the evening of the day following such legal holiday.


Source: Ord. 1783, § 1 (2011)



1-612 Meetings; Change In Office
The change in office shall be made as follows: The Mayor and Council shall meet on the first regular meeting date in December of each year in which a municipal election is held, and the outgoing officers and the outgoing members of the Council shall present their reports. Upon the old Council having completed its business up to the said time, the outgoing members of the Council shall surrender their offices to the incoming members, and the outgoing officers shall thereupon each surrender to his successor in office all property, records, papers, and moneys belonging to the same.



1-613 Meetings; Organizational
(1) The newly elected Council shall convene, at the regular place of meeting in the City on the first regular meeting in December of each year in which a municipal election is held, immediately after the prior Council adjourns and proceed to organize themselves for the ensuing year. The Mayor elected for the new municipal year shall call the meeting to order. The Council shall then proceed to examine the credentials of its members and other elective officers of the City to see that each has been duly and properly elected and to see that such oaths and bonds have been given as are required. After ascertaining that all members are duly qualified, the Council shall then elect one of its own body who shall be styled as President of the Council. The Mayor shall then nominate his candidates for appointive offices. He shall then proceed with the regular order of business.

(2) It is hereby made the duty of each and every member of the Council or his successor in office and of each officer elected to any office to qualify prior to the first regular meeting in December following his election. All appointive officers shall qualify within two weeks following their appointments. Qualification for each officer who is not required to give bond shall consist in his subscribing and taking an oath to support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Nebraska, and the laws of the Municipality and to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his office, said oath to be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk. Each officer who is required to give a bond shall file the required bond in the office of the Municipal Clerk with sufficient sureties, conditioned on the faithful discharge of the duties of his office, with the oath endorsed thereon.



1-614 Meetings; City Council Meeting Agenda
(1) All requests for agenda items must be presented to the Mayor, City Administrator, or City Clerk, preferably in writing, at least four calendar days prior to the scheduled meeting date. Only the Mayor, the City Administrator, or a concurrence of three Councilmembers can place an item on or remove an item from an agenda.

(2) The agenda shall be prepared under the direction of and in a form and manner prescribed by the City Administrator, and unless prevented by unforeseen circumstances or an emergency, a finalized agenda shall be delivered to the Councilmembers and made available to the public no later than four calendar days preceding the meeting for which it pertains.

(3) Part of the agenda may be designated the consent agenda. All items listed on the consent agenda are considered to be minor or routine and may be approved by one motion and vote with the City Clerk reading aloud the items to be considered. There will be no separate discussion of these items unless the Mayor, a Councilmember, or a citizen so requests. If such a request is made, the item will be moved out of the consent agenda and considered separately.


Source: Ord. 2096, § 2 (2019)



1-615 Meetings; Committee, Commission, And Board Meeting Agendas
(1) The agendas for all committee, commission, and board meetings shall be prepared under the direction of and in a form and manner prescribed by the Mayor or City Administrator. Unless prevented by unforeseen circumstances or an emergency, a finalized agenda shall be delivered to all committee, commission, or board members and made available to the public no later than twenty-four hours preceding the meeting for which it pertains.

(2) The Mayor or City Administrator shall determine the items that will be placed on or removed from an agenda. Only the chairperson of a committee, commission, or board may request agenda items be placed on or removed from an agenda. All requests regarding agenda items must be presented to the Mayor or City Administrator, preferably in writing, at least four calendar days prior to the scheduled meeting date.

(3) Part of any agenda may be designated the consent agenda. All of the consent agenda items shall be read aloud, and no separate discussion of these items will occur unless a committee, commission, or board member or a citizen so requests. If such a request is made, the item will be moved out of the consent agenda and considered separately. All items listed on the consent agenda shall be approved altogether by one motion and vote.


Source: Ord. 2101, § 5 (2020)



1-616 Meetings; Parliamentary Procedure
(1) The Mayor shall preserve order during meetings of the Governing Body and shall decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the Governing Body. When any person is called to order, he shall be seated until the point is decided. When the Mayor is putting the question, no person shall leave the meeting room. Every person present, previous to speaking, shall rise from his seat and address himself to the presiding officer and while speaking shall confine himself to the question. When two or more persons rise at once, the Mayor shall recognize the one who spoke first. All resolutions or motions shall be reduced to writing before being acted upon if requested by the Municipal Clerk or any member of the Governing Body. Every member of the Governing Body who is present when a question is voted upon shall cast his vote unless excused by a majority of the Governing Body present. No motion shall be put or debated unless seconded. When seconded, it shall be stated by the Mayor before being debatable. In all cases where a motion or resolution is entered on the minutes, the name of the member of the Governing Body making the motion or resolution shall be entered also.

(2) After each vote, the "yeas" and "nays" shall be taken and entered in the minutes upon the request of any member of the Governing Body. Before the vote is actually taken, any resolution, motion, or proposed ordinance may be withdrawn from consideration by the sponsor thereof with the consent of the member of the Governing Body seconding the said resolution, motion, or ordinance. When, in the consideration of an ordinance, different times or amounts are proposed, the question shall be put on the largest sum or the longest time. A question to reconsider shall be in order when made by a member voting with the majority, but such motion to reconsider must be made before the expiration of the third regular meeting after the initial consideration of the question. When any question is under debate, no motion shall be made, entertained, or seconded except the previous question, a motion to table, and to adjourn. Each of the said motions shall be decided without debate.

(3) Any of the rules of the Governing Body for meetings may be suspended by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members present. In all cases in which provisions are not made by these rules, Robert's Rules of Order is the authority by which the Governing Body shall decide all procedural disputes that may arise.


Source: Ord. 2101, § 1 (2020)



1-617 Meetings; Recording Proceedings
The City Clerk may record the proceedings of the City Council meetings on magnetic tape for the purpose of assisting in the preparation of the minutes of the proceedings. Said magnetically recorded tapes shall not be considered public records.


Source: Ord. 2101, § 2 (2020)



1-618 Meetings; Videoconferencing, When Allowed
(1) A meeting of an organization created under the Interlocal Cooperation Act, the Joint Public Agency Act, or the Municipal Cooperative Financing Act or of the governing body of a risk management pool or its advisory committees organized in accordance with the Intergovernmental Risk Management Act may be held by means of videoconferencing if:

(a) Reasonable advance publicized notice is given;

(b) Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the public's right to attend, hear, and speak at the meeting, including seating, recordation by audio or visual recording devices, and a reasonable opportunity for input such as public comment or questions to at least the same extent as would be provided if videoconferencing were not used;

(c) At least one copy of all documents being considered is available to the public at each site of the videoconference;

(d) At least one member of the governing body or advisory committee is present at each site of the videoconference; and

(e) No more than one-half of the governing body's or advisory committee's meetings in a calendar year are held by videoconference.

(2) Videoconferencing shall not be used to circumvent any of the public government purposes established in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 84-1408 to 84-1414.

(3) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

VIDEOCONFERENCING. Conducting a meeting involving participants at two or more locations through the use of audio-video equipment which allows participants at each location to hear and see each meeting participant at each other location, including public input. Interaction between meeting participants shall be possible at all meeting locations.


Source: Ord. 1567, § 1 (2003); Ord. 2101, § 3 (2020)



1-619 Meetings; Telephone Conference Calls; When Allowed
(1) A meeting of the governing body of an entity formed under the Interlocal Cooperation Act or the Joint Public Agency Act or of the governing body of a risk management pool or its advisory committees organized in accordance with the Intergovernmental Risk Management Act may be held by telephone conference call if:

(a) The territory represented by the member public agencies of the entity or pool covers more than one county;

(b) Reasonable advance publicized notice is given which identifies each telephone conference location at which a member of the entity's or pool's governing body will be present;

(c) All telephone conference meeting sites identified in the notice are located within public buildings used by members of the entity or pool or at a place which will accommodate the anticipated audience;

(d) Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the public's right to attend, hear, and speak at the meeting, including seating, recordation by audio recording devices, and a reasonable opportunity for input such as public comment or questions to at least the same extent as would be provided if a telephone conference call was not used;

(e) At least one copy of all documents being considered is available to the public at each site of the telephone conference call;

(f) At least one member of the governing body of the entity or pool is present at each site of the telephone conference call identified in the public notice;

(g) The telephone conference call lasts no more than one hour; and

(h) No more than one-half of the entity's or pool's meetings in a calendar year are held by telephone conference call.

(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent the participation of consultants, members of the press, and other nonmembers of the governing body at sites not identified in the public notice. Telephone conference calls shall not be used to circumvent any of the public government purposes established in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 84-1408 to 84-1414.


Source: Ord. 1568, § 1 (2003); Ord. 2101, § 4 (2020)



Article 7 Ordinances
1-701 Ordinances; Rules And Regulations
1-702 Ordinances; Appropriation Of Money
1-703 Ordinances; Reading
1-704 Ordinances; Publication
1-705 Ordinances; Style
1-706 Ordinances; Title
1-707 Ordinances; Effective Date; Emergency Ordinances
1-708 Ordinances; Amendments And Revisions
1-709 Ordinances; Resolutions And Motions
1-710 Ordinances; Procedure; Publication Pamphlet Form
1-711 Ordinances, Rules, And Resolutions; Grant Of Power
1-712 Ordinances; Introduction

1-701 Ordinances; Rules And Regulations
All ordinances shall be passed pursuant to such rules and regulations as the Council may provide. All ordinances may be proven by the certificate of the Municipal Clerk under the seal of the Municipality. When printed or published in book or pamphlet form and purporting to be published by authority of the City, such ordinances shall be read and received in evidence in all courts and places without further proof. The passage, approval, and publication or posting of any ordinance shall be sufficiently proven by a certificate under the seal of the City from the Clerk showing that such ordinance was passed and approved, and when and in what paper the same was published. When ordinances are published in book or pamphlet form, purporting to be published by authority of the City Council, the same need not be otherwise published; and such book or pamphlet shall be received as evidence of passage and legal publication of such ordinances as of the dates mentioned in such book or pamphlet.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-403



1-702 Ordinances; Appropriation Of Money
All ordinances, resolutions, or orders for the appropriation or payment of money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence of a majority of all members elected to the Council. The Mayor may vote on such matter when his vote shall be decisive and the Council is equally divided, and the Mayor shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to be a member of the Council.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-404



1-703 Ordinances; Reading
All ordinances and resolutions or orders for the appropriation or payment of money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence of a majority of all members elected to the Council. Ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be read by title on three (3) different days unless three-fourths (3/4) of the Council members vote to suspend this requirement, except that such requirement shall not be suspended for any ordinance for the annexation of territory. In the case such requirement is suspended, the ordinance shall be read by title or number and then moved for final passage. Three-fourths (3/4) of the Council members may require a reading of any such ordinance in full before enactment under either procedure set out in this section.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-404



1-704 Ordinances; Publication
All ordinances of a general nature shall be published one time within fifteen days after they are passed in some newspaper published within the City or in pamphlet form to be distributed or sold as may be provided by ordinance, and every ordinance fixing a penalty or forfeiture for its violation shall, before the same takes effect, be published for at least one week in some manner above prescribed.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-405



1-705 Ordinances; Style
The style of all Municipal ordinances shall be:

"Be it ordained by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Crete."


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-405




1-706 Ordinances; Title
No ordinance shall contain a subject not clearly expressed in its title.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-405



1-707 Ordinances; Effective Date; Emergency Ordinances
(1) Except as provided in Section 1-704 and subsection (2) of this section, an ordinance for the government of the Municipality which has been adopted by the Governing Body without submission to the voters of the Municipality shall not go into effect until fifteen days after the passage of the ordinance.

(2) In the case of riots, infectious diseases, or other impending danger or other emergency requiring its immediate operation, an ordinance shall take effect upon the proclamation of the Mayor immediately upon the first publication of the ordinance.


Source: Ord. 1459 (1999)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-405; 19-3701



1-708 Ordinances; Amendments And Revisions
No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended, and the ordinance or section so amended is repealed, except that an ordinance revising all the ordinances of the Municipality and modifications to zoning or building districts may be adopted as otherwise provided by law.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-404



1-709 Ordinances; Resolutions And Motions
Resolutions and motions shall be introduced in one of the methods prescribed for the introduction of ordinances. After their introduction they shall be fully and distinctly read one time in the presence and hearing of a majority of the members elected to the Council. The issue raised by said resolutions or motions shall be disposed of in accordance with the usage of parliamentary law adopted for the guidance of the Council. A majority vote shall be required to pass any resolution or motion. The Mayor may vote on any such matter when his vote shall be decisive and the Council is equally divided, and the Mayor shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to be a member of the Council. The vote on any resolution or motion shall be viva voce and "yeas" and "nays" thereon shall be recorded by the Clerk.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-503



1-710 Ordinances; Procedure; Publication Pamphlet Form
The ordinance to be published in pamphlet form shall provide in the title of the ordinance and in a section of the ordinance that such ordinance shall be published in pamphlet form. The number and title of the ordinance shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting at which said ordinance is duly passed and approved by the Mayor and Council. Upon the Mayor declaring the ordinance adopted and signing the same, the City Clerk shall attest to the passage and adoption by fixing her signature and seal of the City thereto and the Clerk shall thereupon enter into the minutes of the meeting that the ordinance by its number is published in pamphlet form. The Clerk shall enter under oath a certificate in written form of such publication in pamphlet form in the ordinance records of the City.



1-711 Ordinances, Rules, And Resolutions; Grant Of Power
The Governing Body may make all ordinances, bylaws, rules, regulations, and resolutions, not inconsistent with the laws of the State of Nebraska, as may be necessary or expedient for maintaining the peace, good government, and welfare of the Municipality and its trade, commerce, and manufactures, for preserving order and securing persons or property from violence, danger, and destruction, for protecting public and private property, and for promoting the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, and morals and the general interests and welfare of the inhabitants of the Municipality.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-246



1-712 Ordinances; Introduction
Ordinances shall be introduced by members of the Governing Body in one of the following ways:

(1) With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may, in the presence and hearing of a majority of the members elected to the Governing Body, read aloud the substance of the proposed ordinance and file a copy with the Municipal Clerk for future consideration; or

(2) With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may present the proposed ordinance to the Clerk who, in the presence and hearing of a majority of the members elected to the Governing Body, shall read aloud the substance of the ordinance and file it for future consideration.


Source: Ord. 1555 (2003)




Article 8 Elections
1-801 Elections; Date; Nomination Of Officials
1-802 Elections; Term Of Office
1-803 Elections; Primary Election, Number Of Candidates Filing
1-804 Elections; Tie Votes
1-805 Elections; General Election, Preparation Of Ballot
1-806 Elections; Election To Terms
1-807 Elections; Nominations, When Filed
1-808 Elections; Filing Fee
1-809 Elections; Petition, Write-In, And Other Candidates For General Election Ballot; Procedures
1-810 Elections; Voter Qualifications
1-811 Elections; Wards
1-811.01 Elections; Wards, Election Districts
1-812 Elections; Ballots
1-813 Elections; Certificate Of Nomination Or Election
1-814 [Repealed]
1-815 Elections; Recall Procedure
1-816 Elections; Special Elections
1-817 Elections; Candidate Qualifications
1-818 Elections; Exit Polls

1-801 Elections; Date; Nomination Of Officials
(1) All municipal primary and general elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Chapter Thirty-Two Revised Statutes of Nebraska. Said elections shall be held in conjunction with the state primary and general elections. The County Clerk shall have charge of the election and shall have the authority to deputize the Municipal Clerk for municipal election purposes.

(2) Commencing with the statewide primary election in 1976, and every two years thereafter, those candidates for mayor and for positions on the City Council whose terms will be expiring shall be nominated at the statewide primary election and elected at the statewide general election.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-302.01; 32-505; 32-4,147



1-802 Elections; Term Of Office
All elected officers of the Municipality shall serve a term of four years and until their successors are elected and have qualified.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-302.01



1-803 Elections; Primary Election, Number Of Candidates Filing
If the number of candidates properly selected for nomination at the primary election does not exceed two for each vacancy to be filled, all candidates properly filed shall be considered nominated, and no primary election for their nomination shall be required.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-302.01



1-804 Elections; Tie Votes
In the case of a tie vote of any of the candidates in either the primary or general election, the County Clerk shall notify such candidates to appear at his office on a given day and hour to determine the same by lot before the canvassing board, and the certificate of nomination or election shall be given accordingly. Notice to appear shall be given by certified mail.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-302.01



1-805 Elections; General Election, Preparation Of Ballot
(1) When more than one person becomes a candidate by filing, petition, or write-in procedures for the same position in the primary, the County Clerk, in preparing the official ballot for the general election shall place thereon the names of the persons who received the greatest number of votes in the primary, but in no event shall the names on the general election ballot be more than twice the number of vacancies to be filled at the general election.

(2) The County Clerk shall place the names of the candidates on the general election ballot in the direct order according to the number of votes received at the primary election. If no primary election was held, the names of the candidates shall be placed upon the general election ballot in the order of their filing.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-302.01



1-806 Elections; Election To Terms
The candidates shall be placed on the general election ballot and the candidates receiving the greatest number of votes shall be elected to terms of the longest duration, and those receiving the next greatest number of votes shall be elected to the remaining term or terms. The County Clerk shall place the names of the candidates on the general election ballot in the direct order according to the number of votes received at the primary election. If no primary election was held, the names of the candidates shall be placed upon the general election ballot in the order of their filing. The term of office of all such member shall commence on the first regular meeting of December following their election. Any vacancy on the Council resulting from causes other than expiration of the term shall be filled by vote of the remaining members as provided in Section 1-207.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-302.01



1-807 Elections; Nominations, When Filed
The name of a candidate shall not be printed upon the official ballot for the election of elective officials unless he shall have flied a written application with the County Clerk at least sixty days prior to the primary election requesting that his name be placed upon the official ballot for such election.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-512; 32-535



1-808 Elections; Filing Fee
Prior to the filing of any nomination papers, there shall be paid to the Municipal Treasurer a filing fee which shall amount to one percent (1%) of the annual salary for the office for which the candidate will file; provided, there shall be no filing fee for any candidate filing for an office in which a per diem is paid rather than a salary or an office for which there is a salary of less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. No nominating papers shall be filed until the proper Municipal Treasurer's receipt showing the payment of the filing fee shall be presented to the election officer with whom the nomination papers are to be filed.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-513



1-809 Elections; Petition, Write-In, And Other Candidates For General Election Ballot; Procedures
(1) Any registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary election may have his or her name placed on the general election ballot for a partisan office by filing a petition as prescribed in this section and Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-621 or by nomination by political party convention or committee.

(2) Any candidate who was defeated in the primary election and any registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary election may have his or her name placed on the general election ballot if a vacancy exists on the ballot under subsection (2) of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-625 and the candidate files for the office by petition as prescribed in this section or files as a write-in candidate as prescribed in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-615. 

(3) Petitions for nomination shall conform to the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-628. Petitions shall state the office to be filled and the name and address of the candidate. Petitions for partisan office shall also indicate the party affiliation of the candidate. Petitions shall be signed by registered voters residing in the ward in which the officer is to be elected, if candidates are chosen by ward, or residing in the municipality, if candidates are not chosen by ward, and shall be filed with the filing officer in the same manner as provided for candidate filing forms in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-607. Petition signers and circulators shall conform to the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-629 and 32-630. No petition for nomination shall be filed unless there is attached thereto a receipt showing payment of the filing fee required pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-608. The petitions shall be filed by September 1 in the year of the general election.

(4) The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place the name of a candidate upon the nonpartisan ballot for the general election shall be at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of registered voters voting for Governor or President of the United States at the immediately preceding general election in the ward in which the officer is to be elected or in the municipality, as appropriate.

(5) The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place the name of a candidate upon the partisan ballot for the general election shall be at least twenty percent (20%) of the total vote for Governor or President of the United States at the immediately preceding general election within the municipality, not to exceed two thousand.


Source: Ord. 1413 (1998); Ord. 1563 (2003)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-607; 32-608; 32-615 to 32-618; 32-321; 32-625; 32-628 to 32-630



1-810 Elections; Voter Qualifications
Electors shall mean every person of the constitutionally prescribed age or upwards, who shall have the right to vote for all officers to be elected to public office and upon all questions and proposals lawfully submitted to the voters at any and all elections authorized or provided for by the Constitution or the laws of the State of Nebraska, except school elections; provided, no person shall be qualified to vote at any election unless such person shall be a resident of the State and shall have been properly registered with the election official of the county.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-102



1-811 Elections; Wards
(1) The Municipality shall redistrict as often as necessary using the most resent Federal Census to insure that each ward is substantially equal in population.

(2) The Municipality shall stand divided into the following wards as set forth herein:

(a) FIRST WARD. The First Ward shall include the following area in the corporate limits of the City: commencing at the centerline of Juniper Avenue extended south to the corporate limits of the City, thence north on said extended centerline of Juniper Avenue to the intersection of the centerline of Juniper Avenue and 11th street; thence east on the centerline of 11th Street to the intersection of the centerline of Boswell Avenue and 11th Street; thence North on the centerline of Boswell Avenue to the intersection of Boswell Avenue and 13th Street; thence east on the centerline of 13th Street to the corporate limits of said City. All territory lying east and south of the aforesaid description shall be the first ward of the City of Crete, Saline County, Nebraska.

(b) SECOND WARD. The Second Ward shall include the following area in the corporate limits of the City: commencing at the centerline of Juniper Avenue extended south to the corporate limits of the City, thence north on said extended centerline of Juniper Avenue to the intersection of the centerline of Juniper Avenue and 7th Street; thence west on the centerline of 7th street to the centerline of Oak Avenue; thence north on the centerline of Oak Avenue as it intersects the south line of the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad Company right-of-way, thence northeasterly on the south line of said Chicago, Burlington and Quincy railroad Company right-of-way to the corporate limits of the City. All territory lying west and north of the aforesaid description shall be in the Second ward of the City of Crete, Saline County, Nebraska.

(c) THIRD WARD. The Third Ward shall include the following area in the corporate limits of the City: commencing on the centerline of 13th Street at its intersection with the east corporate limits of said City, thence west on said centerline of 13th Street to the intersection of 13th Street and Boswell Avenue; thence south on the centerline of Boswell Avenue to the intersection of 11th street to its intersection with Juniper Avenue; thence south on the centerline of Juniper Avenue to the intersection of Juniper Avenue and 7th Street; thence west on the centerline of 7th Street to the centerline of Oak Avenue; thence north on the centerline of Oak Avenue as it intersects the south line of the Chicago Burlington and Quincy Railroad Company right-of-way, thence northeasterly on the south line of said Chicago, Burlington and Quincy railroad Company right-of-way to the corporate limits of said City. All territory lying north and east of the aforesaid description shall be in the Third Ward of the City of Crete, Saline County, Nebraska.

(3) The establishment of the wards herein provided shall be implemented and become effective with the next election to be held pursuant to Section 1-801. Each ward shall constitute an election district.


Source: Ord. 1792 (2011)



1-811.01 Elections; Wards, Election Districts
(1) The Mayor and City Council shall divide the City into not less than two wards, as compact in form and equal in population as possible, the boundaries of which are defined below. 

(2) Each ward shall constitute an election district; provided, when any ward shall contain greater than five hundred legal voters, the Mayor and City Council may divide such ward into two or more election districts.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-104



1-812 Elections; Ballots
The County Clerk shall provide printed ballots for every general municipal election and the expense of printing and delivering the ballots and cards of instruction shall be a charge upon the Municipality.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-417; 32-418



1-813 Elections; Certificate Of Nomination Or Election
(1) The Election Commissioner, County Clerk, or Municipal Clerk shall, within forty days after the election, prepare, sign, and deliver a certificate of nomination or a certificate of election to each person whom the canvassing board has declared to have received the highest vote for each municipal office. No person shall be issued a certificate of nomination as a candidate of a political party unless such person has received a number of votes at least equal to five percent (5%) of the total ballots cast at the primary election by registered voters affiliated with that political party in the district which the office for which he or she is a candidate serves.

(2) A certificate of election prepared by the Municipal Clerk shall be in the form as nearly as possible prescribed in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1033 and shall be signed by the Mayor under the seal of the Municipality and countersigned by the Clerk.


Source: Ord. 1565 (2003)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-3041; 32-558; 32-1033



1-814 [Repealed]
Repealed. Ordinance 1562 (2003).



1-815 Elections; Recall Procedure
(1) The Mayor, a member of the City Council, and any other elected official of the city may be removed from office by recall pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-1301 to 32-1309.

(2) The recall procedure and special election provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-1301 to 32-1309 shall apply to members of the City Council who are elected by ward. Only registered voters of such member's ward may sign a recall petition or vote at the recall election. The recall election shall be held within the member's ward. When a member of the City Council is nominated by ward in the primary election and elected at large in the general election, the recall provisions shall apply to the registered voters at the general election.

(3) A petition demanding that the question of removing the Mayor, a member of the City Council, or any other elected official of the city be submitted to the registered voters shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to at least thirty-five percent (35%) of the total vote cast for that office in the last general election, except that for an office for which more than one candidate is chosen, the petition shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to at least thirty-five percent (35%) of the number of votes cast for the person receiving the most votes for such office in the last general election. The signatures shall be affixed to petition papers and shall be considered part of the petition. Petition circulators shall conform to the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-629 and 32-630.

(4) The petition papers shall be procured from the filing clerk. Prior to the issuance of such petition papers, an affidavit shall be signed and filed with the filing clerk by at least one registered voter. Such voter or voters shall be deemed to be the principal circulator or circulators of the recall petition. The affidavit shall state the name and office of the official sought to be removed, shall include in typewritten form in concise language of sixty words or less the reason or reasons for which recall is sought, and shall request that the filing clerk issue initial petition papers to the principal circulator for circulation. The filing clerk shall deliver a copy of the affidavit by certified mail to the official sought to be removed. If the official chooses, he or she may submit a defense statement in typewritten form in concise language of sixty words of less for inclusion on the petition. Any such defense statement shall be submitted to the filing clerk within twenty days after the official receives the copy of the affidavit. The filing clerk shall notify the principal circulator or circulators that the necessary signatures must be gathered within thirty days from the date of issuing the petitions.

(5) The filing clerk, upon issuing the initial petition papers or any subsequent petition papers, shall enter in a record, to be kept in his or her office, the name of the principal circulator or circulators to whom the papers were issued, the date of issuance, and the number of papers issued. The filing clerk shall certify on the papers the name of the principal circulator or circulators to whom the papers were issued and the date they were issued. No petition paper shall be accepted as part of the petition unless it bears such certificate. The principal circulator or circulators who check out petitions from the filing clerk may distribute such petitions to persons who may act as circulators of such petitions.

(6) Petition signers shall conform to the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-629 and 32-630. Each signer of a recall petition shall be a registered voter and qualified by his or her place of residence to vote for the office in question.

(7) Each petition paper shall conform to the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1304. The principal circulator or circulators shall file, as one instrument, all petition papers comprising a recall petition for signature verification with the filing clerk within thirty days after the filing clerk issues the initial petition papers to the principal circulator or circulators.

(8) Within fifteen days after the filing of the petition, the filing clerk shall ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the requisite number of registered voters. No new signatures may be added after the initial filing of the petition papers. No signatures may be removed unless the filing clerk receives an affidavit signed by the person requesting his or her signature be removed before the petitions are filed with the filing clerk for signature verification. If the petition is found to be sufficient, the filing clerk shall attach to the petition a certificate showing the result of such examination. If the requisite number of signatures has not been gathered, the filing clerk shall file the petition in his or her office without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.

(9) If the recall petition is found to be sufficient, the filing clerk shall notify the official whose removal is sought and the City Council that sufficient signatures have been gathered. If the official does not resign within five days after receiving the notice, the Council shall order an election to be held not less than thirty nor more than forty-five days after the expiration of the five-day period, except that if any other election is to be held in the city within ninety days of the expiration of the five-day period, the Council shall provide for the holding of the removal election on the same day. After the Council sets the date for the recall election, the recall election shall be held regardless of whether the official whose removal is sought resigns before the recall election is held. The form of the official ballot at recall election shall conform to the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1307.

(10) If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are against the removal of the official named on the ballot or the election results in a tie, the official shall continue in office for the remainder of his or her term but may be subject to further recall attempts as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1309.

(11) If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are for the removal of the official named on the ballot, he or she shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office unless a recount is ordered. If the official is deemed removed, the removal shall result in a vacancy in the office which shall be filled as otherwise provided in this section and state law.

(12) If the election results show a margin of votes equal to one percent (1%) or less between the removal or retention of the official in question, the Secretary of State, Election Commissioner, or County Clerk shall order a recount of the votes cast unless the official named on the ballot files a written statement with the Election Commissioner or County Clerk that he or she does not want a recount.

(13) If there are vacancies in the offices of a majority or more of the members of the City Council at one time due to the recall of such members, a special election to fill such vacancies shall be conducted as expeditiously as possible by the Secretary of State, Election Commissioner, or County Clerk.

(14) No official who is removed at a recall election or who resigns after the initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to fill the vacancy resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any other member of the same governing body during the remainder of his or her term of office.

(15) No recall petition shall be filed against an elected official within twelve months after a recall election has failed to remove him or her from office or within six months after the beginning of his or her term of office or within six months prior to the incumbent filing deadline for the office.

(16) For purposes of this section, filing clerk means the Election Commissioner or County Clerk.


Source: Ord. 1460 (1999); Ord. 1564 (2003); Ord. 1619 (2004)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-629; 32-630; 32-1301 to 32-1309



1-816 Elections; Special Elections
(1) Except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-3444, any issue to be submitted to the registered voters at a special election by the city shall be certified by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk at least fifty days prior to the election. A special election may be held by mail as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-952 to 32-959. Any other special election shall be subject to subsection (4) of this section.

(2) In lieu of submitting the issue at a special election, the City may submit the issue at a statewide primary or general election or at any scheduled county election, except that no such issue shall be submitted at a statewide election or scheduled county election unless the issue to be submitted has been certified by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk by March 1 for the primary election and by September 1 for the general election.

(3) After the Election Commissioner or County Clerk has received the certification of the issue to be submitted, he or she shall be responsible for all matters relating to the submission of the issue to the registered voters, except that the City Clerk shall be responsible for the publication or posting of any required special notice of the submission of such issue other than the notice required to be given of the statewide election issues. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare the ballots and issue absentee ballots and shall also conduct the submission of the issue, including the receiving and counting of ballots on the issue. The election returns shall be made to the election Commissioner or County Clerk. The ballots, including absentee ballots, shall be counted and canvassed at the same time and in the same manner as the other ballots. Upon completion of the canvass of the vote by the County Canvassing Board, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall certify the election results to the City Council. The canvass by the County Canvassing Board shall have the same force and effect as if made by the City Council.

(4) Any special election shall be held on the first Tuesday following the second Monday of the selected month unless otherwise specifically provided. No special election shall be held in April, May, June, October, November, and December of an even-numbered year unless it is held in conjunction with the statewide primary or general election.


Source: Ord. 1619 (2004)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-405



1-817 Elections; Candidate Qualifications
Any person seeking elected office in the municipality shall be a registered voter prior to holding such office and in addition shall have reached the age of majority.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-4,157



1-818 Elections; Exit Polls
No person shall conduct any exit poll, public opinion poll, or any other interview with voters on election day seeking to determine voter preference within twenty feet of the entrance of any public place room or, if inside the public place building, within one hundred feet of any voting booth.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-1221



Article 9 Fiscal Management
1-901 Fiscal Management; Financial Statement
1-902 Fiscal Management; Proposed Budget Statement; Contents; Availability; Correction
1-903 Fiscal Management; Proposed Budget Statement; Hearing; Adoption; Certification Of Amount To Be Received From Taxation
1-904 Fiscal Management; Adopted Budget Statement; Filing; Certification Of Amount Of Tax
1-904.01 Fiscal Management; Expenditures Prior To Adoption Of Budget
1-904.02 Fiscal Management; Property Tax Levy; Maximum Authority To Exceed
1-904.03 Fiscal Management; Property Tax Levy; Request; Authority To Set
1-905 Fiscal Management; Property Tax Levy; Power To Levy; Certification Of Amount
1-905.01 Fiscal Management; All-Purpose Levy; Allocation; Abandonment; Extraordinary Levies
1-906 Fiscal Management Appropriations
1-907 Fiscal Management; Expenditures
1-908 Fiscal Management; Judgments
1-909 Fiscal Management; Unlawful Transfers
1-910 Fiscal Management; Lawful Transfer Of Funds
1-911 Fiscal Management; Insufficient Funds
1-912 Fiscal Management; Sinking Funds
1-913 Fiscal Management; Depositories; Conflict Of Interest
1-914 Fiscal Management; Certificates Of Deposit; Time Deposits; Security Required
1-915 Fiscal Management; Depository Bond
1-916 Fiscal Management; Security In Lieu Of Bond; Authorized
1-917 Fiscal Management; Maximum Deposits; Liability Of Treasurer
1-918 Fiscal Management; Investment Of Funds
1-919 Fiscal Management; Claims
1-920 Fiscal Management; Claims; Audits
1-921 Fiscal Management; Warrants
1-922 Fiscal Management; Contracts; Appropriation
1-923 Fiscal Management; Contracts; Vote
1-924 Fiscal Management; Contracts And Purchases; Bidding And Other Requirements
1-925 Fiscal Management; Annual Audit; Financial Statements
1-926 [Repealed]
1-927 Fiscal Management; Proprietary Functions; Fiscal Year Or Biennial Period; Budget Statements; Filing; Hearing; Option; Reconciliation
1-928 Fiscal Management; Fiscal Year Or Biennial Period
1-929 Fiscal Management; Fiscal Year Or Biennial Period
1-930 [Reserved]
1-931 Fiscal Management; Credit Cards; Authority To Accept

1-901 Fiscal Management; Financial Statement
The Mayor and Council shall cause to be published semiannually a statement of the receipts of the City and an itemized account of the expenditures of the City.


Source: Ord. 1855 (2013)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-722



1-902 Fiscal Management; Proposed Budget Statement; Contents; Availability; Correction
(1) The Governing Body shall annually or biennially prepare a proposed budget statement on forms prescribed and furnished by the Auditor of Public Accounts. The proposed budget statement shall be made available to the public prior to publication of the notice of the hearing on the proposed budget statement. A proposed budget statement shall contain the following information, except as provided by state law:

(a) For the immediately preceding fiscal year or biennial period, the revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue received from personal and real property taxation, allocated to the funds and separately stated as to each such source: The unencumbered cash balance at the beginning and end of the year or biennial period; the amount received by taxation of personal and real property; and the amount of actual expenditures;

(b) For the current fiscal year or biennial period, actual and estimated revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, allocated to the funds and separately stated as to each such source: The actual unencumbered cash balance available at the beginning of the year; the amount received from personal and real property taxation; and the amount of actual and estimated expenditures, whichever is applicable. Such statement shall contain the cash reserve for each fiscal year or biennial period and shall note whether or not such reserve is encumbered. Such cash reserve projections shall be based upon the actual experience of prior years or biennial periods. The cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;

(c) For the immediately ensuing fiscal year or biennial period, an estimate of revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue to be received from taxation of personal and real property, separately stated as to each such source: The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balances, whichever is applicable, to be available at the beginning of the year or biennial period; the amounts proposed to be expended during the year; and the amount of cash reserve, based on actual experience of prior years or biennial periods, which cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;

(d) A statement setting out separately the amount sought to be raised from the levy of a tax on the taxable value of real property (i) for the purpose of paying the principal or interest on bonds issued by the Governing Body and (ii) for all other purposes;

(e) A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement, including each proprietary function fund included in a separate proprietary budget statement prepared pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act, and a grand total of all funds maintained by the Governing Body; and

(f) A list of the proprietary functions which are not included in the budget statement. Such proprietary functions shall have a separate budget statement which is approved by the Governing Body as provided in the Municipal Proprietary Function Act.

(2) The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance required to be included in the budget statement by this section shall include deposits and investments of the municipality as well as any funds held by the County Treasurer for the municipality and shall be accurately stated on the proposed budget statement.

(3) The municipality shall correct any material errors in the budget statement detected by the Auditor of Public Accounts or by other sources.

(4) The estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for the ensuing fiscal year or biennial period less all estimated and actual unencumbered balances at the beginning of the year and less the estimated income from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than taxation of personal and real property shall equal the amount to be received from taxes, and such amount shall be shown on the proposed budget statement pursuant to this section. The amount to be raised from taxation of personal and real property, as determined above, plus the estimated revenue from other sources, including motor vehicle taxes, and the unencumbered balances shall equal the estimated expenditures, plus the necessary required cash reserve, for the ensuing year or biennial period.


Source: Ord. 1414 (1998); Ord. 1559 (2003); Ord. 1855 (2013); Ord. 2091 (2019)



1-903 Fiscal Management; Proposed Budget Statement; Hearing; Adoption; Certification Of Amount To Be Received From Taxation
(1) The Governing Body shall each year or biennial period conduct a public hearing on its proposed budget statement. Notice of the place and time of the hearing, together with a summary of the proposed budget statement, shall be published at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality.

(2) After the hearing, the proposed budget statement shall be adopted, or amended and adopted as amended, and a written record shall be kept of such hearing. The amount to be received from personal and real property taxation shall be certified to the levying board after the proposed budget statement is adopted or is amended and adopted as amended. The certification of the amount to be received from personal and real property taxation shall specify separately (a) the amount to be applied to the payment of principal or interest on bonds issued by the Governing Body and (b) the amount to be received for all other purposes.

(3) If the adopted budget statement reflects a change from that shown in the published proposed budget statement, a summary of such changes shall be published within 20 days after its adoption in the manner provided in this section, but without provision for hearing, setting forth the items changed and the reasons for such changes.

(4) When a levy increase has been authorized by vote of the electors, the adopted budget statement shall indicate the amount of the levy increase.


Source: Ord. 1415 (1998); Ord. 1560 (2003); Ord. 1855 (2013)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-506; 13-507



1-904 Fiscal Management; Adopted Budget Statement; Filing; Certification Of Amount Of Tax
The Governing Body shall file with and certify to the levying board on or before September 20 of each year, and file with the Nebraska State Auditor a copy of the adopted budget statement, together with the amount to be levied, setting out separately the amount to be levied for the payment of principal or interest on bonds issued by the Governing Body and the amount to be levied for all other purposes. Proof of publication shall be attached to the statements. The Governing Body, shall not certify any tax that exceeds the maximum levy prescribed by State law, except that in certifying the amount to be so levied, allowance may be made for delinquent taxes not exceeding five percent (5%) of the amount to be levied plus the actual percentage of delinquent taxes for the preceding tax year and for the amount of estimated tax loss from any pending or anticipated litigation which involves taxation and in which tax collections have been or can be withheld or escrowed by court order.


Source: Ord. 1416 (1998); Ord. 1554 (2003); Ord. 1855 (2013)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-508



1-904.01 Fiscal Management; Expenditures Prior To Adoption Of Budget
(1) On and after the first day of its fiscal year or biennial period in 1993 and of each succeeding year or biennial period and until the adoption of the budget by the Governing Body in September, the Governing Body may expend any balance of cash on hand for the current expenses of the Municipality. Except as provided in subsection (2), such expenditures shall not exceed an amount equivalent to the total amount expended under the last budget in the equivalent period of the prior budget year. Such expenditures shall be charged against the appropriations for each individual fund or purpose as provided in the budget when adopted.

(2) The restriction on expenditures in subsection (1) may be exceeded upon the express finding of the Governing Body that expenditures beyond the amount authorized are necessary to enable the Municipality to meet its statutory duties and responsibilities. The finding and approval of the expenditures in excess of the statutory authorization shall be adopted by the Governing Body in open public session. Expenditures authorized by this section shall be charged against appropriations for each individual fund or purpose as provided in the budget when adopted, and nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize expenditures by the Municipality in excess of that authorized by any other statutory provision.


Source: Ord. 1855 (2013)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-509.01; 13-509.02




1-904.02 Fiscal Management; Property Tax Levy; Maximum Authority To Exceed
(1) Property tax levies for the support of the city for fiscal years or biennial periods beginning on or after July 1, 1998 shall be limited to the amounts set forth in this subsection, except as provided in subsection (3). The city may levy a maximum levy of $0.45 per $100 of taxable valuation of property subject to the levy plus an additional $0.05 per $100 of taxable valuation to provide financing for the city's share of revenue required under an agreement or agreements executed pursuant to the Interlocal Cooperation Act (Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-801 to 13-827) or the Joint Public Agency Act (Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-801 to 13-827). The maximum levy shall include amounts levied to pay for sums to support libraries pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-201, museums pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-501, visiting community nurse, home health nurse, or home health agencies pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 71-1637, or statues, memorials, or monuments pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 80-202. Property tax levies for judgments, except judgments or orders from the Commission of Industrial Relations, obtained against the city which require or obligate the city to pay such judgment, to the extent such judgment is not paid by liability insurance coverage of the city, for preexisting lease purchase contracts approved prior to July 1, 1998, for bonded indebtedness approved according to law and secured by a levy on property, and for payments by a public airport to retire interest free loans from the Department of Aeronautics in lieu of bonded indebtedness at a lower cost to the public airport are not included in the levy limits established by this subsection. The limitations on tax levies provided in this subsection are to include all other general or special levies provided by law. Notwithstanding other provisions of law, the only exceptions to the limits in this subsection are those provided by or authorized by this section. Tax levies in excess of the limitations in this section shall be considered unauthorized levies under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-1606 unless approved under subsection (3).

(2) All city airport authorities established under the Cities Airport Authorities Act, community redevelopment authorities established under the Community Development Law, and off-street parking districts established under the Off-street Parking District Act may be allocated property taxes as authorized by law which are authorized by the city and are counted in the municipal levy limit provided by subsection (1), except that such limitation shall not apply to property tax levies for preexisting lease purchase contracts approved prior to July 1, 1998, for bonded indebtedness approved according to law and secured by a levy on property, and for payments by a public airport to retire interest free loans from the Department of Aeronautics in lieu of bonded indebtedness at a lower cost to the public airport. For off-street parking districts established under the Off-street Parking District Act, the tax shall be counted in the allocation by the city proportionately, by dividing the total taxable valuation of the taxable property within the district by the total taxable valuation of the taxable property within the city multiplied by the levy of the district. The City Council shall review and approve or disapprove the levy request of the political subdivisions subject to this subsection. The City Council may approve all or a portion of the levy request and may approve a levy request that would allow a levy greater than that permitted by law. The levy allocated by the city may be exceeded as provided in subsection (3).

(a) On or before August 1, all political subdivisions subject to municipal levy authority under subsection (2) shall submit a preliminary request for levy allocation to the City Council. The preliminary request of the political subdivision shall be in the form of a resolution adopted by a majority vote of members present of the political subdivision's governing body. The failure of a political subdivision to make a preliminary request shall preclude such political subdivision from using procedures set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-3444 to exceed the final levy allocation as determined in subsection (2).

(b) The City Council shall:

(i) Adopt a resolution by a majority vote of members present which determines a final allocation of levy authority to its political subdivisions; and,

(ii) Forward a copy of such resolution to the chairperson of the governing body of each of its political subdivisions.

(c) No final levy allocation shall be changed after September 1 except by agreement between both the City Council and the governing body of the political subdivision whose final levy allocation is at issue. 

(3) The City may exceed the limits provided in subsection (1) by an amount not to exceed a maximum levy approved by a majority of registered voters voting on the issue in a primary, general, or special election at which the issue is placed before the registered voters. A vote to exceed the limits must be approved prior to October 10 of the fiscal year or biennial period which is to be the first to exceed the limits.

(a) The City Council may call for the submission of the issue to the voters:

(i) By passing a resolution calling for exceeding the limits by a vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the City Council and delivering a copy of the resolution to the County Clerk or Election Commissioner of every county which contains all or part of the city; or

(ii) Upon receipt of a petition by the County Clerk or Election Commissioner of every county containing all or part of the city requesting an election signed by at least five percent (5%) of the registered voters residing in the city.

(b) The resolution or petition shall include the amount of levy which would be imposed in excess of the limits provided in subsection (1) and the duration of the excess levy authority. The excess levy authority shall not have a duration greater than five years. Any resolution or petition calling for a special election shall be filed with the County Clerk or Election Commissioner no later than thirty days prior to the date of the election, and the time of publication and providing a copy of the notice of election required in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-802 shall be no later than twenty days prior to the election.

(c) The County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall place the issue on the ballot at an election as called for in the resolution or petition which is at least thirty days after receipt of the resolution or petition. The election shall be held pursuant to the Election Act. For petitions filed with the County Clerk or Election Commissioner on or after May 1, 1998, the petition shall be in the form as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32-628 to 32-631.

(d) Any excess levy authority approved under subsection (3) shall terminate pursuant to its terms; on a vote of the City Council to terminate the authority to levy more than the limits; at the end of the fourth fiscal year following the first year in which the levy exceeded the limit; or, as provided in subsection (4), whichever is earliest.

(e) The City Council may pass no more than one resolution calling for an election pursuant to subsection (3) during any one calendar year or biennial period. Only one election may be held in any one calendar year pursuant to a petition initiated under subsection (3). The ballot question may include any terms and conditions set forth in the resolution or petition and shall include the language specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-3444.

(f) If a majority of the votes cast upon the ballot question are in favor of such tax, the County Board shall authorize a tax in excess of the limits in subsection (1), but such tax shall not exceed the amount stated in the ballot question. If a majority of those voting on the ballot question are opposed to such tax, the City Council shall not impose such tax.

(4) The City may rescind or modify a previously approved excess levy authority prior to its expiration by a majority of registered voters voting on the issue in a primary, general, or special election at which the issue is placed before the registered voters. A vote to rescind or modify must be approved prior to October 10 of the fiscal year for which it is to be effective.

(a) The City Council may call for the submission of the issue to the voters:

(i) By passing a resolution calling for the rescission or modification by a vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the City Council and delivering a copy of the resolution to the County Clerk or Election Commissioner of every county which contains all or part of the city; or

(ii) Upon request of a petition by the County Clerk or Election Commissioner of every county containing all or part of the city requesting an election signed by at least five percent (5%) of the registered voters residing in the city.

(b) The resolution or petition shall include the amount and the duration of the previously approved excess levy authority and a statement that either such excess levy authority will be rescinded or such excess levy authority will be modified. If the excess levy authority will be modified, the amount and duration of such modification shall be stated. The modification shall not have a duration greater than five years. The County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall place the issue on the ballot at an election as called for in the resolution or petition which is at least thirty days after receipt of the resolution or petition, and the time of publication and providing a copy of the notice of election required in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 32-802 shall be no later than twenty days prior to the election. The election shall be held pursuant to the Election Act.


Source: Ord. 1410 (1998); Ord. 1557 (2003); Ord. 1855 (2013)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 77-3442 to 77-3444



1-904.03 Fiscal Management; Property Tax Levy; Request; Authority To Set
(1) The property tax request for the prior year shall be the property tax request for the current year for purposes of the levy set by the County Board of Equalization in Neb. Rev. Stat. 77-1601 unless the City Council passes by a majority vote a resolution or ordinance setting the tax request at a different amount. Such resolution or ordinance shall only be passed after a special public hearing called for such purpose is held and after notice is published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the municipality at least five days prior to the hearing.

(2) The hearing notice shall contain the following information:

(a) The dollar amount of the prior year's tax request and the property tax rate that was necessary to fund that tax request;

(b) The property tax rate that would be necessary to fund last year's tax request if applied to the current year's valuation; and,

(c) The proposed dollar amount of the tax request for the current year and the property tax rate that will be necessary to fund that tax request.

(3) Any resolution setting a tax request under this section shall be certified and forwarded to the County Clerk prior to October 14 of the year for which the tax request is to apply.

(4) Any tax levy which is not in compliance with this section and Neb. Rev. Stat. 77-1601 shall be construed as an unauthorized levy under Neb. Rev. Stat. 77-1606.


Source: Ord. 1417 (1998); Ord. 1558 (2003); Ord. 1855 (2013)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-702; 77-1601 to 77-1606



1-905 Fiscal Management; Property Tax Levy; Power To Levy; Certification Of Amount
(1) Subject to the limits in Neb. Rev. Stat. 77-3442, the Mayor and City Council shall have the power to levy and collect taxes for all municipal purposes on the taxable property within the corporate limits of the Municipality. All municipal taxes, except special assessments otherwise provided for, shall become due on the first day of December of each year.

(2) At the time provided for by law, the Council shall cause to be certified to the County Clerk the amount of tax to be levied for the purposes of the adopted budget statement on the taxable property within the Municipality for the year then ensuing, as shown by the assessment roll for such year, including all special assessments and taxes assessed as otherwise provided.

(3) The maximum amount of tax which may be certified, assessed, and collected for purposes of the adopted budget statement shall not require a tax levy in excess of the amounts specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-702.

(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize an increase in the amounts of levies for any specific municipal purpose or purposes elsewhere limited by law, whether limited in specific sums or by tax levies.


Source: Ord. 1417 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-702; 77-3442




1-905.01 Fiscal Management; All-Purpose Levy; Allocation; Abandonment; Extraordinary Levies
(1) The Governing Body has decided to certify to the County Clerk for collection one all-purpose levy required to be raised by taxation for all municipal purposes instead of certifying a schedule of levies for specific purposes added together. Subject to the limits in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-3442, the all-purpose levy shall not exceed the annual levy specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-1309 to be levied upon the taxable valuation of all taxable property in the Municipality.

(2) The amount of the all-purpose levy shall be certified as a single amount for general fund purposes. The Governing Body shall allocate the amount raised by the all-purpose levy to the several departments of the Municipality in its annual budget and appropriation ordinance, or in other legal manner, as the Governing Body deems wisest and best.

(3) The Municipality shall be bound by its election to follow the all-purpose levy method during the ensuing fiscal year but may abandon such method in succeeding fiscal years.

(4) Otherwise authorized extraordinary levies to service and pay bonded indebtedness of the Municipality may be made by the Municipality in addition to the all-purpose levy.


Source: Ord. 1408 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-1309 to 19-1312; 77-3442



1-906 Fiscal Management Appropriations
The City shall adopt a budget statement pursuant to the Nebraska Budget Act, to be termed "the Annual Appropriation Bill", in which are appropriated such sums of money as may be deemed necessary to defray all necessary expenses and liabilities of the City.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-704



1-907 Fiscal Management; Expenditures
The Governing Body shall not have the power to appropriate, issue, or draw any order or warrant on the Municipal Treasurer for money, unless the same has been appropriated or ordered by ordinance or the claim has been allowed and a fund has been provided in the adopted budget statement out of which such claim is payable.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-706; 16-726 to 16-729



1-908 Fiscal Management; Judgments
Should any judgment be obtained against the Municipality, the Mayor and the Finance Committee, with the sanction of the City Council, may borrow a sufficient amount to pay the same for a period of time not to extend beyond the close of the next fiscal year. The Governing Body shall then add to the amount authorized to be raised in the general tax levy the sum and interest accrued of the judgment.


Source: Ord. 1855 (2013)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-706



1-909 Fiscal Management; Unlawful Transfers
Any transfer or division of the money or credits from any of the funds to another fund or to a purpose other than for which proposed, except as specifically hereinafter provided, shall render any council member voting therefor or any municipal official participating therein guilty of a misdemeanor.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-706



1-910 Fiscal Management; Lawful Transfer Of Funds
When the City Council, by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the members, shall declare the expenditure of any fund for the purpose for which it was created to be unwise and impracticable or where the purpose has been fully accomplished and the whole fund or an unexpired balance thereof remains, and no indebtedness has been incurred on account of such fund which has not been fully paid, such fund may be transferred to any other fund of the Municipality by the affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the Council.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-721



1-911 Fiscal Management; Insufficient Funds
The Governing Body may, whenever during the current fiscal year or biennial period it becomes apparent due to unforeseen emergencies that there is temporarily insufficient money in a particular fund to meet the requirements of the adopted budget of expenditures for that fund, by a majority vote, unless otherwise provided by state law, transfer money from other funds to such fund. No expenditure during the fiscal year or biennial period shall be made in excess of the amounts indicated in the adopted budget statement, except as authorized herein. If, as the result of unforeseen circumstances, the revenue of the current fiscal year shall be insufficient, the Governing Body may propose to supplement the previously adopted budget statement and shall conduct a public hearing at which time any taxpayer may appear or file a written statement protesting the application for additional money. A written record shall be kept of all such hearings. Notice of a place and time for the said hearing shall be published at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality. The published notice shall set forth the time and place of the proposed hearing, the amount in dollars of additional or reduced money required and for what purpose, a statement setting forth the nature of the unanticipated circumstances and, if the budget requirements are to be increased, the reasons why the previously adopted budget of expenditures cannot be reduced during the remainder of the current year to meet the need for additional money in that manner and a copy of the summary of the originally adopted budget previously published. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing on the proposed supplemental budget and the approval of the Governing Body, the Governing Body shall file with the County Clerk and the Nebraska State Auditor, a copy of the revised budget, as adopted, and shall certify the revised amount of tax to be levied. The Governing Body may then issue warrants in payment for expenditures authorized by the adopted revised budget. The warrants shall be referred to as registered warrants and shall be repaid during the next fiscal year or biennial period from funds derived from taxes levied therefor.


Source: Ord. 1855 (2013)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-510; 13-511



1-912 Fiscal Management; Sinking Funds
(1) The Governing Body, subject to the limitations set forth herein, shall have the power to levy a tax not to exceed three mills on the dollar in any one year upon the assessed value of all taxable property within the Municipality, except intangible property, for a term not to exceed ten years in addition to the amount of tax which may be annually levied for the purposes of the adopted budget statement of the Municipality, for the purpose of establishing a sinking fund for the construction, purchase, improvement, extension, or repair of the approved uses as authorized by state law.

(2) To initiate the said sinking fund, the Governing Body shall declare its purpose by resolution to submit to the qualified electors of the Municipality the proposition to provide the improvement at the next general municipal election. The resolution shall set forth the improvement, the estimated cost, the amount of the annual levy, the number of years required to provide the required revenue, the name of the sinking fund proposed, and the proposition as it will appear on the ballot. Notice of the said proposition shall be published in its entirety three times on successive weeks before the day of the election in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality. The sinking fund may be established after the election if a majority or more of the legal votes were in favor of the establishment of the fund. The Governing Body may then proceed to establish the said fund in conformity with the provisions of the proposition, and applicable state law. The funds received by the Municipal Treasurer shall, as they accumulate, be immediately invested with the written approval of the Governing Body in the manner provided by state law.

(3) No sinking fund so established shall be used for any purpose or purposes contrary to the purpose as it appeared on the ballot unless the Governing Body is authorized to do so by sixty percent (60%) of the qualified electors of the Municipality voting at a general election favoring such a change in the use of the sinking fund.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-1301 to 19-1304; 77-2337 to 77-2339



1-913 Fiscal Management; Depositories; Conflict Of Interest
The City Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times keep on deposit, for safekeeping, in banks, capital stock financial institutions, or qualifying mutual financial institutions of approved and responsible standing, all money collected, received, or held by him or her as City Treasurer. Such deposits shall be subject to all regulations imposed by law or adopted by the City Council for the receiving and holding thereof. The fact that a stockholder, director, or other officer of such bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution shall also be serving as Mayor, as a member of the City Council, as a member of a Board of Public Works, or as any other officer of such Municipality shall not disqualify such bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution from acting as a depository for such municipal funds. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock financial institutions. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in qualifying mutual financial institutions.


Source: Ord. 1419 (1998); Ord. 1820 (2012)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 77-2365; 77-2366



1-914 Fiscal Management; Certificates Of Deposit; Time Deposits; Security Required
The City Treasurer may, upon resolution of the Mayor and Council authorizing the same, purchase certificates of deposit from and make time deposits in banks, capital stock financial institutions, or qualifying mutual financial institutions selected as depositories of city funds under the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-712 to 16-715. The certificates of deposit purchased and time deposits made shall bear interest and shall be secured as set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-714 and 16-715, except that the penal sum of such bond or the sum of such security shall be reduced in the amount of the time deposit or certificate of deposit insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock financial institutions. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in qualifying mutual financial institutions.


Source: Ord. 1420 (1998); Ord. 1820 (2012)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-712 to 16-715; 77-2365; 77-2366



1-915 Fiscal Management; Depository Bond
For the security of the fund so deposited, the City Treasurer shall require each depository to give bond for the safekeeping and payment of such deposits and the accretions thereof, which bond shall run to the City and be approved by the Mayor. Such bond shall be conditioned that such a depository shall, at the end of every quarter, render to the Treasurer a statement in duplicate showing the several daily balances, the amount of money of the City held by it during the quarter, the amount of the accretion thereto, and how credited. The bond shall also be conditioned that the depository shall generally do and perform whatever may be required by the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-712 to 16-715 and faithfully discharge the trust reposed in such depository. Such bond shall be as nearly as practicable in the form provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2304. No person in any way connected with any depository as an officer or stockholder shall be accepted as a surety on any bond given by the depository of which he or she is an officer or stockholder. Such bond shall be deposited with the City Clerk. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock financial institutions. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in qualifying mutual financial institutions.


Source: Ord. 1421 (1998); Ord. 1820 (2012)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-712 to 16-715; 77-2304; 77-2365; 77-2366



1-916 Fiscal Management; Security In Lieu Of Bond; Authorized
In lieu of the bond required by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-714, any bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution making application to become a depository may give security as provided in the Public Funds Deposit Security Act to the City Clerk. The penal sum of such bond shall be equal to or greater than the amount of the deposit in excess of that portion of such deposit insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock financial institutions. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in qualifying mutual financial institutions.


Source: Ord. 1422 (1998); Ord. 1820 (2012)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-714; 77-2365; 77-2366



1-917 Fiscal Management; Maximum Deposits; Liability Of Treasurer
The Treasurer shall not have on deposit in any bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution at any time more than the amount insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation plus the maximum amount of the bond given by the bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution if the bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution gives a surety bond, nor in any bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution giving a personal bond, more than the amount insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation plus one-half (1/2) of the amount of the bond of such bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution; and the amount so on deposit any time with any such bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution shall not in either case exceed the amount insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation plus the paid-up capital stock and surplus of such bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution. The City Treasurer shall not be liable for any loss sustained by reason of the failure of any such bonded depository whose bond has been duly approved by the Mayor as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-714 or which has, in lieu of a surety bond, given security as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-715.


Source: Ord. 1423 (1998); Ord. 1820 (2012)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-714; 16-715



1-918 Fiscal Management; Investment Of Funds
Whenever the Municipality shall have accumulated a surplus in its General Fund in excess of its current needs or shall have accumulated a sinking fund for the payment of its bonds and the money in such sinking fund shall exceed the amount necessary to pay the principal and interest of any such bonds which become due during the current year, the Mayor and Council are authorized to invest such surplus in its General Fund, in excess of current needs, or such excess in its sinking funds, in any securities in which the Board of Educational Lands and Funds of Nebraska is authorized by law to invest the educational funds of the State, including bonds and debentures issued either singly or collectively by any of the twelve federal land banks, the twelve intermediate credit banks, or the thirteen banks for cooperatives under the supervision of the Farm Credit Administration. When any warrant of the Municipality shall have been presented for payment and the same is not paid for want of funds, the Treasurer shall, upon and under direction of the Mayor and Council, purchase and take up such registered warrant with the sinking funds in the hands of the Treasurer and hold such warrant for the benefit of the fund so invested until the same is paid in its order, as provided by law.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 77-2335; 77-2341



1-919 Fiscal Management; Claims
All claims against the Municipality, including claims for personal injury but not including officers' salaries and interest upon public debts, must be filed with the Municipal Clerk. Upon the filing of any such claim, the party shall state therein his post office address; and, upon the disallowance of any such claim, it will be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to notify the claimant or his agent or attorney by letter mailed to such address within five days after such disallowance.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-726



1-920 Fiscal Management; Claims; Audits
The Council shall, prior to the allowance of any claim against the Municipality, examine and audit the same to determine whether it is in proper form, is correctly computed, and is justly and legally due and payable and shall determine the proper fund from which the same is payable.



1-921 Fiscal Management; Warrants
Upon allowance of a claim by the Council, the order for the payment thereof shall specify the particular fund or appropriation out of which it is payable as specified in the Annual Appropriation Bill and no order or warrant shall be drawn in excess of eighty-five percent (85%) of the current levy for the purpose of which it is drawn unless there shall be sufficient money in the treasury to the credit of the proper fund for its payment, and no claim shall be audited or allowed except an order or warrant for the payment thereof may legally be drawn. All warrants drawn upon the treasury must be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk and shall state the particular fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable, the person to whom payable, and for what particular object. No money shall be otherwise paid that has not been drawn upon such warrant. Such warrants may be delivered immediately when so drawn.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-718



1-922 Fiscal Management; Contracts; Appropriation
No contract shall be made by the City Council or any committee or member thereof and no expense shall be incurred by any of the officers or departments of the Municipality, whether the object of the expenditure is ordered by the City Council or not, unless an appropriation shall have been previously made concerning such expense, except as otherwise provided by law.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-501




1-923 Fiscal Management; Contracts; Vote
On the passage or adoption of every resolution or order to enter into a contract or accepting of work done under contract by the Mayor or Council, the yeas and nays shall be called and entered upon the record. To pass or adopt any bylaw, ordinance, or any such resolution or order, a concurrence of a majority of the whole number of the members elected to the Council shall be required. The Mayor may vote on any such matter when his vote shall be decisive, and the Mayor shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to be a member of the Council.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-503



1-924 Fiscal Management; Contracts And Purchases; Bidding And Other Requirements
(1) Except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-412.01 for a contract with a public power district to operate, renew, replace, or add to the electric distribution, transmission, or generation system of the Municipality, no contract, for enlargement or general improvements such as water extensions, sewers, public heating system, bridges, work on streets, or any other work or improvement when the cost of such improvement is assessed to the property, costing over thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) shall be made unless it is first approved by the Governing Body.

(2) Except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-412.01, before the Governing Body makes any contract in excess of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) for enlargement or general improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating system, bridges, work on streets or any other work or improvement when the cost of such enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property, an estimate of the cost shall be made by the Municipal Engineer and submitted to the Governing Body. In advertising for bids as provided in subsections (3) and (5) of this section, the Governing Body may publish the amount of the estimate.

(3) Advertisements for bids shall be required for any contract costing over thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) entered into for enlargement or general improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating system, bridges, work on streets, or any other work or improvement when the cost of such enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property, or for the purchase of equipment used in the construction of such enlargement or general improvements.

(4) A municipal Electric Utility may enter into a contract for the enlargement or improvement of the electric system or for the purchase of equipment used for such enlargement or improvement without advertising for bids if the price is:

(a) thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) or less;

(b) sixty thousand dollars ($60,000) or less and the municipal Electric Utility has gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000);

(c) ninety thousand dollars ($90,000) or less and the municipal Electric Utility has gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of five million dollars ($5,000,000); or,

(d) one hundred twenty thousand dollars ($120,000) or less and the municipal Electric Utility has gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of ten million dollars ($10,000,000).

(5) The advertisement provided for in subsection (3) of this section shall be published at least seven days prior to the bid closing in a legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the Municipality. In case of a public emergency resulting from infectious or contagious diseases, destructive windstorms, floods, snow, war, or an exigency or pressing necessity or unforeseen need calling for immediate action or remedy to prevent a serious loss of, or serious injury or damage to, life, health, or property, estimates of costs and advertising for bids may be waived in the emergency ordinance authorized by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-405 when adopted by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the Governing Body and entered of record.

(6) If, after advertising for bids as provided in this section, the Governing Body receives fewer than two bids on a contract or if the bids received by the Governing Body contain a price which exceeds the estimated cost, the Mayor and City Council may negotiate a contract in an attempt to complete the proposed enlargement or general improvements at a cost commensurate with the estimate given.

(7) If the materials are of such a nature that, in the opinion of the manufacturer and with the concurrence of the Governing Body, no cost can be estimated until the materials have been manufactured or assembled to the specific qualifications of the purchasing Municipality, the Governing Body may authorize the manufacture and assemblage of such materials and may thereafter approve the estimated cost expenditure when it is provided by the manufacturer.

(8) Any municipal bidding procedure may be waived by the Governing Body when materials or equipment are purchased at the same price and from the same seller as materials or equipment which have formerly been obtained pursuant to the State bidding procedure in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 81-145 to 81-162 or when the contract is negotiated directly with a sheltered workshop pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-1503.

(9) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law or a home rule charter, a Municipality which has established, by an interlocal agreement with any county, a joint purchasing division or agency may purchase personal property without competitive bidding if the price for the property has been established by the federal General Services Administration or the material division of the Department of Administrative Services. For purpose of this subsection:

(a) Personal property includes, but is not limited to, supplies, materials, and equipment used by or furnished to any officer, office, department, institution, board, or other agency; and,

(b) Purchasing or purchased means the obtaining of personal property by sale, lease, or other contractual means.


Source: Ord. 1424 (1998); Ord. 1799 (2011)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-321; 16-321.01; 18-1756



1-925 Fiscal Management; Annual Audit; Financial Statements
The Governing Body shall cause an audit of the municipal accounts to be made by a qualified accountant as expeditiously as possible following the close of the fiscal year. Such audit shall be made on a cash or accrual method at the discretion of the Governing Body. The said audit shall be completed and the annual audit report made not later than six months after the close of the fiscal year. The accountant making the audit shall submit not less than three copies of the audit report to the Governing Body. All public utilities or other enterprises which substantially generate their own revenue shall be audited separately, and the results of such audits shall appear separately in the annual audit report, and such audits shall be on an accrual basis and shall contain statements and materials which conform to generally accepted accounting principles. The audit report shall set forth the financial position and results of financial operations for each fund or group of accounts of the Municipality as well as an opinion by the accountant with respect to the financial statements. Two copies of the annual audit report shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and shall become a part of the public records of the Municipal Clerk's office and will at all times thereafter be open for public inspection. One copy shall be filed with the Auditor of Public Accounts. Every Governing Body that is required herein to submit to an audit of its accounts shall provide and file with the Municipal Clerk, not later than August 1 of each year, financial statements showing its actual and budgeted figures for the most recently completed fiscal year.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-2901 to 19-2909; 23-934




1-926 [Repealed]
Repealed. Ordinance 2111 (2020).

1-927 Fiscal Management; Proprietary Functions; Fiscal Year Or Biennial Period; Budget Statements; Filing; Hearing; Option; Reconciliation
(1) Pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act, the Governing Body may prepare a proprietary budget statement for its proprietary functions separate and apart from its Municipal budget statement prepared pursuant to the Nebraska Budget Act. For purposes of this section, proprietary function shall mean a water supply or distribution utility, a wastewater collection or treatment utility, an electric generation, transmission, or distribution utility, a gas supply, transmission, or distribution utility, an integrated solid waste management collection, disposal, or handling utility, or a hospital or a nursing home owned by the Municipality.

(2) The Governing Body may establish a separate fiscal year or biennial period for each proprietary function, except that any proprietary function which is subsidized by appropriations from the Municipality's general fund shall have the same fiscal year or biennial period as the Municipality. For purposes of this section, subsidization shall mean that the costs of operation of a proprietary function are regularly financed by appropriations from the Municipality's general fund in excess of the amount paid by the Municipality to the proprietary function for actual service or services received.

(3) If the Municipality does not include its proprietary functions in its Municipal budget statement, a proposed proprietary statement shall be prepared in writing on forms provided by the State Auditor and filed with the Municipal Clerk, at least thirty days prior to the start of the fiscal year or biennial period of each proprietary function, containing the following information:

(a) For the immediate two prior fiscal years or biennial periods, the revenue from all sources, the unencumbered cash balance at the beginning and end of the year or biennial period, the amount received by taxation, and the amount of actual expenditure;

(b) For the current fiscal year or biennial period, actual and estimated revenue from all sources separately stated as to each such source, the actual unencumbered cash balance available at the beginning of the year, the amount received from taxation, and the amount of actual and estimated expenditure, whichever is applicable;

(c) For the immediately ensuing fiscal year or biennial period, an estimate of revenue from all sources separately stated as to each such source, the actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance, whichever is applicable, to be available at the beginning of the year, the amounts proposed to be expended during the fiscal year, and the amount of cash reserve based on actual experience of prior years or biennial periods; and,

(d) A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement which shall include a total of all funds maintained for the proprietary function. Such statement shall contain the estimated cash reserve for each fiscal year or biennial period and shall note whether or not such reserve is encumbered. The cash reserve projections shall be based upon the actual experience of prior years or biennial periods.

(4) After the proposed proprietary budget statement is filed with the Municipal Clerk, the Governing Body shall conduct a public hearing on such statement. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, a summary of the proposed proprietary budget statement, and notice that the full proposed proprietary budget statement is available for public review with the Municipal Clerk during normal business hours, shall be published at least five days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the Governing Body's jurisdiction or by mailing each resident within the Governing Body's jurisdiction.

(5) After such hearing, the proposed proprietary budget statement shall be adopted or amended and adopted as amended, and a written report shall be kept of such hearing. If the adopted proprietary budget statement reflects a change from the proposed proprietary statement presented at the hearing, a copy of the adopted proprietary budget statement shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk within twenty days after its adoption and published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Governing Body's jurisdiction or by mailing to each resident within the Governing Body's jurisdiction.

(6) If the actual expenditures for a proprietary function exceed the estimated expenditures in the proprietary budget statement during its fiscal year or biennial period, the Governing Body shall adopt a proprietary function reconciliation statement within ninety days after the end of such fiscal year or biennial period which reflects any difference between the adopted proprietary budget statement for the previous fiscal year or biennial period and the actual expenditures and revenue for such fiscal year or biennial period. After the adoption of a proprietary function reconciliation statement, it shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Governing Body's jurisdiction or by mailing to each resident within the Governing Body's jurisdiction. If the difference between the adopted proprietary budget for the previous fiscal year or biennial period and the actual expenditures and revenues for such fiscal year or biennial period is greater than ten percent (10%), the proprietary function reconciliation statement shall only be adopted following a public hearing.

(7) Any income from a proprietary function which is transferred to the general fund of the Municipality shall be shown as a source of revenue in the Municipal budget statement created pursuant to the Nebraska Budget Act.


Source: Ord. 1855 (2013)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-2803 to 18-2808



1-928 Fiscal Management; Fiscal Year Or Biennial Period
The fiscal year or biennial period of the City and of any public utility of the City commences on October 1 and extends through the following September 30 except as provided in the Municipal Proprietary Function Act.


Source: Ord. 1855 (2013)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-701



1-929 Fiscal Management; Fiscal Year Or Biennial Period
Public funds shall mean all money, including non-tax money, used in the operation and functions of governing bodies. For purposes of a county, city, or village which has a lottery established under the Nebraska County and City Lottery Act, only those net proceeds which are actually received by the county, city or village from a licensed lottery operator shall be considered public funds, and public funds shall not include amounts awarded as prizes. 


Source: Ord. 1273 (1995); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1855 (2013)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-503



1-930 [Reserved]

1-931 Fiscal Management; Credit Cards; Authority To Accept
(1) The Governing Body may authorize municipal officials to accept credit cards, charge cards, or debit cards as a method of cash payment of any tax, levy, excise, duty, custom, toll, interest, penalty, fine, license, fee, or assessment of whatever kind or nature, whether general or special, as provided by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-1702.

(2) The total amount of such taxes, levies, excises, duties, customs, tolls, interest, penalties, fines, licenses, fees, or assessments of whatever kind or nature, whether general or special, paid for by credit card shall be collected by the municipal official.

(3) The Governing Body may choose to accept credit cards, charge cards, or debit cards as a means of cash payment to any facility it operates in a proprietary capacity and may adjust the price for services to reflect the handling and payment costs.

(4) The municipal official shall obtain, for each transaction, authorization for use of any credit card, charge card, or debit card used pursuant to this section from the financial institution, vending service company, credit card or charge card company, or third-party merchant bank providing such service.

(5) The Governing Body may choose to accept the types of credit cards, charge cards, or debit cards accepted by and the services provided to the State pursuant to the contract entered into by the State with one or more credit card, charge card, or debit card companies or third-party merchant banks for services on behalf of the state and those political subdivisions that choose to participate in the state contract. The Governing Body may choose not to participate in the state contract and may choose types of credit cards, charge cards, and debit cards and may negotiate and contract independently or collectively as a governmental entity with one or more financial institutions, vending service companies, credit card, charge card, or debit card companies, or third-party merchant banks for the provision of such services.

(6) When authorizing acceptance of credit card or charge card payments, the Governing Body shall be authorized but not required to impose a surcharge or convenience fee upon the person making a payment by credit card or charge card so as to wholly or partially offset the amount of any discount or administrative fees charged to the Municipality. The surcharge or convenience fee shall be applied only when allowed by the operating rules and regulations of the credit card or charge card involved or when authorized in writing by the credit card or charge card company involved. When a person elects to make a payment to the Municipality by credit card or charge card and such a surcharge or convenience fee is imposed, the payment of such surcharge or convenience fee shall be deemed voluntary by such person and shall be in no case refundable.


Source: Ord. 1411 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-609; 77-1702



Article 10 Compensation
1-1001 Compensation; Municipal Officers And Employees
1-1002 Compensation; Salaries Of Mayor And Council
1-1003 Compensation; Change In Salary
1-1004 Compensation; Conflict Of Interest

1-1001 Compensation; Municipal Officers And Employees
Salaries of officers and employees of the Municipality shall be in such amount as the Governing Body shall fix by ordinance; provided, that after the Governing Body has adopted a wage and salary schedule with employee classifications and wage ranges for each classification by ordinance, such ordinance shall be sufficient for all changes in salary for Municipal employees included thereunder without further ordinances being passed, approved, and published. All salaries shall be on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and available for public inspection at any reasonable time.



1-1002 Compensation; Salaries Of Mayor And Council
The annual salaries of the Mayor and Council are hereby fixed in the sums and payable at the beginning of the full term of any member of the Governing Body as follows:

Mayor, per year, payable biweekly	$ 15,000.00
Council member (each), per year, biweekly	$   4,000.00

Source: Ord. 1702 (2008)




1-1003 Compensation; Change In Salary
The emoluments of any elected official shall not be increased or diminished during the term of office for which he was elected, except that elected officials who are elected to the Council or other body having more than one member and terms of one or more members commence and end at different times, the compensation of all members of that body may be increased or diminished at the beginning of the full term of any member thereof. No person who shall have resigned or vacated any elective office shall be again eligible to hold the office during the term he was elected to if after resignation the emoluments have been increased.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-326



1-1004 Compensation; Conflict Of Interest
(1) For purposes of this section officer shall mean any member of any Board or Commission of the Municipality, any Appointed Official if such Municipal official serves on a Board or Commission which spends and administers its own funds and is dealing with a contract made by such Board or Commission, or any elected Municipal Official. Unless specified otherwise, volunteer firefighters and ambulance drivers shall not be considered officers for purposes of this section, with respect to their duties as firefighters and ambulance drivers.

(2) No officer of the Municipality shall be permitted to benefit from any contract to which the Municipality is a party. The existence of such an interest in any contract renders the contract voidable by decree of a court of competent jurisdiction as to any person who entered into the contract or took assignment thereof with actual knowledge of the prohibited conflict. An action to have a contract declared void under this section may be brought by the Municipality or by any resident thereof and must be brought within one year after the contract is signed or assigned. Any such decree may provide for the reimbursement of any person for the reasonable value of all money, goods, material, labor, or services furnished under the contract, to the extent that the Municipality has benefited thereby. The prohibition in this section shall apply only when the officer or his or her parent, spouse, or child: 

(a) has a business with which the individual is associated or business association which shall mean a business in which the individual is a partner, director, or officer or in which the individual or a member of the individual's immediate family is a stockholder of a closed corporation stock worth one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more at fair market value or which represents more than five percent (5%) equity interest, or is a stockholder of publicly traded stock worth ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more at fair market value or which represents more than ten percent (10%) equity interest; or

(b) will receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission as a result of the contract; provided however, if such officer is an employee of the business involved in the contract and has no ownership interest or shall not receive a pecuniary fee, such officer shall not be deemed to have an interest within the meaning of this section.

(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply if the interested officer:

(a) Makes a declaration on the record to the Governmental Body responsible for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent for his or her interest, prior to official consideration of the contract;

(b) Does not vote on the matter of granting the contract, except that if the number of members of the Board declaring an interest in the contract would prevent the Board, with all members present, from securing a quorum on the issue, then all members may vote on the matter; and

(c) Does not act for the Municipality as to inspection or performance under the contract in which he or she has an interest.

(4) The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and selling of warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any Municipality by a financial institution shall not be considered a contract under the provisions of this section. The ownership of less than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of a corporation shall not constitute an interest within the meaning of this section. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if an officer's parent, spouse or child is an employee of the Municipality, the officer may vote on all issues of the contract which are generally applicable to all employees or all employees within a classification and do not single out his or her parent, spouse, or child for special action. If an officer has the power to employ personnel and he or she hires his or her parent, spouse, or child, such officer shall disclose the hiring pursuant to subsection (5), except that if the parent, spouse, or child is already employed in the position at the time the officer takes office and such position does not change, no disclosure need be made. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any contract entered into with an interested officer shall be subject to applicable competitive bidding requirements and shall be fair and reasonable to the Municipality.

(5) The Municipal Clerk shall maintain, separately from other records, a ledger containing the information listed in this subsection about every contract entered into by the Municipality in which disclosure is made as provided in this section. Such information shall be kept in the ledger for five years from the date of the officer's last day in office and shall include the:

(a) Names of the contracting parties;

(b) Nature of the interest of the officer in question;

(c) Date that the contract was approved by the Municipality involved;

(d) Amount of the contract; and

(e) Basic terms of the contract.

(6) The information supplied relative to the contract shall be provided to the Clerk not later than ten days after the contract has been signed by both parties. The ledger kept by the Clerk shall be available for public inspection during the normal working hours of the office in which it is kept.

(7) An open account established for the benefit of any Municipality or entity thereof, with a business in which an officer has an interest, shall be deemed a contract subject to the provisions of this section. The statement required to be filed pursuant to this section shall be filed within ten days after such account is opened. Thereafter, the Clerk shall maintain a running account of all amounts purchased on the open account. Purchases made from petty cash or a petty cash fund shall not be subject to the provisions of this section.

(8) Any officer who knowingly violates the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. 49-14,103.01 to 49-14,103.03 shall be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor. Any officer who negligently violates Neb. Rev. Stat. 49-14,103.01 to 49-14,103.03 shall be guilty of a Class V misdemeanor.

(9) Contracts involving one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less in which an officer of the Municipality may have an interest are hereby exempted from the provisions of this section.

(10) No officer, including volunteer firefighters and ambulance drivers, shall receive any pay or perquisites from the Municipality other than his or her salary. The Governing Body shall not pay or appropriate any money or other valuable thing to pay a person who is not an officer for the performance of any act, service, or duty, which shall come within the proper scope of the duties of any officer of the Municipality.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-305 to 18-312; 49-14,103.01 to 49-14,103.03; 70-624.04



Article 11 Police Pension Plan
1-1101 Incorporation Of Pension Plan
1-1102 Retirement Committee City Members

1-1101 Incorporation Of Pension Plan
The restated Police Officers Pension Plan for the City of Crete, is made a part of and incorporated into this Article as fully as if set forth at length herein. A copy of this plan is on file at the office of the City Clerk.



1-1102 Retirement Committee City Members
The City Council designated members for the Retirement Committee for the Pension Plan shall consist of the Mayor and the City Clerk-Treasurer and that the persons holding those offices are hereby appointed and empowered to perform all administrative duties not specifically delegated by ordinance to the Retirement Committee.



Article 12 Initiative And Referendum
1-1201 Initiative And Referendum; Definitions
1-1202 Initiative And Referendum; Petitions, Ballots
1-1203 Initiative And Referendum; Petition Form
1-1203.01 Initiative And Referendum; Declaratory Judgment
1-1204 Initiative And Referendum; Signature Sheets
1-1205 Initiative And Referendum; Petitions, Affidavit
1-1206 Initiative And Referendum; Petitions, Notification, Verification
1-1207 Initiative And Referendum; Frequency Of Occurrence
1-1208 Initiative And Referendum; Direct Vote
1-1209 Initiative And Referendum; Elections
1-1210 Initiative And Referendum; Ballots
1-1211 Initiative And Referendum; Initiative
1-1212 Initiative And Referendum; Referendum Limitations
1-1213 Initiative And Referendum; Referendum, Passage
1-1214 Initiative And Referendum; Violations, Penalties
1-1215 Initiative And Referendum; Applicability

1-1201 Initiative And Referendum; Definitions
The powers of initiative and referendum are reserved to the qualified electors of the Municipality by State law. This Article shall govern the use of initiative to enact, and the use of referendum to amend or repeal measures affecting the governance of the Municipality. For purposes of this Article, the definitions set out in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires, shall apply.

CIRCULATOR shall mean any person who solicits signatures for an initiative or referendum petition.

CLERK shall mean the Municipal Clerk or the Municipal Official in charge of elections.

GOVERNING BODY shall mean the legislative authority of the Municipality.

MEASURE shall mean an ordinance, charter provision, or resolution which is within the legislative authority of the Governing Body to pass, and which is not excluded from the operation of referendum by the exceptions in Section 1-1212.

MUNICIPALITY shall mean the City of Crete, Nebraska.

PETITION shall mean a document authorized for circulation pursuant to Section 1-1202, or any copy of such document.

PLACE OF RESIDENCE shall mean the street and number of the residence. If there is no street and number for the residence, place of residence shall mean the mailing address.

PROSPECTIVE PETITION shall mean a sample document containing the information necessary for a completed petition, including a sample signature sheet, which has not yet been authorized for circulation.

QUALIFIED ELECTORS shall mean all persons registered to vote. at the time the prospective petition is filed, in the jurisdiction governed or to be governed by any measure sought to be enacted by initiative, or altered or repealed by referendum. 

RESIDENCE shall mean that place at which a person has established his or her home, where he or she is habitually present, and to which, when he or she departs, he or she intends to return.

SIGNATURE SHEET shall mean a sheet of paper which is part of a petition and which is signed by persons wishing to support the petition effort.

(Ref. 18-2501 thru 18-2511 RS Neb.)

1-1202 Initiative And Referendum; Petitions, Ballots
Before circulating an initiative or referendum petition, the petitioner shall file with the Clerk a prospective petition. The Clerk shall date the prospective petition immediately upon its receipt. The Clerk shall verify that the prospective petition is in proper form and shall provide a ballot title for the initiative or referendum proposal, as described below. If the prospective petition is in proper form, the Clerk shall authorize the circulation of the petition and such authorization shall be given within three (3) working days from the date the prospective petition was filed. If the form of the prospective petition is incorrect, the Clerk shall, within three (3) working days from the date the prospective petition was filed, inform the petitioner of necessary changes and request that those changes be made. When the requested changes have been made and the revised prospective petition has been submitted to the Clerk in proper form, the Clerk shall authorize the circulation of the petition and such authorization shall be given within two (2) working days from the receipt of the properly revised petition. Verification by the Clerk that the prospective petition is in proper form does not constitute an admission by the Clerk, Governing Body, or Municipality that the measure is subject to referendum or limited referendum or that the measure may be enacted by initiative.

The ballot title of any measure to be initiated or referred shall consist of:

A briefly-worded caption by which the measure is commonly known or which accurately summarizes the measure;
A briefly-worded question which plainly states the purpose of the measure, and is phrased so that an affirmative response to the question corresponds to an affirmative vote on the measure; and
A concise and impartial statement, of not more than seventy-five (75) words, of the chief purpose of the measure.
The ballots used when voting on an initiative or referendum proposal shall contain the entire ballot title. Proposals for initiative and referendum shall be submitted on separate ballots and the ballots shall be printed in lower case ten point type, except that the caption shall be in bold face type. All initiative and referendum measures shall be submitted in a nonpartisan manner without indicating or suggesting on the ballot that they have or have not been approved or endorsed by any political party or organization.

(Ref 18-2512, 18-2513 RS Neb.)

1-1203 Initiative And Referendum; Petition Form
The forms designed by the Secretary of State to be used for initiative and referendum petitions shall be made available to the public by the City Clerk, and they shall serve as a guide for individuals preparing prospective petitions. Substantial compliance with initiative and referendum forms is required before authorization to circulate such petition shall be granted by the City Clerk. Chief petitioners or circulators preparing prospective petitions shall be responsible for making copies of the petition for circulation after authorization for circulation has been granted. (Neb. RS 18-2514)
Each petition presented for signature must be identical to the petition authorized for circulation by the City Clerk. Every petition shall contain the name and place of residence of not more than three persons as chief petitioners or sponsors of the measure. The chief petitioners or sponsors shall be qualified electors of the municipality potentially affected by the initiative or referendum proposal. Every petition shall contain the caption and the statement specified to be part of the ballot title. When a special election is being requested, such fact shall be stated on every petition (Neb. RS 18-2515)
(Ord. No. 1619, 09/21/04)

1-1203.01 Initiative And Referendum; Declaratory Judgment
The city or any chief petitioner may seek a declaratory judgment regarding any questions arising under this Article, as it may be from time to time amended, including, but not limited to, determining whether a measure is subject to referendum or limited referendum or whether a measure may be enacted by initiative. If a chief petitioner seeks a declaratory judgment, the city shall be served by personal, residence, or certified mail service upon the chief executive officer or City Clerk. If the city seeks a declaratory judgment, only the chief petitioner or chief petitioners shall be required to be served.
Any action brought for declaratory judgment for purposes of determining whether a measure is subject to limited referendum or referendum, or whether a measure may be enacted by initiative, may be filed in the district court at any time after the filing of a referendum or initiative petition with the City Clerk for signature verification until 40 days from the date the City Council received notification from the verifying official that the necessary signatures have been obtained. If the city does not bring an action for declaratory judgment to determine whether the measure is subject to limited referendum or referendum, or whether the measure may be enacted by initiative, until after it has received such notification, it shall be required to proceed with the initiative or referendum election in accordance with the provisions of this Article. If the city does file such an action prior to receiving such notification, it shall not be required to proceed to hold such election until a final decision has been rendered in the action.
Any action for a declaratory judgment shall be governed generally by Neb. RS 25-21,149 through 25-21,164, except that only the city and each chief petitioner shall be required to be made parties. The city, City Clerk, City Council, or any of the city's officers shall be entitled to rely on any order rendered by the court in any such proceeding. Any action brought for declaratory judgment pursuant to this section shall be given priority in scheduling hearings and in disposition as determined by the court. When an action is brought to determine whether the measure is subject to limited referendum or referendum, or whether a measure may be enacted by initiative, a decision shall be rendered by the court no later than five days prior to the election.
The provisions of this section relating to declaratory judgments shall not be construed as limiting, but construed as supplemental and additional to other rights and remedies conferred by law.
(Neb. RS 18-2538) (Ord. No. 1619, 09/21/04)

1-1204 Initiative And Referendum; Signature Sheets
Every signature sheet shall:

Contain the caption required in subdivision A of Section 1-1202 of this Article;
Be part of a complete and authorized petition when presented to potential signatories;
Provide space for signatories to write their names, residential addresses, and the date of signing; and
Contain a statement that anyone falsifying information on a signature sheet shall be subject to penalties provided by law.
No more than twenty-five (25) signatures on each signature sheet shall be counted. In order to be valid, a signature shall be that of an individual registered to vote, at the time of signing, in the jurisdiction governed or to be governed by the measure addressed in the petition. A signature shall include the signatory's full name, his or her place of residence, and the date of signing. No signatory shall use ditto marks as a means of affixing his or her place of residence or date on any petition. A wife shall not use her husband's Christian or given name when she signs a petition and she shall sign her own Christian or given name along with her surname.

(Ref. 18-2516 RS Neb.)

1-1205 Initiative And Referendum; Petitions, Affidavit
Included in the contents of every petition shall be an affidavit, to be signed by the circulator in the presence of a notary, which states that the circulator is a qualified elector, that each person who signed the petition did so in the presence of the circulator on the date indicated. and that the circulator believes that each signatory was registered to vote in the affected jurisdiction at the time he or she signed the petition and that the circulator believes that each signatory has stated his or her name and place of residence correctly.

(Ref. 18-2517 RS Neb.)

1-1206 Initiative And Referendum; Petitions, Notification, Verification
Signed petitions shall be filed with the Clerk for signature verification. Upon the filing of a petition, and passage of a resolution by the Governing Body, the Municipality and the County Clerk or Election Commissioner of the County in which such Municipality is located may by mutual agreement provide that the County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall ascertain whether the petition is signed by the requisite number of voters. The Municipality shall reimburse the County for any costs incurred by the County Clerk or Election Commissioner. When the verifying official has determined that one hundred (100%) percent of the necessary signatures required by this Article have been obtained, he or she shall notify the Governing Body of that fact, and shall immediately forward to the Governing Body a copy of the petition.
In order for an initiative or referendum proposal to be submitted to the Governing Body and the voters, the necessary signatures shall be on file with the Clerk within six (6) months from the date the prospective petition was authorized for circulation. If the necessary signatures are not obtained by such date, the petition shall be void.
(Ref. 18-2518 RS Neb.)

1-1207 Initiative And Referendum; Frequency Of Occurrence
The same measure, either in form or in essential substance, may not be submitted to the people by Initiative petition, either affirmatively or negatively, more often than once every two (2) years. No attempt to repeal or alter an existing measure or portion of such measure by referendum petition may be made within two (2) years from the last attempt to do the same. Such prohibition shall apply only when the subsequent attempt to repeal or alter is designed to accomplish the same, or essentially the same purpose as the previous attempt.

(Ref. 18-2519 RS Neb.)

1-1208 Initiative And Referendum; Direct Vote
The Executive Officer and Governing Body of the Municipality may at any time, by resolution, provide for the submission to a direct vote of the electors of any measure pending before it, passed by it, including an override of any veto, if necessary, or enacted by the electors under this Article and may provide in such resolution that such measure shall be submitted at a special election or the next regularly scheduled primary or general election. Immediately upon the passage of any such resolution for submission, the Clerk shall cause such measure to be submitted to a direct vote of the electors, at the time specified in such resolution and in the manner provided in this Article for submission of measures upon proposals and petitions filed by voters. Such matter shall become law if approved by a majority of the votes cast.

(Ref. 18-2520 RS Neb.)

1-1209 Initiative And Referendum; Elections
The Clerk shall call elections under this Article, either at a special election or regularly scheduled primary or general election. He or she shall cause notice of every such election to be printed in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in such Municipality at least once not less than thirty (30) days prior to such election and also posted in the office of the Clerk and in at least three (3) conspicuous places in such Municipality at least thirty (30) days prior to such election. The notice shall be substantially as follows:

Notice is hereby given that on Tuesday, the ________ day of __________, 19__, at (identify polling place or precinct)of the Municipality of __________________________, Nebraska, an election will be held at which there will be submitted to the electors of the Municipality for their approval or rejection, the following measures, propositions, issues:______________________________________________________(naming measures, propositions, or issues), which election will be open at 8:00 a.m. and will continue open until 8:00 p.m., of the same day.

Dated this_________ day of___________________________2__.

Clerk of the City

Crete, Nebraska.

The Clerk shall make available for photocopying a copy in pamphlet form of measures initiated or referred. Such notice provided in this Section shall designate where such a copy in pamphlet form may be obtained.

(Ref. 18-2521 RS Neb.)

1-1210 Initiative And Referendum; Ballots
All ballots for use in special elections under this Article shall be prepared by the Clerk and furnished by the Governing Body, unless the Governing Body contracts with the County for such service, and shall be in form the same as provided by law for election of the Executive Officer and Governing Body of such Municipality. When ordinances under such sections are submitted to the electors at a regularly scheduled primary or general election they shall be placed upon the official ballots as provided in this Article.

(Ref. 18-2522 RS Neb.)

1-1211 Initiative And Referendum; Initiative
The power of initiative allows citizens the right to enact measures affecting the governance of the Municipality. An initiative proposal shall not have as its primary or sole purpose the repeal or modification of existing law except if such repeal or modification is ancillary to and necessary for the adoption and effective operation of the initiative measure.
An initiative shall not be effective if the direct or indirect effect of the passage of such initiative measure shall be to repeal or alter an existing law, or portion thereof, which is not subject to referendum or subject only to limited referendum pursuant to section 1-1212.
Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in number to at least fifteen percent (15%) of the qualified electors of the Municipality has been filed with the Clerk and verified, it shall be the duty of the Governing Body to consider passage of the measure contained in the petition including an override of any veto, if necessary. If the Governing Body fails to pass the measure without amendment, including an override of any veto, if necessary, within thirty (30) days from the date it received notification, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at the next regularly scheduled primary or general election held within the Municipality. If the Governing Body desires to submit the measure to a vote of the people at a special election prior to the next regularly scheduled primary or general election held within the Municipality, the Governing Body, shall, by resolution, direct the Clerk to cause the measure to be submitted at a special election. Such resolution shall not be subject to referendum or limited referendum.
Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in number to at least twenty percent (20%) of the qualified electors which requests that a special election be called to submit the initiative measure to a vote of the people, has been filed with the Clerk and verified pursuant to Section 1-1206, it shall be the duty of the Governing Body to consider passage of the measure contained in the petition including an override of any veto, if necessary. If the Governing Body falls to pass the measure, without amendment, including an override of any veto, if necessary, within thirty (30) days from the date it received notification, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at a special election called for such purpose. The date of such election shall not be less than (30) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the Governing Body received notification pursuant to Section 1-1206.
If a majority of voters voting on the initiative measure shall vote in favor of such measure, it shall become a valid and binding measure of the Municipality thirty (30) days after certification of the election results, unless the Governing Body by resolution orders an earlier effective date or the measure itself provides for a later effective date, which resolution shall not be subject to referendum or limited referendum. A measure passed by such method shall not be amended or repealed except by two-thirds (2/3) majority of the members of the Governing Body. No such attempt to amend or repeal shall be made within one (1) year from the passage of the measure by the electors.
(Ref. 18-2523 through 18-2526 RS Neb.)

1-1212 Initiative And Referendum; Referendum Limitations
The power of referendum allows citizens the right to repeal or amend existing measures, or portions thereof, affecting the governance of the Municipality. (Neb. RS 18-2527)
The following measures shall not be subject to referendum or limited referendum:
Measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations including, but not limited to, those relating to the issuance of or provided for in bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness, for projects previously approved by a measure which was, or is, subject to referendum or limited referendum or previously approved by a measure adopted prior to July 17, 1982;
Measures relating to any industrial development projects, subsequent to measures giving initial approval to such projects;
Measures adopting proposed budget statements following compliance with procedures set forth in the Nebraska Budget Act;
Measures relating to the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety which have been designated as urgent measures by unanimous vote of those present and voting of the Governing Body and approved by the Mayor;
Measures relating to projects for which notice has been given as provided for in subsection E of this section for which a sufficient referendum petition was not filed within the time limit stated in such notice or which received voter approval after the filing of such petition;
Resolutions directing the Municipal Clerk to cause measures to be submitted to a vote of the people at a special election as provided in Section 1-1211, Subsection C and Section 1-1213, Subsection A; and
Resolutions ordering an earlier effective date for measures enacted by initiative as provided in Section 1-1211, Subsection E;
Measures relating to any facility or system adopted or enacted pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act by the Municipality and which are necessary to carry out contractual obligations provided for in previously issued bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidence of indebtedness;
Measures that amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal a zoning regulation, restriction, or boundary and are subject to protest as provided in Neb. RS 19-905; and
Measures relating to personnel issues, including, but not limited to, establishment, modification, or elimination of any personnel position, policy, salary, or benefit and any hiring, promotion, demotion, or termination of personnel. (Neb. RS 18-2528(1))
The following measures shall be subject to limited referendum:
Measures in furtherance of a policy of the Municipality or relating to projects previously approved by a measure which was subject to referendum or which was enacted by initiative or has been approved by the voters at an election, except that such measures shall not be subject to referendum or limited referendum for a period of one year after any such policy or project was approved at a referendum election, enacted by initiative, or approved by the voters at an election;
Measures relating to the acquisition, construction, installation, improvement, or enlargement, including the financing or refinancing of the costs of public ways, public property, utility systems, and other capital projects, and measures giving initial approval for industrial development projects;
Measures setting utility system rates and charges, except for measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations provided for in previously issued bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness, and pay rates and salaries for municipal employees other than the members of the Governing Body and the Mayor; and
Measures relating to any facility or system adopted or enacted pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act by the Municipality except for measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations provided for in previously issued bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidence of indebtedness. (Neb. RS 18-2528(2))
Measures subject to limited referendum shall ordinarily take effect thirty days after their passage by the Governing Body, including an override of any veto, if necessary. Referendum petitions directed at measures subject to limited referendum shall be filed for signature verification pursuant to Section 1-1206 within thirty days after such measure's passage by the Governing Body, including an override of any veto, if necessary, or after notice is first published pursuant to Subdivision E,3 of this section. If the necessary number of signatures as provided in Section 1-1211 has been obtained within the time limitation, the effectiveness of the measure shall be suspended unless approved by the voters. (Neb. RS 18-2528(3))
For any measure relating to the acquisition, construction, installation, improvement, or enlargement of public ways, public property, utility systems, or other capital projects or any measure relating to any facility or system adopted or enacted pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act, the Municipality may exempt all subsequent measures relating to the same project from the referendum and limited referendum procedures provided for in this Article by the following procedure:
By holding a public hearing on the project, the time and place of such hearing being published at least once not less than five days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the Governing Body's jurisdiction;
By passage of a measure approving the project, including an override of a veto, if necessary, at a meeting held on any date subsequent to the date of hearing; and
After passage of such measure, including an override of a veto, if necessary, by giving notice as follows:
For those projects for which applicable statutes require an ordinance or resolution of necessity, creating a district or otherwise establishing the project, notice shall be given for such project by including either as part of such ordinance or resolution or as part of any publicized notice concerning such ordinance or resolution a statement that the project as described in the ordinance or resolution is subject to limited referendum for a period of thirty days after the first publication of such notice and that, after such thirty-day period, the project and measures related to it will not be subject to any further right of referendum; and
For projects for which applicable statutes do not require an ordinance or resolution of necessity, notice shall be given by publication of a notice concerning such projects stating in general terms the nature of the project and the engineer's estimate of costs of such project and stating that the project described in the notice is subject to limited referendum for a period of thirty days after the first publication of such notice and that, after such thirty-day period, the project and measures related to it will not be subject to any further right of referendum. The notice required by this subdivision shall be published in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the Municipality and shall be published not later than fifteen days after passage by the Governing Body, including an override of a veto, if necessary, of a measure approving the project.

The right of the Municipality to hold such a hearing prior to the passage of the measure by the Governing Body and give such notice after passage of such measure by the Governing Body to obtain exemption for any particular project in a manner described in this subsection is optional, and the Municipality shall not be required to hold such a hearing or give such notice for any particular project. (Neb. RS 18-2528(4))
All measures, except as provided in subsections B, C, and E of this section, shall be subject to the referendum procedure at any time after such measure has been passed by the Governing Body, including an override of a veto, if necessary, or enacted by the voters by initiative. (Neb. RS 18-2528(5))
(Ord. 1556; 04/15/03)

1-1213 Initiative And Referendum; Referendum, Passage
Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in number to at least fifteen percent (15%) of the qualified electors of the Municipality has been filed with the Clerk and verified pursuant to Section 1-1206, It shall be the duty of the Governing Body to reconsider the measure or portion of such measure which is the object of the referendum. If the Governing Body fails to repeal or amend the measure or portion thereof in the manner proposed by the referendum, including an override of any veto, if necessary, within thirty (30) days from the date the Governing Body receives notification pursuant to Section 1-1206, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at the next regularly scheduled primary or general election held within the Municipality. If the Governing Body desires to submit the measure to a vote of the people at a special election prior to the next regularly scheduled primary or general election held within the Municipality, the Governing Body shall, by resolution, direct the Clerk to cause the measure to be submitted at a special election. Such resolution shall not be subject to referendum or limited referendum.
Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in number to at least twenty percent (20%) of the qualified voters of the Municipality which requests that a special election be called to submit the referendum measure to a vote of the people, has been filed with the Clerk and verified, it shall be the duty of the Governing Body to reconsider the measure or portion of such measure which is the object of the referendum. If the Governing Body fails to repeal or amend the measure or portion thereof, in the manner proposed by the referendum, including an override of any veto, if necessary, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at a special election called for such purpose within thirty (30) days from the date the Governing Body received notification. The date of such special election shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the Governing Body received notification.
If a majority of the electors voting on the referendum measure shall vote in favor of such measure, the law subject to the referendum shall be repealed or amended. A measure repealed or amended by referendum shall not be reenacted or returned to its original form except by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the members of the Governing Body. No such attempt to reenact or return the measure to its original form shall be made within one (1) year of the repeal or amendment of the measure by the electors. If the referendum measure does not receive a majority vote, the ordinance shall immediately be come effective or remain in effect.
(Ref. 18-2529 through 18-2531 RS Neb.)

1-1214 Initiative And Referendum; Violations, Penalties
Whoever knowingly or willfully makes a false affidavit or takes a false oath regarding the qualifications of any person to sign petitions under Sections 18-2501 through 18-2531 RS Neb. shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor with a limit of three hundred dollars ($300.00) on the fine.
Whoever falsely makes or willfully destroys a petition or any part thereof, or signs a false name thereto, of signs or files any petition knowing the same or any part thereof to be falsely made, or suppresses any petition, or any part thereof, which has been duly filed, pursuant to Sections 18-2501 through 18-2531 RS Neb. shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor with a limit of five hundred dollars ($500.00) on the fine.
Whoever signs any petition under Sections 18-2501 through 18-2531 RS Neb. knowing that he or she is not a registered voter in the place where such petition is made, aids or abets any other person in doing any of the acts mentioned in this section, bribes or gives or pays any money or thing of value to any person directly or indirectly to induce him or her to sign such petition, or engages in any deceptive practice intended to induce any person to sign a petition, shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor with a limit of three hundred dollars ($300.00) on the fine. Any Clerk who willfully refuses to comply with the provisions of Sections 18-2501 through 18-2531 RS Neb. or who willfully causes unreasonable delay in the execution of his or her duties under such sections shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor but imprisonment shall not be included as part of the punishment.
(Ref. 18-2532 through 18-2535 RS Neb.)

1-1215 Initiative And Referendum; Applicability
The provisions of the statutes of the State of Nebraska relating to election officers, voting places, election apparatus and blanks, preparation and form of ballots, information to voters, delivery of ballots, calling of elections, conduct of elections, manner of voting, counting of votes, records and certificates of election, and recounts of votes, so far as applicable, shall apply to voting on ordinances by the electors pursuant to this Article.

Nothing in this Article shall apply to procedures for initiatives or referendums provided in Nebraska Revised Statutes Sections 18-412 and 18-412.02 relating to Municipal light and power plants, Sections 70-504, 70-650.01 and 70-650.02, relating to public power districts, and Sections 80-203 to 80-205 relating to soldiers and sailors monuments.

(Ref. 18-2536, 18-2537 RS Neb.)

Article 13 Pension Plan
1-1301 Incorporation Of Pension Plan
1-1302 Retirement Committee City Members

1-1301 Incorporation Of Pension Plan
The Pension Plan, for the City of Crete, for all eligible (other than police officer) employees, is made a part of and incorporated into this Article as fully as if set forth at length herein. A copy of this plan is on file at the office of the City Clerk.


Source: Ord. 1771 (2010)



1-1302 Retirement Committee City Members
There is hereby established a Retirement Committee for the Pension Plan for the City of Crete (other than police officer employees), which Committee shall consist of the Mayor, the Deputy City Clerk, and three other regular full time employees (other than police officer employees), who shall be nominated by the Mayor and approved by the Council. The Committee shall perform such administrative duties as are designated by the Mayor and Pension Plan.


Source: Ord. 1771 (2010)



Article 14 Penal Provision
1-1401 Violations Of Code; Penal Provision

1-1401 Violations Of Code; Penal Provision
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a violation of a municipal ordinance. Unless otherwise specified in the particular Article or Section for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such violation shall be in any amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said payment, the offender shall stand committed to the county jail until such fine and costs be paid.


Source: Ord. 1772 (2010)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-246



Chapter 2 Commissions And Boards
Article 1 Standing Committees
Article 2 Library Advisory Board
Article 3 Planning Commission
Article 4 Board Of Adjustment
Article 5 Board Of Health
Article 6 Hospital Board
Article 7 Parks And Recreations
Article 8 Cemetery
Article 9 Housing Authority
Article 10 [Repealed]
Article 11 Airport Authority
Article 12 Civil Service Code
Article 13 Board Of Electrical Examiners
Article 14 Policy Compliance
Article 15 City Tree Board
Article 16 Community Development Agency
Article 17 Economic Development Plan
Article 18 Penal Provision

Article 1 Standing Committees
2-101 Standing Committees
2-101.01 Civic Center Standing Committee And Advisory Board
2-102 Commission And Boards; Appointed Boards And Commissions; Appointment By Mayor; Removal Of Board And Commission Members

2-101 Standing Committees
The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, will appoint the following Standing Committees:

- Finance Committee

- Legislative Community Development Committee

- Park & Recreation Committee

- Personnel Committee

- Public Safety Committee

- Public Works Committee

and such other Standing Committees as the City Council may by ordinance or resolution thereafter create. Each Committee shall consist of not more than three (3) members, and the personnel thereof may be changed by the Mayor at any time, with the approval of the City Council. Provided, the Mayor shall be an ex-officio member of each Standing Committee, and the first (1st) named Councilmember for each Committee shall be the chairperson.

(Amended by Ord. 1440, 01/05/99)

2-101.01 Civic Center Standing Committee And Advisory Board
The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, will appoint a Civic Center Standing Committee, for the City of Crete Civic Center, located at 515 E. 1st Street, Crete, Nebraska. The Committee shall consist of three (3) members of the City Council, whose members shall be one (1) each from the Council Finance Committee, Council Park & Recreation Committee, and Council Public Works Committee and the Committee shall have the duty and authority to promote and control activities of the Civic Center.
A Civic Center Advisory Board is hereby created to meet with and/or assist the Mayor, City Council and/or the Civic Center Standing Committee of the City Council, to consult with and/or advise the City as to matters concerning the Civic Center and the Civic Center activities. The Board shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of a majority vote of the City Council. The members of the Board shall be residents of the City.
(Ord. 1763; 07/20/10)

2-102 Commission And Boards; Appointed Boards And Commissions; Appointment By Mayor; Removal Of Board And Commission Members
The mayor, by and with the advice and consent of a majority of the City Council, may appoint such board or commission members as may be established by ordinance. Unless specific procedure for removal is provided for in ordinance establishing such board or commission, all appointed board or commission members may be removed at any time by the Mayor with the approval of the majority of the Council. All confirmation of appointments to such board or commission by the Council shall be made with the concurrence of a majority of the Council and the vote for and against shall be recorded.

(Ord. 1506, 12/05/00)

Article 2 Library Advisory Board
2-201 Library Board Of Advisors

2-201 Library Board Of Advisors
The Library Board of Advisors shall be appointed by the Mayor with a majority vote of the members of the Governing Body. The Board shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be residents of the Municipality. The members of the Library Board shall serve a four (4) year term of office as specified by Nebraska statutes. The Board shall serve without compensation and may be required, in the discretion of the Governing Body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the Governing Body, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. At the time of the Board's first (1st) meeting in July of each year, the Board shall organize by selecting from their number a chairman and secretary. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings, and to file the same with the Municipal Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection within ten (10) working days, or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever occurs earlier. An additional ten (10) days shall be allowed for providing the minutes in the event of the secretary’s serious illness or an emergency which prevents him/her from writing such minutes. A majority of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Board shall meet at such times as it may designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the chairman, or any three (3) members of the Board. The City Administrator or his/her designee shall serve as an ex-officio member of the Board. It shall be the duty of the Board to have general charge of the Municipal Library and to establish appropriate rules and regulations for the general operation and use of the same. The City Administrator shall have supervisory authority over all employees of the library including the Library Director. All actions of the Board shall be subject to the review and supervision of the Governing Body. The Board shall be responsible for making such reports and performing such additional duties as the Governing Body may designate from time to time. No member of the Governing Body shall serve as a member of the Library Board while serving a term of office as a member of the Governing Body. No member of the Library Board shall serve in the capacity of both the chairman and secretary of the Board.

Delegated responsibilities. The Library Board shall work with the Library Director, City Administrator or designee, Mayor and City Council in regard to the operation, maintenance and development of the public library.

The Library Board is delegated to the following specific responsibilities:

To ensure and participate in preparation of an annual library budget in accordance with the format used by other city departments and divisions.
To receive and review quarterly budgetary reports to ensure income and expenditure targets and expectations of the Board and City are being met.
To ensure national, state, and local policies and objectives are being addressed, including those from the American Library Association, Nebraska Library Association, and the Nebraska Library Commission.
Maintain State of Nebraska Board Accreditation.
To aid the City Administrator in the screening of applicants for the position of Library Director.
To provide a recommendation to the City Administrator or designee on the hiring of a Library Director.
To determine with the Library Director and the City Administrator or designee the hours of operation of the public library.
To represent the City and the public library within professional associations and at library functions.
To initiate and implement new library programs, expand existing programs and delete outdated programs.
(Amended by Ord. No. 1993, 1/3/2017)

Article 3 Planning Commission
2-301 Planning Commission

2-301 Planning Commission
The Planning Commission shall consist of nine (9) regular members who shall represent, insofar as is possible, the different professions or occupations in the Municipality and shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of a majority vote of the members elected to the City Council. Two (2) of the regular members may be residents of the area over which the Municipality is authorized to exercise extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation. When there is a sufficient number of residents in the area over which the Municipality exercises extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation, one (1) regular member of the Commission shall be a resident from such area. If it is determined by the City Council that a sufficient number of residents reside in the area subject to extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation, and no such resident is a regular member of the Commission, the first available vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by the appointment of such an individual. For purposes of this section, a sufficient number of residents shall mean one thousand (1000) residents. The term of each regular member shall be three (3) years, except that three (3) regular members of the first Commission shall serve for terms of one (1) year, three (3) for terms of two (2) years, and three (3) for terms of three (3) years. All regular members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. Any member may, after a public hearing before the City Council, be removed by the Mayor, with the consent of a majority vote of the members elected to the City Council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office, or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor. All regular members of the Commission shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other Municipal office except when appointed to serve on the Board of Adjustment as provided in section 19-908 RS Neb. All members of the Commission may be required, in the discretion of the City Council, to give bond in a sum set by resolution of the Council, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. The Commission shall elect its Chairperson and a Secretary from its members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the Chairperson and the Secretary shall be one year, and they shall be eligible for reelection. No member of the Commission shall serve in the capacity of both the Chairperson and Secretary of the Commission. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and to file them with the Municipal Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection during office hours. The Commission shall be funded by the City Council from time to time out of the General Fund. The expenditures of the Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the City Council: and no expenditures nor agreements for expenditures shall be valid in excess of such amounts. A number of Commissioners equal to a majority of the number of regular members appointed to the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each calendar quarter, except the City Council may require the Commission to meet more frequently and the Chairperson of the Commission may call for a meeting when necessary to deal with business pending before the Commission. Special meetings may also be held upon the call of any three (3) members of the Commission. The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which shall be a public record. The Commission shall make and adopt plans for the physical development of the Municipality, including any areas outside its boundaries which, in the Commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the Municipality, and shall carry out the other duties and exercise the powers specified in section 19-929 RS Neb. All actions by the Commission shall be subject to the review and supervision of the Mayor and City Council. The Commission shall make its recommendations to the City Council so that they are received by the City Council within sixty (60) days after the Commission begins consideration of a matter relating to the comprehensive development plan, capital improvements, building codes, subdivision development, the annexation of territory, or zoning. The Commission shall be responsible for making such reports and performing such other duties as the City Council may, from time to time, designate.

The Mayor, with the approval of a majority vote of the other elected members of the City Council, shall appoint one (1) alternate member to the Commission. The alternate member shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other Municipal office. The term of the alternate member shall be three (3) years, and he or she shall hold office until his or her successor is appointed and approved. The alternate member may be removed from office in the same manner as a regular member. If the alternate member position becomes vacant other than through the expiration of the term, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor with the approval of a majority vote of the elected members of the City Council. The alternate member may attend any meeting and may serve as a voting and participating member of the Commission at any time when less than the full number of regular Commission members is present and capable of voting.
(Ref. 19-924 through 19-929 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 1425, 09/01/98)

Article 4 Board Of Adjustment
2-401 Board Of Adjustment

2-401 Board Of Adjustment
ESTABLISHMENT. A Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) regular members plus one (1) additional member designated as an alternate who shall attend and serve only when one of the regular members is unable to attend for any reason, each to be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Council, for a term of three (3) years, and removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearings. The members of the board shall serve without compensation and may be required, in the discretion of the Governing Body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the Governing Body, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. One (1) member only of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed from the membership of the Planning Commission and the loss of membership on the Planning Commission by such member shall also result in his immediate loss of membership on the Board of Adjustment and the appointment of another Planning Commission member to the Board of Adjustment.
RULES. The Board of Adjustment shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson, who shall act in the absence of the chairperson. The Board shall meet at the call of the chairperson and such other times as the Board may determine. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. Minutes of the Board's proceedings shall be kept showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or if failing to vote, indicating such fact; and records of the Board's examinations and other official actions shall be kept and immediately filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record. Such chairperson, or in the absence of the chairperson, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the statement of witnesses. Other rules governing the functions of the Board shall be adopted by the Board.
APPLICATION, FEE FOR APPEAL OR RELIEF. The owner of a building, structure, or land or any other person may appeal from a decision, notice, order, or interpretation of the administrative official, or such person may request relief from the strict application of these regulations. Appeal shall be made to the Board through the office of the City Clerk, in written form as prescribed by the City Clerk. Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that the true intent or the strict provisions of these regulations have been incorrectly interpreted by the administrative official or the provisions have been incorrectly interpreted by the administrative official or the provisions of these regulations do not fully apply. The section number of the regulation appealed from shall be cited. Application for relief may be made when it is claimed:
The strict application of these regulations would produce undue hardship.
Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity.
The authorization of relief will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of relief.
The request for relief is based upon reasons of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from relief for purposes of convenience, profit or caprice.

Applications submitted in accordance with this Section shall be accompanied by a fee payment as listed in §9-201(A). Upon application for appeal or relief, all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from shall stop.
PROCEDURE. The City Clerk shall immediately transmit applications for appeal or relief to the Board and notice of the applications to the administrative official shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Within thirty (30) days from receipt of the application, the Board, shall, after giving public notice thereof, as well as written notice to the persons in interest, conduct a hearing of the appeal and decide the same. At the hearing any person may voice his appeal or request for relief or by agent or attorney. Lack of information or testimony necessary to decide on an appeal is just cause for the Board to delay decision for an additional thirty (30) days.
POWERS AND DUTIES. The board shall have the following powers and duties and none other than those herein expressly stated:
To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any regulations relating to the location or soundness of structures.
To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, request for interpretation of any map.
Where by reasons of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of these regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the strict application of any enacted regulation under this action would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and under hardship upon the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal relating to the property, a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of any ordinance or resolution.

No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds the condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably impracticable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to these regulations.

In exercising the above powers such Board may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision of determination appealed from, and may make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such regulation to effect any variation in such regulation.
APPEALS FROM BOARD. Any person or persons, or any Board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau aggrieved by any decision of the Board may seek review of such decision by the district Court for the County, in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Nebraska, particularly by Chapter 19, RS, Nebraska.
DUTIES ON MATTER OF APPEAL. It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official, and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the administrative official, and that recourse from the decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts, as provided by law.
Article 5 Board Of Health
2-501 Board Of Heath


2-501 Board Of Heath
The Governing Body shall appoint a Board of Health which shall consist of five (5) members. The members of the Board shall include the Mayor, who shall serve as Chairman; the Police Chief, who shall serve as Secretary and quarantine officer; a physician who shall serve as the medical advisor; and the President of the City Council; and one (1) other member. The members of the Board shall serve, without compensation, a one (1) year term of office, unless reappointed, and shall reorganize at the first (1st) meeting in June of each year. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and to file the same with the Municipal Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable time. The Board of Health shall be funded by the Governing Body from time to time out of the General Fund. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of doing business. The Board shall meet at such times as the Governing Body may designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairman, or any two (2) members of the Board. It shall be the duty of the Board to enact rules and regulations which shall have the full force and effect of law, to safeguard the health of the residents of the Municipality. Included in the duties of the Board shall be to enforce the said rules and regulations, and to provide fines and punishments for any violations thereof. It may regulate, suppress, and prevent the occurrence of nuisances and shall actively enforce all laws of the State of Nebraska and ordinances of the Municipality relating to matters of sanitation which affect the health and safety of the people. The Board shall regularly inspect such premises and businesses as the Governing Body may direct. All members of the Board shall be responsible for making such reports and performing such other duties as the Governing Body may, from time to time, designate. No member of the Board of Health shall hold more than one (1) Board of Health position.

(Ref. 16-238 RS Neb.)

Article 6 Hospital Board
2-601 Hospital Board


2-601 Hospital Board
The Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint the Hospital Board. The Board shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the Municipality. The members of the Board shall serve a three (3) year term of office unless reappointed. The Board shall serve without compensation and may be required, in the discretion of the Governing Body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the Governing Body, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. At the time of the Board's first (1st) meeting in March of each year, the Board shall organize by selecting from among its membership a chairman, vice chairman, and secretary. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings, and to file the same with the Municipal Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable time. A majority of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the chairman, or any three (3) members of the Board. It shall be the duty of the Board to have general charge of the Municipal hospital and establish appropriate rules and regulations for the management, operation, and use of the same. All actions of the Board shall be subject to review and supervision of the Governing Body. The Board shall be responsible for making such reports and performing such additional duties as the Governing Body may from time to time designate. No member of the Governing Body shall serve as a member of the Hospital Board while serving a term of office as a member of the Governing Body. No member of the Hospital Board shall serve in the capacity of both the chairman and secretary of the Board.

(Ref. 16-239 RS Neb.)

Article 7 Parks And Recreations
2-701 Board Of Parks And Recreation Commissioners

2-701 Board Of Parks And Recreation Commissioners
The Mayor and City Council of the City of Crete shall act as an ex-officio park and recreation board under Nebraska Revised Statute §16-696 and shall have the duty and authority to promote, manage, supervise, and control all recreation activities supported financially by the City to the extent funds are available.
A Park and Recreation Advisory Board is hereby created to meet with and/or assist the Mayor, City Council and/or the standing Park and Recreation Committee of the City Council to consult with and/or advise the City as to matters concerning the Park and Recreation departments and activities of the City. The Board shall consist of seven (7) members who shall he appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of a majority vote of the City Council. Six (6) members of the Board shall be residents of the City and one (1) of the members of the Board may be a resident of the area over which the Municipality is authorized to exercise extra-territorial zoning and subdivision regulations.
(Ref. 16-696 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1737, 08/18/09)

Article 8 Cemetery
2-801 Cemetery Board

2-801 Cemetery Board
The Governing Body shall appoint the Cemetery Board which shall consist of six (6) members who are residents of the Municipality and who shall serve without compensation for a term of three (3) years. Two (2) members shall be appointed each year and may be required in the discretion of the Governing Body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the Governing Body, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. At the first (1st) meeting in June of each year, the Board shall organize by selecting from its membership a Chairperson and Secretary. The Secretary shall keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and file the same with the Municipal Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable time. A majority of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of doing business. The Board shall meet at such times as it may designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or any three (3) members or the Board. The management and supervision of the Municipal Cemeteries shall be under the direct control of the Director or Public Works. The Board shall be responsible for the general operation and care, of the Municipal Cemeteries with the power and authority to limit and regulate the number of cemetery lots that may be owned by the same person; to prescribe rules for enclosing, adorning, and erecting monuments and tombstones on cemetery lots; and to prohibit any diverse or improper use thereof; provided, no religious tests shall be made as to ownership of lots, the burial therein, and the ornamentation of graves. The Board shall develop and recommend to the Mayor and City Council rules and regulations for the proper use of the Cemeteries and prescribe penalties and fines for violations thereof.

The Board shall also study and recommend the development, expansion and improvement of Cemeteries. All revenue received from the sale or lots, gifts, or by devise shall he used for the care, management and administration of the Cemeteries. All actions or the Board shall be subject to the review and supervision of the Governing Body and it shall be responsible for making such reports and performing such additional duties as the Governing Body may designate. No member of the Governing Body shall serve as a member of the Board while serving a term of office as a member of the Governing Body. No member of the Cemetery Board shall hold more than one (1) Cemetery Board office.

(Ref. 12-401 through 12-403 RS Neb.) (Amended Ord. No. 1758, 6/1/10)

Article 9 Housing Authority
2-901 Housing Authority Board
2-902 Housing Authority; Reports
2-903 Housing Authority; Continued Existence As Housing Agency

2-901 Housing Authority Board
The Governing Body shall appoint five (5) persons who shall constitute the Housing Authority and such persons shall be called the Commissioners. One (1) Commissioner shall be appointed each year. Each Commissioner shall serve a five (5) year term of office or until his successor is duly appointed; provided, that all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms. A certificate of the appointment or reappointment of any Commissioner shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the proper appointment of such Commissioner. A Commissioner shall receive no compensation for his services, but he shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in discharge of his duties. Three (3) Commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the Authority for the purpose of conducting its business, exercising its powers, and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the Authority upon the vote of the majority of the Commissioners present unless in any case the by-laws of the Authority shall require a larger number. The Commissioners shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among the Commissioners and shall have the power to employ an executive director who shall serve as ex officio secretary of the Authority. The Authority may also employ legal counsel, or it may call upon the chief law officer of the Municipality, for such services as it may require. It may employ technical experts and such other officers, agents, and employees as it may require and shall determine their qualifications, duties, compensations, and terms of office. The Authority may delegate such other powers and duties to its agents or employees as it may deem proper. During his tenure, and for one (1) year thereafter, no commissioner, officer, or employee of the Municipal Housing Authority shall voluntarily acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any project or in any property included or planned to be included in any project, or in any contract or proposed contract relating to any housing project. If any such commissioner, officer, or employee involuntarily acquires any such interest, or voluntarily or involuntarily acquired any such interest prior to appointment or employment as commissioner, officer, or employee, he shall immediately disclose his interest in writing to the Authority, and such disclosure shall be entered upon the minutes of the Authority, and he shall not participate in any action by the Authority relating to the property or contract in which he has any such interest; provided, that nothing herein shall apply to the acquisition of any interest in notes or bonds of the Authority issued in connection with any housing project, or to the execution of agreements by banking institutions for deposit or handling of funds in connection with a project or to act as trustee under any trust indenture, or to utility services, the rates for which are fixed or controlled by a governmental agency. The Mayor may remove a Commissioner for neglect of duty or misconduct in office in the manner prescribed hereinafter. The Mayor shall send a notice of removal to such Commissioner which notice shall contain a statement containing the charges against him. Unless within ten (10) days from the receipt of such notice, such Commissioner files with the Clerk a request for a hearing before the Governing Body, the Commissioner shall be deemed as removed from office. If a request for a hearing is filed with the Clerk, the Governing Body of the Municipality shall hold a hearing at which the Commissioner shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel and the Governing Body shall determine whether the removal shall be disapproved or upheld. If the removal is disapproved, the Commissioner shall continue to hold his position.

The Housing Authority shall keep an accurate account of all its activities and of all its receipts and disbursements and shall make a report to the Governing Body on all such information.

(Ref. 71-1524 thru 71-1526, 71-1552 RS Neb.)

2-902 Housing Authority; Reports
The Housing Authority shall keep an accurate account of all its activities and of all its receipts and disbursements and shall make an annual report at the second (2nd) regular meeting in January of each year to the Governing Body. Such report shall include all mortgages and other interests in real property held by the Housing Authority, including options to purchase and land sale contracts; a listing of all bond issues and their essential terms and obligations; and all other financial obligations of the Housing Authority over fifty thousand ($50,000.00) dollars. Such reports shall be considered public records. If there has been no change from the last report in the status of any of the items reported pursuant to this Section, the Housing Authority may file a statement to that effect in lieu of the report.

(Ref. 71-1552 RS Neb.)

2-903 Housing Authority; Continued Existence As Housing Agency
The local housing authority established under prior state law and in existence on January 1, 2000, shall have continued existence as a housing agency under the Nebraska Housing Agency Act.
The local housing agency shall conduct its operations consistent with the Nebraska Housing Agency Act. All property, rights in land, buildings, records, and equipment and any funds, money, revenue, receipts, or assets of the authority belong to the agency as successor. All obligations, debts, commitments, and liabilities of the authority are obligations, debts, commitments, and liabilities of the successor agency.
Any resolution by the authority and any action taken by the authority prior to January 1, 2000, with regard to any project or program which is to completed within or to be conducted for a twelve-month period following January 1, 2000, and which resolution or action is lawful under state law as it existed prior to January 1, 2000, is a lawful resolution or action of the successor agency and binding upon the successor agency and enforceable by or against the agency notwithstanding that such resolution or action is inconsistent with, not authorized by, or prohibited under the provisions of the Nebraska Housing Agency Act.
All commissioners of the local housing agency and all officers, legal counsel, technical experts, directors, and other appointees or employees of the agency holding office or employment by virtue of any such prior law on January 1, 2000, shall be deemed to have been appointed or employed under the Nebraska Housing Agency Act.
(Neb. RS 71-1576) (Ord. No. 1573, 06/03/03)

Article 10 [Repealed]
2-1001 [Repealed]

2-1001 [Repealed]
Repealed. Ordinance 1500 (2000).



Article 11 Airport Authority
2-1101 Airport Authority Board

2-1101 Airport Authority Board
The Airport Authority Board shall have the full and exclusive jurisdiction and control over all facilities owned or hereafter acquired by the Municipality for the purpose of aviation operation, air navigation, and air safety operation. The Board is a body corporate and politic, constituting a public corporation, and an agency of the Municipality. The Board shall consist of five (5) members. Members of the Board shall be nominated and elected in the manner provided by law for the election of other elected officials and shall take office at the same time as the officers of the City in each Municipal election year. Members of the Board shall be residents of the Municipality and shall serve a term of six (6) years. Two (2) members of the Board shall be elected in each Municipal election year; Provided, that in each third (3rd) election year, one (1) member only shall be elected to the Airport Authority Board. Any vacancy on the Board resulting from any other cause than the expiration of a term of office, shall be filled by temporary appointment by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, until a successor can be elected at the next general Municipal election to serve the unexpired portion of the term. A member of the Board may be removed from office for incompetence, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. An action for the removal of such officer may be brought, upon resolution of the City Council, in the District Court of the County. The Board shall have such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by State Law.

(Ref. 3-501 thru 3-514 RS Neb.)

Article 12 Civil Service Code
2-1201 Code, How Cited
2-1202 Definitions
2-1203 Civil Service Commission, Creation
2-1204 Commission; Appointment Of Members; Removal
2-1205 Commission; Chairperson; Secretary And Chief Examiner
2-1206 Civil Service Employees; Qualifications; Vacancies; Hiring Process
2-1207 Civil Service Employees; Written Accusations; Disciplinary Procedures
2-1208 Civil Service Employees; Appeal And Investigation By Commission; Public Hearing

2-1201 Code, How Cited
The provisions of this Article shall be known and may be cited as the Civil Service Code.


Source: Ord. 1377 (1997); Ord. 1999 (2017); Ord. 2109 (2020)

2-1202 Definitions
For purposes of the Civil Service Code, unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions found in the Civil Service Act and those listed below shall apply:

(1) “Appointing Authority” means the City Administrator of the City of Crete, Nebraska.

(2) “Civil Service Act” means sections 19-1825 to 19-1848 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes and any updates and amendments thereto.

(3) “Commission” means the Civil Service Commission of the City of Crete, Nebraska.

(4) “Examinations” means all open competitive examinations and tests that are practical and consist only of subjects which will fairly and impartially determine the capacity of persons who are to be examined to perform the duties of a specific civil service position and may include, but not be limited to, tests of basic knowledge, physical fitness, manual skill, and psychological testing.

(5) “Position” means an individual job which is designated by an official title and corresponding job description indicating the nature of work to be performed.

(6) “Promotion” or “demotion” means changing from one position to another, accompanied by a corresponding change in rate of pay.


Source: Ord. 1377 (1997); Ord. 1999 (2017); Ord. 2109 (2020)

2-1203 Civil Service Commission, Creation
There shall be and there is hereby created, in and for the City of Crete, Nebraska, a Civil Service Commission, which shall exercise all of the power and authority granted to and perform all of the duties required by a civil service commission under the Civil Service Act and this Article.


Source: Ord. 1377 (1997); Ord. 1999 (2017); Ord. 2109 (2020)

2-1204 Commission; Appointment Of Members; Removal
(1) The Civil Service Commission shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. No person shall be appointed a member of the Commission who is not a citizen of the United States, a resident of the City of Crete for at least three years immediately preceding such appointment, and a registered elector of Saline County, Nebraska. At the time of appointment, no more than three members, including the one or ones to be appointed, shall be registered electors of the same political party.

(2) Any member of the Commission may be removed from office by the Mayor for incompetency, dereliction of duty, malfeasance in office, or other good cause. No member of the Commission shall be removed until written charges have been made and provided to the Commission, due notice has been given to such member, and a full hearing has been held before the Mayor and the City Council. Any member so removed shall have the right to appeal the decision to the District Court of Saline County, which shall hear and determine such appeal as provided for in the Civil Service Act.


Source: Ord. 1377 (1997); Ord. 1999 (2017); Ord. 2109 (2020)

2-1205 Commission; Chairperson; Secretary And Chief Examiner
(1) Each December, the Commission shall meet and elect one of its members chairperson to serve for the following year. If the chairperson resigns or is removed from office, a successor shall be elected as the first item of business at the next meeting of the Commission.

(2) The Commission shall appoint the Director of Human Resources, Human Resources Coordinator, or other agent of the Department of Human Resources as its secretary and chief examiner. The secretary and chief examiner shall keep all records of the Commission, preserve all reports made to it, superintend and keep a record of all examinations held by the Commission, and perform such other duties as the Commission may prescribe in its rules and regulations.


Source: Ord. 1377 (1997); Ord. 1999 (2017); Ord. 2109 (2020)

2-1206 Civil Service Employees; Qualifications; Vacancies; Hiring Process
(1) The Appointing Authority shall establish the minimum job qualifications, minimum qualifying standards for examinations, essential job functions, and job descriptions of each position subject to the Civil Service Act.

(2) Whenever a position subject to the Civil Service Act becomes vacant, the Appointing Authority shall request the Commission provide a certified eligibility list of persons eligible for the position and may decline to fill such vacancy for an indefinite period.

(a) Such certified eligibility list (i) shall include the names of all persons who have satisfactorily passed the required examinations for the vacant position and whose qualifications have been verified by the Commission and (ii) shall be ranked in order from highest to lowest based on composite scores calculated from the sum of each person’s scores on the required examinations.

(b) If the certified eligibility list contains fewer than three different names for each vacant position, the Appointing Authority shall direct the Department of Human Resources to begin an application and hiring process and may hire a temporary employee, pursuant to the Civil Service Act, to temporarily fill any vacant position.

(3) The Department of Human Resources shall solicit applications for vacant positions and shall invite those applicants who meet the minimum job qualifications to participate in and take the required examinations for such positions.

(4) The Commission shall determine the examinations required for each position subject to the Civil Service Act and shall proctor, score, and administer all required examinations at such dates and times as determined by the Appointing Authority. The Commission shall adopt and promulgate procedural rules and regulations to govern the manner in which examinations are held.

(5) The Appointing Authority shall determine and be responsible for all aspects of the hiring and selection process for filling vacant positions, except for the selection and administration of examinations, and shall make all hiring or promotion decisions based solely on merit, efficiency, and fitness as determined by the results of the required examinations and the factors specified in the Civil Service Act.


Source: Ord. 1377 (1997); Ord. 1999 (2017); Ord. 2109 (2020)

2-1207 Civil Service Employees; Written Accusations; Disciplinary Procedures
(1) No person who has been permanently placed into civil service under the Civil Service Act and this Article shall be suspended, demoted, removed, or discharged except for cause and then only upon the written accusation of the police or fire chief, the Appointing Authority, or any citizen or taxpayer.

(2) The written accusation shall set forth the alleged misconduct, charges, or grounds in sufficient detail as to allow the police or fire chief and the Appointing Authority to perform an investigation into its veracity and shall be filed with the Department of Human Resources, which shall cause a copy of the written accusation to be delivered to the police or fire chief and the Appointing Authority.

(3) If, after an investigation, the police or fire chief and the Appointing Authority determine the written accusation has merit, discipline shall be imposed according to the Personnel Rules and Regulations of the City of Crete.


Source: Ord. 1377 (1997); Ord. 1999 (2017); Ord. 2109 (2020)

2-1208 Civil Service Employees; Appeal And Investigation By Commission; Public Hearing
(1) Any person suspended, demoted, removed, or discharged pursuant to this Article may, within ten days after being notified by the Appointing Authority of such disciplinary action, file a written demand for an appeal and investigation with the Department of Human Resources, which shall cause a copy of the written demand to be delivered to the Commission and the Appointing Authority.

(2) The Appointing Authority shall provide the Commission and the appellant a certified copy of: the written accusation, any statements or evidence obtained as a result of the investigation performed by the police or fire chief and the Appointing Authority, and the imposed disciplinary action.

(3) The Commission shall conduct an independent investigation to determine the sole question of whether or not the suspension, demotion, removal, or discharge was made in good faith for cause, which shall mean that the action was not arbitrary or capricious and was not made for political or religious reasons.

(4) After such investigation, the Commission shall, not less than ten days or more than twenty days after the filing of the written demand for an investigation, hold a public hearing in accordance with the Civil Service Act. The Appointing Authority shall appear at the public hearing to present evidence and testimony in support of the imposed disciplinary action.

(5) At the close of the public hearing or within a reasonable amount of time after the public hearing, the Commission shall make such findings as are provided for in the Civil Service Act and shall issue an order or judgment explaining its findings and directing the Appointing Authority to take appropriate action. Such order or judgment shall be certified in writing to and enforced by the Appointing Authority.

(6) The Commission shall adopt and promulgate procedural rules and regulations to govern its investigations and public hearing proceedings.


Source: Ord. 1377 (1997); Ord. 1999 (2017); Ord. 2109 (2020)

Article 13 Board Of Electrical Examiners
2-1301 Board Of Electrical Examiners

2-1301 Board Of Electrical Examiners
There is hereby created an Examining Board of Electricians, which shall consist of one (1) Master Electrician, one (1) Master Plumber, and the Electrical Inspector. The members of said Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council for a term of two (2) years. Should any member be sooner removed from office, or resign, or a vacancy occur, a new member to fill such vacancy shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council for the unexpired term. The Electrical Inspector shall be Secretary of the Examining Board for the Electricians and shall have custody of all records of the same. The Examining Board for Electricians is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to prescribe regulations consistent with this Code for the examination of applicants for license under the terms of this Code.

Article 14 Policy Compliance
2-1401 Board Compliance With Uniform Policies For Personnel

2-1401 Board Compliance With Uniform Policies For Personnel
In matter of employees salary benefits and administrative personnel actions and policies, all Boards, Commissions, Authorities shall comply with the Uniform Policies as outlined in the current wage and benefit survey and personnel manual of the City of Crete, Nebraska, and insure that personnel forms required on all City personnel in their employ and under their supervision are filed with the Human Resource Director.

Article 15 City Tree Board
2-1501 Tree Board; Tree And Forest Definitions
2-1502 Creation And Establishment Of A Tree Board
2-1503 Tree Board; Term Of Office
2-1504 Tree Board; Compensation
2-1505 Tree Board; Duties And Responsibilities
2-1506 Tree Board; Operation
2-1507 Tree Board; Street Trees, Species To Be Planted
2-1508 Tree Board; Distance And Clearances For Planting
2-1509 Tree Board; Public Tree Care
2-1510 Tree Board; Clearance Over Streets And Walkways
2-1511 Tree Board; Permits Required
2-1512 Tree Board; Compensatory Payments
2-1513 Tree Board; Clearance Over Streets And Walkways
2-1514 Tree Board; Dead Or Hazard Tree Removal
2-1515 Tree Board; Interference With The Tree Board
2-1516 Tree Board; Access

2-1501 Tree Board; Tree And Forest Definitions
Street Trees: “Street trees” are defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between the property lines on either side of all streets and avenues within the City.

Park Trees: “Park trees” are defined as trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks.

Public Community Forest: “Public community forest” is defined as all street and park, and other trees owned by the City as a total resource.

Private Community Forest: “Private community forest” is defined as all trees within municipal boundaries but not owned by the City.

Community Forest Director: The “Community forest Director” is defined as the Park Director official representative of the Tree Board and as such is responsible for administration of the community forestry program.

2-1502 Creation And Establishment Of A Tree Board
There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the City of Crete, Nebraska, which shall consist of five (5) members, citizens and residents of this City, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The Community Forest Director shall be an ex-officio member of the City Tree Board.

2-1503 Tree Board; Term Of Office
The term of the five persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three years except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first Board shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first Board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor shall be appointed for a new three year term.

2-1504 Tree Board; Compensation
Members of the Tree Board shall service without compensation.

2-1505 Tree Board; Duties And Responsibilities
It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and submit to the City Administrator written plans (annual and long range) for the care, replacement, maintenance, and removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the City Council by the City Administrator, and upon their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive City tree plan for the City of Crete, Nebraska.

The Tree Board, when requested by the City Administrator, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter or questions relating to trees.

(Amended Ord. No. 1895, 5/20/14)

2-1506 Tree Board; Operation
The Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.

2-1507 Tree Board; Street Trees, Species To Be Planted
The City of Crete, Nebraska, shall maintain an extensive list of recommended trees for planting in public areas. The purpose of this listing will be to maintain diversity in the total tree population. This list shall be available to residents of the City upon request to aid in the selection of trees for private and public properties. The list of recommended trees shall be updated periodically to reflect new developments or species that will affect the population of the community forest.

2-1508 Tree Board; Distance And Clearances For Planting
Street trees may be planted in the tree lawn where there is more than six feet between the edge of the sidewalk and the curb of the street. Street trees shall be planted no closer than three feet from a sidewalk, driveway or street.

No street tree shall be planted closer than thirty-five feet (35’) from any street corner, measured from the point of the nearest intersection of curbs or curblines.

No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet (10’) from any fireplug.

Special permission must be obtained from the Public Works Director when planting street trees within ten feet (10’) of any point on a line on the ground immediately below any overhead utility wire.

2-1509 Tree Board; Public Tree Care
The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the right-of-way or bounds of all streets alleys, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure the public safety. 

The City may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to electric power lines or other public improvements or is seriously affected with any fatal disease.

2-1510 Tree Board; Clearance Over Streets And Walkways
The abutting property owners shall have the right to perform normal tree care on all street trees.

2-1511 Tree Board; Permits Required
No person shall plant a street tree without first obtaining a permit from the Community Forest Director. There will be no fee for such permit.

2-1512 Tree Board; Compensatory Payments
No person shall remove any public tree without replacing such tree with a tree or trees of equivalent dollar value in the vicinity of the removed tree. The value of trees shall be determined by the Community Forest Director in accordance with regulations considering the species, location, size and condition of trees adopted by the Tree Board. If no suitable location exists in the vicinity of the tree removed or if the replacement tree is of lesser value, the person causing the tree to be removed shall make a compensatory payment to the City equal to the difference in value between the tree removed and any replacement tree. Such compensatory payment shall be paid into a fund established by the Director of Finance and used solely for the purpose of enhancing the Community Forest.

2-1513 Tree Board; Clearance Over Streets And Walkways
Clearance over streets and walkways shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner. A clearance of eight (8’) feet must be maintained over walkways and a clearance of twelve (12’) feet must be maintained over streets and alleys. Property owners are responsible for trees on their own property as well as trees on the public way that abuts their property.

2-1514 Tree Board; Dead Or Hazard Tree Removal
The City shall have the right to cause to be removed any tree within the city limits that is dead or has been declared a hazard. Hazard trees are defined as trees with severe structural defects or splits. The City will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal is the responsibility of the owners of such trees and shall be accomplished within time limits set by the Community Forest Director.

2-1515 Tree Board; Interference With The Tree Board
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the Tree Board or any of its representatives or agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any trees within the public community forest.

2-1516 Tree Board; Access
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with access to private property by the City or its representative in the legal performance of any section of this ordinance.

Article 16 Community Development Agency
2-1601 Regulations, How Cited
2-1602 Definitions
2-1603 Community Development Agency, Creation
2-1604 Agency; Function; Government Efficiency; Delegation Of Duties
2-1605 Agency; Powers
2-1606 Redevelopment Plan; Procedure; Modification
2-1607 Public Notice

2-1601 Regulations, How Cited
The provisions of this Article shall be known and may be cited as the Community Development Regulations.

Source: Ord. 2095, § 1 (2019).

2-1602 Definitions
For purposes of the Community Development Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply:

“Agency” or “Authority” means the Community Development Agency created by the City of Crete, Nebraska.
“Blighted area” means an area:
which, by reason of the presence of a substantial number of deteriorated or deteriorating structures, existence of defective or inadequate street layout, faulty lot layout in relation to size, adequacy, accessibility, or usefulness, insanitary or unsafe conditions, deterioration of site or other improvements, diversity of ownership, tax or special assessment delinquency exceeding the fair value of the land, defective or unusual conditions of title, improper subdivision or obsolete platting, or the existence of conditions which endanger life or property by fire and other causes, or any combination of such factors, substantially impairs or arrests the sound growth of the community, retards the provision of housing accommodations, or constitutes an economic or social liability and is detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare in its present condition and use; and,
in which there is at least one of the following conditions:
unemployment in the designated area is at least one hundred twenty percent of the state or national average;
the average age of the residential or commercial units in the area is at least forty (40) years;
more than half of the plotted and subdivided property in an area is unimproved land that has been within the city for forty (40) years and has remained unimproved during that time;
the per capita income of the area is lower than the average per capita income of the city or village in which the area is designated; or,
the area has had either stable or decreasing population based on the last two decennial censuses.
“Bonds” means any bonds, including refunding bonds, notes, interim certificates, debentures, or other obligations issued pursuant to the Community Development Law.
“City” means the City of Crete, Nebraska.
“Community Development Law” means sections 18-2101 to 18-2154 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes and any updates and amendments thereto.
“Community redevelopment area” means a substandard and blighted area which the Community Development Agency designates as appropriate for a renewal project.
“Extremely blighted area” means a substandard and blighted area in which:
the average rate of unemployment in the area during the period covered by the most recent federal decennial census or American Community Survey 5-Year Estimate is at least two hundred percent (200%) of the average rate of unemployment in the state during the same period; and,
the average poverty rate in the area exceeds twenty percent (20%) for the total federal census tract or tracts or federal census block group or block groups in the area.
“Governing body” means the City Council of the City of Crete, Nebraska.
“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, company, association, joint-stock association, or body politic and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
“Real property” means all lands, including improvements and fixtures thereon, and property of any nature appurtenant thereto, or used in connection therewith, and every estate, interest, and right, legal or equitable, therein, including terms for years and liens by way of judgment, mortgage, or otherwise, and the indebtedness secured by such liens.
“Redeveloper” means any person, partnership, or public or private corporation or agency which enters or proposes to enter into a redevelopment agreement.
“Redevelopment agreement” means a contract entered into between the Agency and a redeveloper for the redevelopment of an area in conformity with a redevelopment plan.
“Redevelopment plan” means a plan, as it exists from time to time for one or more community redevelopment areas or for a redevelopment project, which:
conforms to the general plan for the City as a whole; and,
is sufficiently complete to indicate such land acquisition, demolition and removal of structures, redevelopment, improvements, and rehabilitations as may be proposed to be carried out in the community redevelopment area, zoning and planning changes, if any, land uses, maximum densities, and building requirements.
“Redevelopment project” means any work or undertaking in one or more community redevelopment areas:
to acquire substandard and blighted areas or portions thereof, including lands, structures, or improvements the acquisition of which is necessary or incidental to the proper clearance, development, or redevelopment of such substandard and blighted areas;
to clear any such areas by demolition or removal of existing buildings, structures, streets, utilities, or other improvements thereon and to install, construct, or reconstruct streets, utilities, parks, playgrounds, public spaces, public parking facilities, sidewalks or moving sidewalks, convention and civic centers, bus stop shelters, lighting, benches or other similar furniture, trash receptacles, shelters, skywalks and pedestrian and vehicular overpasses and underpasses, enhancements to structures in the redevelopment plan area which exceed minimum building and design standards in the community and prevent the recurrence of substandard and blighted conditions, and any other necessary public improvements essential to the preparation of sites for uses in accordance with a redevelopment plan;
to sell, lease, or otherwise make available land in such areas for residential, recreational, commercial, industrial, or other uses, including parking or other facilities functionally related or subordinate to such uses, or for public use or to retain such land for public use, in accordance with a redevelopment plan, and may also include the preparation of the redevelopment plan, the planning, survey, and other work incident to a redevelopment project and the preparation of all plans and arrangements for carrying out a redevelopment project;
to dispose of all real and personal property or any interest in such property, or assets, cash, or other funds held or used in connection with residential, recreational, commercial, industrial, or other uses, including parking or other facilities functionally related or subordinate to such uses, or any public use specified in a redevelopment plan or project, except that such disposition shall be at its fair value for uses in accordance with the redevelopment plan;
to acquire real property in a community redevelopment area which, under the redevelopment plan, is to be repaired or rehabilitated for dwelling use or related facilities, repair or rehabilitate the structures, and resell the property;
to carry out plans for a program of voluntary or compulsory repair, rehabilitation, or demolition of buildings in accordance with the redevelopment plan; and,
to construct workforce housing in an extremely blighted area within the City.
“Substandard area” means an area in which there is a predominance of buildings or improvements, whether nonresidential or residential in character, which, by reason of dilapidation, deterioration, age or obsolescence, inadequate provision for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces, high density of population and overcrowding, the existence of conditions which endanger life or property by fire and other causes, or any combination of such factors, is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, juvenile delinquency, and crime (which cannot be remedied through construction of prisons), and is detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare; and,
“Workforce housing” means:
housing that meets the needs of today’s working families;
housing that is attractive to new residents considering relocation to a rural community;
owner-occupied housing units that cost not more than the per unit amount set annually by the Nebraska Department of Economic Development to construct;
owner-occupied and rental housing units for which the cost to substantially rehabilitate exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the unit’s assessed value; and,
upper-story housing.
Source: Ord. 2095, § 2 (2019).

Cross References

Community Development Law, see Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-2101 to 18-2154.

2-1603 Community Development Agency, Creation
There shall be and there is hereby created, in and for the City of Crete, Nebraska, a Community Development Agency, which shall consist of the governing body of the City and which may exercise all of the power and authority granted to a community redevelopment authority under the Community Development Law.

Source: Ord. 2095, § 3 (2019).

2-1604 Agency; Function; Government Efficiency; Delegation Of Duties
The Community Development Agency shall function in the exact same manner as and be indistinguishable from the governing body, and all resolutions, orders, motions, approvals, or other actions of the Community Development Agency shall be considered resolutions, orders, motions, approvals, or actions of the governing body. Any action of the Agency may be taken or approved at any regular, special, or emergency meeting of the governing body.
The governing body may, in the interest of government efficiency, combine or eliminate any duplicate or redundant steps, processes, or procedures specified by the Community Development Law to be done separately by an agency or authority prior to being reviewed by or submitted to a governing body.
The governing body may delegate or assign any duties, responsibilities, or essential functions of the Agency to any city department, official, employee, or contractor including, but not limited to, the Finance Department, Public Works Department, City Administrator, City Attorney, City Clerk, or any other officers, employees, and contractors as may be necessary.
Source: Ord. 2095, § 4 (2019).

2-1605 Agency; Powers
The Agency may levy taxes for the exercise of the powers, jurisdiction, and authority granted to it by the Community Development Law and may issue general obligation bonds, general obligation notes, revenue bonds, and revenue notes, including general obligation and revenue refunding bonds and notes, for the purposes set forth in the Community Development Law and under any power granted therein to an agency or authority.
The Agency may formulate for the entire municipality a workable program for utilizing appropriate private and public resources to eliminate or prevent the development or spread of urban blight, to encourage needed urban rehabilitation, to provide for the redevelopment of substandard and blighted areas, or to undertake any of the aforesaid activities or other feasible municipal activities as may be suitably employed to achieve the objectives of the workable program.
The Agency may itself prepare or cause to be prepared a redevelopment plan, which shall be sufficiently complete to indicate its relationship to definite local objectives as to appropriate land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities and other public improvements, and the proposed land uses and building requirements in the redevelopment project area and which shall include all of the information required by the Community Development Law.
The powers conferred in the Community Development Law and these regulations shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law and shall be independent of and in addition to any other provision of the laws of the State of Nebraska with reference to the matters covered therein. The provisions of the Community Development Law and these regulations and all grants of power, authority, rights, or discretion to the City and the Agency shall be liberally construed, and the City and the Agency shall have all incidental powers necessary to carry into effect such provisions, grants of power, authority, rights, or discretion.
Source: Ord. 2095, § 5 (2019).

2-1606 Redevelopment Plan; Procedure; Modification
A redevelopment plan shall not be prepared for a redevelopment project area unless the governing body has, by resolution adopted after the required public hearings, declared such area to be a substandard and blighted or an extremely blighted area in need of redevelopment.
The governing body shall conduct or cause to be conducted a study or an analysis on whether the area is substandard and blighted or extremely blighted and shall submit the question of whether an area is substandard and blighted or extremely blighted to the planning commission for its review and recommendation.
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the question after providing proper public notice and shall submit its written recommendations, if any, to the governing body within thirty (30) days after the public hearing.
Upon receipt of the recommendations or at least thirty (30) days after the planning commission public hearing if no recommendations are received, the governing body shall, after giving proper public notice, hold a public hearing on the question of whether the area is substandard and blighted or extremely blighted. After such hearing, the governing body may make its declaration.
If an area has been declared substandard and blighted or extremely blighted, a proposed redevelopment plan shall first be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendations as to its conformity with the general plan for the development of the City as a whole. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed redevelopment plan after giving proper public notice of the hearing and shall submit its written recommendations, if any, to the governing body within thirty (30) days after the public hearing.
Upon receipt of the recommendations or at least thirty (30) days after the planning commission public hearing if no recommendations are received, the governing body shall, after giving proper public notice, hold a public hearing on the redevelopment plan. Following the public hearing, the redevelopment plan may be approved if it is found to conform with all of the requirements specified in the Community Development Law.
A redevelopment plan may be modified at any time; provided, that if modified after the lease or sale of real property in the redevelopment project area, the modification must be consented to by the redeveloper or redevelopers of such real property affected by the proposed modification or their successors in interest. If the proposed modification will substantially change the redevelopment plan, the modification must follow the same process enumerated above for the approval of a redevelopment plan.
Source: Ord. 2095, § 6 (2019).

2-1607 Public Notice
Public notice of any hearing shall be given by publication at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the City and shall describe the time, date, place, purpose of the hearing, and any and all specific information required by the Community Development Law. The time of the hearing shall be at least ten (10) days from the last publication.

Source: Ord. 2095, § 7 (2019).

Article 17 Economic Development Plan
2-1701 Adopting The City Of Crete Economic Development Plan And Creating City Economic Development Citizens Advisory Review Committee

2-1701 Adopting The City Of Crete Economic Development Plan And Creating City Economic Development Citizens Advisory Review Committee
The City of Crete here by establishes and adopts the City of Crete Economic Development Plan, the terms and conditions of which are listed in the plan which is on file in the Office of City Clerk.
The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint a City Economic Development Citizens Advisory Review Committee, consisting of seven (7) members, who shall be registered voters of the City of Crete. At least one member of the committee shall have expertise or experience in the field of business, finance or accounting. The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for administration of the City of Crete Economic Development Program and shall serve as an ex-officio member of the committee with responsibility for assisting the committee and providing it with necessary information and advice on the economic development program.
No member of the citizens advisory review committee shall be an elected or appointed City official, an employee of the City, a participant in a decision-making position regarding expenditure of program funds, or an official or employee of any qualifying business receiving financial assistance under the economic development program or of any financial institution participating directly in the economic development program.
In order to assure that no more than three members change in any given year the seven (7) initial citizens advisory review committee members shall be appointed, two (2) each to a one year term, two (2) each to a two year term and three (3) each to a 3 year term. Each appointment after the initial term shall be for a three year term. Committee members may be appointed to more than one term.
The citizens advisory review committee shall meet at least once every three (3) months, to review the functioning and progress of the economic development program and to advise the governing body of the City with regard to the program. At least once every six-month period, from and after January 1, 2011, the committee shall report to the City Council on its findings and suggestions at a public hearing called for that purpose.
Members of the citizens advisory review committee, in their capacity as members and consistent with their responsibilities as members, may be permitted access to business information received by the City in the course of its administration of the economic development program, which information would otherwise be confidential (a) under Section 84-712.05, R.R.S. 1943 (b) by agreement with a qualifying business participating in the economic development program, or (c) under any ordinance of the City providing access to such records to members of the committee and guaranteeing the confidentiality of business information received by reason of its administration of the economic development program. Any unauthorized disclosure of any business information by any member of the citizens advisory review committee shall be a violation of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1777, 12/21/2010)

Article 18 Penal Provision
2-1801 Violations Of Code; Penal Provision

2-1801 Violations Of Code; Penal Provision
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a violation of a Municipal Ordinance. Unless otherwise specified in the particular Article or section for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such violation shall be in any amount not to exceed $500.00 for any one (1) offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said payment, the offender shall stand committed to the County jail until such fine and costs be paid.

(Ref. 16-246 RS Neb.)

Chapter 3 Departments
Article 1 Electric Department
Article 2 Water Department
Article 3 Sewer Department
Article 4 Cogeneration
Article 5 Fire Department
Article 6 Police Department
Article 7 Parks And Recreation Department
Article 8 Library Department
Article 9 Municipal Cemetery
Article 10 Municipal Sanitary Landfill
Article 11 Ambulance Service
Article 12 Utilities Generally
Article 13 Penal Provision

Article 1 Electric Department
3-100 Electric System; Ownership
3-101 Electric Department; Administration
3-102 Electric Department; Definitions
3-103 Electric Department; Customer's Contract
3-104 Electric Department; Customer's Application
3-105 Electric Department; Service To Non-Residents
3-106 Electric Department; Service Drop Installation Expense
3-107 Electric Department; Service Drop Installation
3-108 Electric Department; Separate Services
3-109 [Reserved]
3-110 Electric Department; Repairs, Testing
3-111 Electric Department; Abandoned Services
3-112 Electric Department; Access To Premises
3-113 Electric Department; Repairs And Maintenance
3-114 Electric Department; Restricted And Unlawful Use
3-115 Electric Department; Equipment Specifications
3-116 [Reserved]
3-117 Electric Department; Destruction Of Property
3-118 Electric Department; Electric Line Extensions
3-119 Electric Department; Customer Classification
3-120 Electric Department; Billing; Collecting
3-121 Electric Department; Service Deposit; Refund
3-122 Electric Department; Liability Of City
3-123 Electric Department; Rates
3-124 Electric Department; Rate Adjustment, Availability
3-125 Electric Department; Fees And Charges

3-100 Electric System; Ownership
The Municipality owns and operates the Municipal Electrical System through the Public Works Director. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management, and maintenance of the Municipal Electrical System may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by State law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Electrical Fund and shall remain in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. The Public Works Director shall have the direct management and control of the Municipal Electrical System and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his office. He shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the safe and efficient management of the Electrical System subject to the supervision and review of the Governing Body. The Governing Body shall by ordinance set the rates to be charged for services rendered and shall file the same in the office of the Municipal Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time.

(Ref. 16-675, 16-679, 16-682, 19-1404 RS Neb.)

3-101 Electric Department; Administration
The Public Works Director shall have the direct management and control of the Municipal Electric Department and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his office. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to adopt regulations for the proper and efficient management of the Electrical Department, subject to the supervision and review of the City Council.

The City Council shall set the rates to be charged for services rendered by ordinance and shall file a copy of the rates in the office of the Public Works Director and in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time.

(Ref. 19-1404 RS Neb.)

3-102 Electric Department; Definitions
The following definitions shall be applied throughout this Article. Where no definition is specified, the normal dictionary usage of the word shall apply.

COLLECTION CHARGE. A charge added to a utility bill outstanding and unpaid at the time and date specified for disconnection of service for nonpayment. This charge is to defray additional office and staff expense required to implement collection procedures.

CONNECTION CHARGE. A charge to be collected from the customer on establishing a new account, or transferring an account in name or location. This charge is to defray additional office and staff expense required to initiate service or to implement the change in service.

DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. This term includes all poles, wires, cables, and all facilities necessary to bring electric energy from the source transmission or generating system to the customer's premises.

EASEMENT. Tracts of privately deeded land where rights to install, operate, maintain, remove, or replace utility lines have been established, by instrument or otherwise.

ENCROACHMENT. Any structure, plant, or other physical feature placed in a street, alley, or an easement by others, that restricts its beneficial use by the grantee of the easement.

METER. An Electric Watt-hour meter, provided by the Crete Electric Department to measure electric power and energy.

METER SOCKET. A device normally permanently attached and wired into the customers' service equipment, designed to mount an electric meter.

POINT OF ATTACHMENT. A hook or other means of attaching an overhead electric service to a structure. This is provided by, and is the responsibility of the owner of the premises.

RECONNECTION FEE. A charge to defray the additional office and staff expense of restoring electric service previously disconnected for nonpayment.

SERVICE CALL. A visit by Crete Electric Department personnel to the customer's premises for any purpose that is made at the customer's request.

SERVICE DROP CONDUCTORS. Those wires or cables, generally provided by the Crete Electric Department, whether underground or overhead, that connect the electric service entrance of the customer from the point of attachment, to the electric distribution system in the alley, street or easement.

SERVICE DEPOSIT. An amount of money a customer is required to deposit with the Electric Department to be used by the Electric Department to apply on any unpaid utility bills on termination of service.

3-103 Electric Department; Customer's Contract
The City shall furnish electric service for light, heating, cooking and power purposes to persons whose premises lie in the electric service area of the City as filed with the Nebraska Power Review Board and may furnish electric service to such persons within or without its corporate limits as and when, according to law, on reasonable terms, the Mayor and Council may see fit to do so. The rules, regulations, and rates for electric service, hereinafter referred to in this Article, shall be considered a part of every application hereafter made for electric service to the City, and shall be considered a part of the contract between every consumer now served by the City. Without further formality, the making of application on the part of any applicant or the use or consumption of electric energy by present customers and the furnishing of electric service to said applicant or customer by the City shall constitute a contract between applicant or customer and the City, to which both parties are bound. If a customer should violate any of the provisions of said contract or any reasonable rules and regulations that the City Council or Public Works Director may hereafter adopt, the Public Works Director, may cut off or disconnect the electric service from the building, premise, or place of such violation and no further connection of electric service for such building, premise, or place shall again be made save or except by order of the Public Works Director.

Contracts for electric service are not transferable. Any person wishing to change from one location to another shall make a new application and sign a new contract. If any consumer shall sell, dispose, or remove from the premise where service is furnished in his name, or if the said premise is destroyed by fire or other casualty, he shall at once inform the Public Works Director who shall cause the electric service to be shut off from the said premise. If the consumer should fail to give such notice, he shall be charged for all electricity used on the said premise until the Public Works Director is otherwise advised of such circumstances.

(Ref. 17-902 RS Neb.) (CHECK STATE STATUTE)

3-104 Electric Department; Customer's Application
Every person or persons desiring electric service must make application therefor to the Public Works Director, upon forms to be furnished for that purpose by the Municipality. The application must state truly and fully all the uses to which the electric current desired is to be applied, including the type and condition of the machinery, appliances or equipment to be used in connection therewith. The Public Works Director shall require any applicant to pay a connection fee, none of which shall be returned, in such amount as has been set by the City Council and placed on file at the Utilities Department. Any applicant may be required to make a service deposit in such amount as has been set by the City Council and on file at the Utilities office and the office of the Municipal Clerk. Electricity may not be supplied to any house or building except upon the written order of the Public Works Director.

(Ref. 16-681 RS Neb.)

3-105 Electric Department; Service To Non-Residents
The Municipal Electric Department shall provide electric service within the Electric Service Area filed with the State of Nebraska Power Review Board. Nothing herein shall be construed to obligate the Municipality to supply electric service to any customer, where the revenues from the sale of electricity to that customer will not be sufficient to pay the cost of providing service to that customer. The City Council may require the customer to pay for part or all of the cost of making electric service available to the customer.

(Ref. 16-681, 19-2701 RS Neb.)

3-106 Electric Department; Service Drop Installation Expense
Overhead service drop conductors, connectors, and associated miscellaneous material will be provided and installed at the expense of the Electric Department. Underground cable will be provided, only, with connection at the source end made at the expense of the Electric Department, but all trenching, trench installation, backfill, and connection costs other than the aforementioned will be at the expense of the customer. The cost of the electric watt-hour meter and any associated metering transformers and their connection thereto will be paid by the Electric Department. Furnishing and installing the meter-socket will be the responsibility of the customer.

3-107 Electric Department; Service Drop Installation
The Electric Department will provide an overhead service drop conductor, from the point of attachment provided by the customer, to the distribution lines in the alley, street, or easement, wire or cable for an underground service will be provided by the Electric Department, with installation of this made by the customer, except at the point of connection with the Electric Department distribution system, which connection and installation will be made by the Electric Department. The Electric Department will provide an electric meter for each customer, this to be placed in a suitable device provided by the customer.

3-108 Electric Department; Separate Services
Not more than one (1) house or building shall be supplied from one (1) service connection without special permission of the Public Works Director. A premises with detached garage, or other small appurtenant buildings on the same lot, or in close proximity to the premises may be supplied for the same connection. No multiple-occupancy premises may be "master-metered" except by special permission of the Public Works Director.

3-109 [Reserved]
Reserved.



3-110 Electric Department; Repairs, Testing
No person except an authorized agent of the City shall be allowed to set meters or make connections to the service of the distribution system of the City. The City shall keep all meters in repair at the expense of the City. The owner of the premises where a meter is located shall provide ready and convenient access to the meter so that it may easily be examined and read by the Public Works Director or his authorized agents. Any customer of the Electric Distribution System of the City shall have the right to request the Public Works Director to test his watt-hour meter subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the City and Public Works Director may adopt. One (1) meter test will be made at no charge to the customer by Field Test Methods. An additional test will be made upon agreement of the customer to pay in advance all costs of laboratory testing of the meter. If the tests show the meter to be accurate within legal standards, the customer will not be reimbursed. If the meter is not accurate within legal standards, the City will reimburse the customer and pay all costs of repairing or replacing the meter. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director at the expense of the City, to test said meter as requested and any other meter which needs to be tested. When meter replacement is deemed necessary, a meter will be furnished and set by the City for such customer at the expense of the City: provided, where meter repairs or meter replacements are made necessary on account of the willful neglect, recklessness or tampering on the part of the customer, then the City shall require the customer to pay for installing a new meter or for making the meter repairs, as the case is, and shall collect the same as for electric service furnished. All electric meters shall be sealed upon installation by the Municipality and no person shall deface, injure, or break any of said seals unless authorized by the Public Works Director. It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to tamper with any meter, or by means of any contrivance or device, to divert flow of electric energy through the meter, or to cause the same to register inaccurately.

3-111 Electric Department; Abandoned Services
An electric service to a premises will normally be left connected to the electric distribution system, even if the premises is disconnected from the system and is not receiving service. It is the responsibility of the owner of the premises to notify the Electric Department, in writing, to disconnect or remove the service connection if the electric service constitutes a safety hazard, or if electric service is not to be resumed in the foreseeable future.

3-112 Electric Department; Access To Premises
The Public Works Director or his agent shall have access at any time to premises connected to the electric system for the purpose of making repairs to electric services, and at all reasonable hours to determine if electrical energy is being carried, distributed and used in the proper manner.

3-113 Electric Department; Repairs And Maintenance
The Municipality shall repair or replace, as the case may be, all equipment of the system from the near point of the building to the distribution system, exclusive of expense to property, except those repairs or replacements made necessary by independent acts not within the control of the Municipality.

3-114 Electric Department; Restricted And Unlawful Use
The Municipality, through the Public Works Director, reserves the right to refuse to connect, to cut off or disconnect the supply of electric energy to any customer without any preliminary notice, where such connection is detrimental to the service furnished by the City, where the customer refuses or neglects to repair or reconstruct any machinery, equipment or appliance when ordered to do so by the Public Works Director or his agent or if such connection tends to increase the fire hazard or to disturb service furnished other customers or to affect generating equipment or distribution system of the City in such a way as is prejudicial to providing reliable electric service, free of objectionable noise, flickers, voltage deviations, or other defects in quality of service.

3-115 Electric Department; Equipment Specifications
All electrical equipment to be connected to the electric system of the Municipality must be designed to compensate for low power factor, or such auxiliary equipment as needed to compensate for low power factor will be added by the customer. No electric motor or other device of twenty-five (25) horsepower equivalent may be connected other than through a device to reduce the starting current except by special permission of the Public Works Director. All electric motors of fifteen (15) or more horsepower will be equipped with power factor correction capacitors.

3-116 [Reserved]
Reserved.



3-117 Electric Department; Destruction Of Property
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure, or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment, or appurtenance of the Municipal Electric Department. No person may commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of any of the above-mentioned property without the written permission of the Public Works Director.

3-118 Electric Department; Electric Line Extensions
Municipal electric lines will be extended throughout the Crete Electric Service Area, as needed, to provide electric service to all premises within the Service Area. Lines will be built only on streets, alleys, land deeded to the Municipality, or on easements granted to the Municipality on terms suitable to the Municipality. The Municipality is not obligated to extend lines at no cost to the customer. In cases where distance from existing lines, characteristics of the customer's electrical use, or other factors are such that revenues from the use of electricity are insufficient to justify the extension of the line, or where the lines are to be placed underground, then the customer may be required to pay part of the cost of construction, in such manner and amount as determined by the City Council.

3-119 Electric Department; Customer Classification
Customers of the Electric Department shall be classified as follows for purposes of setting rates, charges, and other conditions of service:

RESIDENTIAL SERVICES:
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE R:

AVAILABLE: Within the Crete Electric Service Area.

APPLICABLE: To single-family residences and individually metered apartments for all domestic services when all service is supplied through a single meter.

CHARACTER OF SERVICE: Nominally 60 cycle, alternating current, single-phase, 120 volt two-wire, or 120/240 volt three-wire, 120/208 three-wire single-phase or other standard voltage or phase arrangements may be supplied at the option of the City.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
The entire residential service, including heating requirements must be taken through a single meter.
All devices larger than 1650 watts shall be connected for operation at 208-240 volts.
No individual thermostat contact or switching device shall control a connected load in excess of 10 kilowatts unless such installation is specifically approved by the City.
Subject to application of Production Cost Adjustment.
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE; LOAD MANAGEMENT RL:

AVAILABLE: Within the Crete Electric Service Area.

APPLICABLE: To all single-family residences and individually metered apartments for all domestic purposes when all service is supplied through a single meter, and where a City-approved electric load management device is installed.

CHARACTER OF SERVICE: Nominally 60 cycle, alternating current, single-phase, 120 volt two-wire, or 120/240 volt three-wire, 120/208 three-wire or single phase or other standard voltage or phase arrangements may be supplied at the option of the City.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
The entire residential service, including heating requirements must be taken through a single meter.
All devices larger than 1650 watts shall be connected for operation at 208-240 volts.
No individual thermostat contact or switching device shall control a connected load in excess of 10 kilowatts of 10 kilowatts unless such installation is specifically approved by the City.
Subject to application of Production Cost Adjustment.
An approved electric load management device is installed and functioning to control air conditioning, heating, or other appliances, as described in the customer's application for this rate schedule.
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE; SPACE HEATING RH:

AVAILABLE: Within the Crete Electric Service Area.

APPLICABLE: To customers taking service under residential rate classification where permanently installed electric heating equipment is in regular use to supply heating and domestic requirements of the residence.

CHARACTER OF SERVICE: Nominally 60 cycle, alternating current, single-phase, 120 volt two-wire, or 120/240 volt three-wire, 120/208 three-wire single-phase or other standard voltage or phase arrangements may be supplied at the option of the City.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
The entire residential service, including heating requirements must be taken through a single meter.
All devices larger than 1650 watts shall be connected for operation at 208-240 volts.
No individual thermostat contact or switching device shall control a connected load in excess of 10 kilowatts unless such installation is specifically approved by the City.
Subject to application of Production Cost Adjustment.
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE: SPACE HEATING-LOAD MANAGEMENT-RHL:

AVAILABLE: Within the Crete Electric Service Area.

APPLICABLE: To customers taking service under residential rate classification where permanently installed electric heating equipment is in regular use to supply heating and domestic requirements of the residence, and where an approved electric load management device is installed.

CHARACTER OF SERVICE: Nominally 60 cycle, alternating current, single-phase, 120 volt two-wire, or 120/240 volt three-wire single-phase or other standard voltage or phase arrangements may be supplied at the option of the City.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
The entire residential service, including heating requirements must be taken through a single meter.
All devices larger than 1650 watts shall be connected for operation at 208-240 volts.
No individual thermostat contact or switching device shall control a connected load in excess of 10 kilowatts unless such installation is specifically approved by the City.
Subject to application of Production Cost Adjustment.
An approved electric load management device is installed and functioning to control air conditioning, heating, or other appliances, as described in the customer's application for this rate classification.
GENERAL SERVICE:
GENERAL SERVICE G:

AVAILABLE: Within the Crete electric service area.

APPLICABLE: To any Customer for lighting, heating, and power purposes, where all service is taken through a single meter at one location, and where the Customer's monthly peak demand does not exceed 100 KW, or monthly usage exceeds 50.000 KWH, for three consecutive months. A customer otherwise qualifying for this rate classification, and registering a KW demand of over 25 KW for three consecutive months may apply for service under the General Service, Demand (GD) schedule. Rating of individual single phase motors and other single phase power and heating units served under this schedule shall not exceed ten (10) horsepower except by special permission. This rate shall also apply. at the option of the City when more than one (1) dwelling unit is served through one (1) meter, or more than one separate and distinct dwellings receive service through one (1) meter.

CHARACTER OF SERVICE: Nominally 60 Cycle, AC, 120 volts or 120/240 volts single phase; 240 volts, three phase, four-wire; 120/240, 120/208 volts, or 277/480 volts, three phase, four wire; or at any of the City’s standard distribution voltages, as available. Customers requiring service at secondary voltages other than that already established by the City shall be required to provide suitable space for location of the City’s transformation, metering and associated equipment. Secondary voltage other than that already established may be provided by special permission.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
Subject to application of Production Cost adjustment.
An approved electric load management device is installed and functioning to control air conditioning, heating or other appliances, as described in the customer's application for this rate classification.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS: One meter shall be installed to service one class of business. If additional buildings are required for a given business, they may be interconnected by the customer to obtain one meter. If additional meters and services are requested by the customer, each shall be treated as a separate customer.

FLUCTUATING LOADS. Customers operating equipment having a highly fluctuating or large instantaneous demand, such as welders or X-ray machines, shall be required to pay all non-betterment costs of isolating the load from the balance of the City's system so that the load will not unduly interfere with the service of the city's lines. In addition, customers who fail to provide adequate corrective equipment may be required to own and maintain their own transformers. 

In case of customer equipment having abnormally low utilization factors or unusual operating characteristics, or abnormally low power factors, special minimum charges may be prescribed by the City.
GENERAL SERVICE - LOAD MANAGEMENT; GL:

AVAILABLE: Within the Crete electric service area.

APPLICABLE: To any Customer for lighting, heating, and power purposes, where all service is taken through a single meter at one location, and where the Customer's monthly peak demand does not exceed 100 KW, or monthly usage exceeds 50,000 KWH, for three consecutive months. A customer otherwise qualifying for this rate classification, and registering a KW demand of over 25 KW for three consecutive months may apply for service under the General Service, Demand (GD) schedule. Rating of individual single phase motors and other single phase power and heating units served under this schedule shall not exceed ten (10) horsepower except by special permission. This rate shall also apply, at the option of the City when more than one (1) dwelling unit is served through one (1) meter, or more than one separate and distinct dwellings receive service through one (1) meter.

CHARACTER OF SERVICE: Nominally 60 Cycle, AC, 120 volts or 120/240 volts single phase; 240 volts, three phase, four-wire; 120/240, 120/208 volts, or 277/480 volts, three phase, four wire; or at any of the City's standard distribution voltages, as available. Customers requiring service at secondary voltages other than that already established by the City shall be required to provide suitable space for location of the City's transformation, metering and associated equipment. Secondary voltage other than that already established may be provided by special permission.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
Subject to application of Production Cost Adjustment.
An approved electric load management device is installed and functioning to control air conditioning, heating or other appliances, as described in the customer's application for this rate classification.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS: One meter shall be installed to service one class of business. If additional buildings are required for a given business, they may be interconnected by the customer to obtain one meter. If additional meters and services are requested by the customer, each shall be treated as a separate customer.

FLUCTUATING LOADS. Customers operating equipment having a highly fluctuating or large instantaneous demand, such as welders or X-ray machines, shall be required to pay all non-betterment costs of isolating the load from the balance of the City's system so that the load will not unduly interfere with the service of the City's lines. In addition, customers who fail to provide adequate corrective equipment may be required to own and maintain their own transformers. In case of customer equipment having abnormally low utilization factors or unusual operating characteristics, or abnormally low power factors, special minimum charges may be prescribed by the City.

LOAD MANAGEMENT CREDIT (SUMMER ONLY): For those customers that currently have a City approved load controller installed and operable on their air conditioner or other City designated equipment, at the City's discretion, there shall be credited monthly on the bill load management credit established in 3-123.
GENERAL SERVICE; SPACE HEATING GH:

AVAILABLE: To electric space heating to any customer receiving service under General Service GS rate schedule where service is supplied through separate or sub-metered circuit to which the space heating equipment is connected. When permanently installed electric equipment is used for both heating and cooling and the consumption is registered on this meter, then consumption registered for the period of June 1 – October 31 will be included with consumption registered on the General Service meter and the billing will be calculated on the total consumption. (Amd. Ord. 1636; 09/20/05)

CHARACTER OF SERVICE: Nominally 60 Cycle, AC, 120 volts or 120/240 volts single phase; 240 volts, three phase, four-wire; 120/240, 120/208 volts or 277/480 volts, three phase, four wire; or at any of the City's standard distribution voltages, as available. Customers requiring service at secondary voltages other than that already established by the City shall be required to provide suitable space for location of the City's transformation, metering and associated equipment. Secondary voltage other than that already established may be provided by special permission.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
All heaters larger than 1650 watts shall be connected for operation at 208-240 volts or higher.
No individual thermostat contact or switching device contact shall control a connected load in excess of 10 kilowatts unless such installation is specifically approved by the City.
When permanently installed all-electric equipment for both heating and cooling and the consumption for each is registered on this meter, then consumption registered for the period of June 1 – October 31 will be included with consumption registered on the GS Commercial Service Meter and the billing will be calculated on the total consumption. No devices other than heating or cooling equipment shall be connected to this circuit. (Amd. Ord. 1636; 09/20/05)
Subject to application of Production Cost Adjustment.
FLUCTUATING LOADS: Customers operating equipment having a highly fluctuating or large instantaneous demand, such as welders or X-ray machines, shall be required to pay all non-betterment costs of isolating the load from the balance of the City's system so that the load will not unduly interfere with the service of the City's lines. In addition, customers who fail to provide adequate corrective equipment may be required to own and maintain their own transformers.

In case of customer equipment having abnormally low utilization factors or unusual operating characteristics, or abnormally low power factors, special minimum charges may be prescribed by the City.
GENERAL SERVICE; SPACE HEATING GHL:

AVAILABLE: To electric space heating to any customer receiving service under General Service GS rate schedule where service is supplied through separate or sub-metered circuit to which the space heating equipment is connected, and where an approved electric load management device is installed and operable. When permanently installed electric equipment is used for both heating and cooling and the consumption is registered on this meter, then consumption registered for the period of June 1 – October 31 will be included with consumption registered on the General Service meter and the billing will be calculated on the total consumption. (Amd. Ord. 1636; 09/20/05)

CHARACTER OF SERVICE: Nominally 60 Cycle, AC, 120 volts or 120/240 volts single phase; 240 volts, three phase. four-wire; 120/240, 120/208 volts, or 277/480 volts, three phase, four wire; or at any of the City's standard distribution voltages, as established by the City shall be required to provide suitable space for location of the City's transformation, metering and associated equipment. Secondary voltage other than that already established may be provided by special permission.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
All heaters larger than 1650 watts shall be connected for operation at 208-240 volts or higher.
No individual thermostat contact or switching device contact shall control a connected load in excess of 10 kilowatts unless such installation is specifically approved by the City.
When permanently installed all-electric equipment for both heating and cooling and the consumption for each is registered on this meter, then consumption registered for the period of June 1 - October 31 will be included with consumption registered on the GS Commercial Service Meter and the billing will be calculated on the total consumption. No devices other than heating or cooling equipment shall be connected to this circuit.
Subject to application of Production Cost Adjustment.
An approved electric load management device is installed and functioning to control air conditioning, heating or other appliances, as described in the customer's application for this rate classification. (Amd. Ord. 1636; 09/20/05)
FLUCTUATING LOADS: Customers operating equipment having a highly fluctuating or large instantaneous demand, such as welders or X-ray machines, shall be required to pay all non-betterment costs of isolating the load from the balance of the City's system so that the load will not unduly interfere with the service of the City's lines. Customers who fail to provide adequate corrective equipment may be required to own and maintain their own transformers.

In case of customer equipment having abnormally low utilization factors or unusual operating characteristics, or abnormally low power factors, special minimum charges may be prescribed by the City.
GENERAL SERVICE, DEMAND GD:

AVAILABLE: Within the Crete electric service area.

APPLICABLE: To any Customer for lighting, heating, and power purposes, where all service is taken through a single meter at one location, and where the Customer's monthly peak demand exceeds 100 KW, but does not exceed 500 KW, or whose monthly usage exceeds 50,000 KWH for three consecutive months, whose entire requirements are taken through one meter, or for a customer otherwise qualifying for the GS rate schedule, but with a peak KW demand of over 25 KWH for three consecutive months, who requests service under the General Service, Demand (GD) Schedule, under a contract of standard form. (Not applicable to resale, stand-by, shared, or auxiliary service.) This rate shall also apply, at the option of the City when more than one (1) dwelling unit is served through one (1) meter, or more than one separate and distinct dwellings receive service through one (1) meter.

CHARACTER OF SERVICE: Nominally 60 Cycle, AC, 120 volts or 120/240 volts single phase; 240 volts, three phase, four-wire; 120/240, 120/208 volts, or 277/480 volts, three phase, four wire; or at any of the City's standard distribution voltages, as available, requiring a single transformation. Customers requiring service at secondary voltages other than that already established by the City shall be required to provide suitable space for location of the City's transformation, metering and associated equipment. Secondary voltage other than that already established may be provided by special permission.

DETERMINATION OF MAXIMUM KILOWATT DEMAND: The maximum kilowatt demand for any billing period shall be the highest adjusted integrated kilowatt load during any fifteen (15) minute period occurring in the billing period for which the determination is made.

OFF-PEAK DEMAND BILLING (June 1 - October 31 only): Customers with demands of 100 KW or more for three consecutive months, and that have magnetic tape or similar time-of-use metering installed may be billed on an off-peak rate comprised of a coincident and non-coincident demand billing component. All other provisions and requirements of this rate schedule remain in tact. (Amd. Ord. 1636; 09/20/05)

For purposes of this schedule, coincident peak shall mean the customer's peak demand occurring at the same time as the City Peak Demand, or within specified hours. Non-coincident demand shall be the positive difference between the customer's measured peak monthly demand and their coincident peak demand.

Ratcheted demand for October 1 through May 31 shall be based upon the customer's coincident summer peak. The ratchet for June through September is waived for non-coincident demand.

Special metering equipment used to qualify for OFF-PEAK DEMAND BILLING will be provided at the expense of the customer.

DETERMINATION OF BILLING DEMAND: The billing demand shall be the highest of the following:

The maximum adjusted kilowatt demand measured in the month, or sixty-five (65%) percent of the highest adjusted kilowatt demand established during June 1 through October 31 of the preceding eleven (11) months. (Amd. Ord. 1636; 09/20/05)

POWER FACTOR ADJUSTMENT: Power factor adjustments will be made in the billing when the power factor, as determined at the time of the customer's maximum use is less than ninety (90%) percent. The measured maximum kilowatt demand will be multiplied by ninety (90) and divided by the customer's power factor (expressed in percent), leading or lagging, determined at the time of the customer's maximum use.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
Subject to application of Production Cost Adjustment.
One meter shall be installed to service one class of business. If additional buildings are required for a given business, they may be interconnected by the customer to obtain one meter. If additional meters and services are requested by the customer, each shall be treated as a separate customer.
FLUCTUATING LOADS: Customers operating equipment having a highly fluctuating or large instantaneous demand, such as welders or X-ray machines, shall be required to pay all non-betterment costs of isolating the load from the balance of the City's system so that the load will not unduly interfere with the service of the City's lines. In addition, customers who fail to provide adequate corrective equipment may be required to own and maintain their own transformers.

In case of customer equipment having abnormally low utilization factors or unusual operating characteristics, or abnormally low power factors, special minimum charges may be prescribed by the City.
LARGE POWER SERVICE:
LARGE POWER SERVICE LPl:

AVAILABLE: Within the Crete electric service area.

APPLICABLE: To any customer for general commercial lighting, heating, and miscellaneous power service where the maximum electrical demand is 500 Kilowatts or more, but not exceeding 5000 Kilowatts for three consecutive months, or whose usage exceeds 50,000 KWH per month for three consecutive months, and whose entire requirements are taken through one meter, under a contract of standard form. (Not applicable to resale, stand-by, or auxiliary service).

CHARACTER OF SERVICE: Nominally 60 Cycle, AC, 120 volts or 120/240 volts, single phase; 240 volts, three phase, four-wire; 120/240, 120/208 volts, or 277/480 volts, three phase, four wire; or at any of the City's standard distribution voltages, as available. Customers requiring service at secondary voltages other than that already established by the City shall be required to provide suitable space for location of the City's transformation, metering and associated equipment. Secondary voltage other than that already established may be provided by special permission.

DETERMINATION OF MAXIMUM KILOWATT DEMAND: The maximum kilowatt demand for any billing period shall be the highest adjusted integrated kilowatt load during any fifteen (15) minute period occurring in the billing period for which the determination is made.

OFF-PEAK DEMAND BILLING (June 1 - October 31, only): Customers with demands of 500 KW or more for three consecutive months, and that have magnetic tape or similar time-of-use metering installed may be billed on an off-peak rate comprised of a coincident and non-coincident demand billing component. All other provisions and requirements of this rate schedule remain intact. (Amd. Ord. 1636; 09/20/05)

For purposes of this schedule, coincident peak shall mean the customer's peak demand occurring at the same time as that of the City. Non-coincident demand shall be the positive difference between the customer's measured peak monthly demand and their coincident peak demand.

Ratcheted demand for October 1 through May 31 shall be based upon the customer's coincident summer peak. The ratchet for June through September is waived for non-coincident demand.

Special metering equipment used to qualify for OFF-PEAK DEMAND BILLING will be provided at the expense of the customer.

DETERMINATION OF BILLING DEMAND: The billing demand shall be the highest of the following:

The maximum adjusted kilowatt demand measured in the month, or sixty-five (65%) percent of the highest adjusted kilowatt demand established from June 1 through October 31 of the preceding eleven (11) months. (Amd. Ord. 1636; 09/20/05)

TRANSFORMER OWNERSHIP: The demand charge shall be decreased by ten (.10) cents per kilowatt of demand above city-owned transformer capacity where the customer supplies a portion of the transformation facilities (other than metering equipment) connected to and receiving power and energy from the City's primary distribution line at that location.

POWER FACTOR ADJUSTMENT: Power factor adjustments will be made in the billing when the power factor, as determined at the time of the customer's maximum use is less than ninety (90%) percent. The measured maximum kilowatt demand will be multiplied by ninety (90) and divided by the customer's power factor (expressed in percent), leading or lagging, determined at the time of the customer's maximum use.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS: The City shall provide one (1) transformation from primary voltage to a standard utilization voltage (120/240, 120/208, 480, 480/277, 4160/2400, or 13,800/7970 volts) at one (1) delivery and metering point. Metering will be on the load side of the transformers, or where metering is applied on the line side of the transformer, the measured kilowatt demand and kilowatt-hour consumption shall be reduced two (2%) percent.

FLUCTUATING LOADS: Customers operating equipment having a highly fluctuating or large instantaneous demand, such as welders or X-ray machines, shall be required to pay all non-betterment costs of isolating the load from the balance of the City's system so that the load will not unduly interfere with the service of the City's lines. In addition, customers who fail to provide adequate corrective equipment may be required to own and maintain their own transformers.

In case of customer equipment having abnormally low utilization factors or unusual operating characteristics, or abnormally low power factors, special minimum charges may be prescribed by the City.
LARGE POWER SERVICE LP2:

AVAILABLE: Within the Crete electric service area.

APPLICABLE: To any customer with demands of 5000 Kilowatts or more for three consecutive months, whose entire requirements are supplied at one (1) metering point from 34,500 line volts or higher, under a contract of standard form. (Not applicable to resale, stand-by, shared, or auxiliary service). The customer will furnish all equipment necessary for transformation and regulation of power and energy below 34,500 volts.

CHARACTER OF SERVICE: Nominally 60 Cycle, AC, three phase transmission line voltages (34,500 volts or higher).

DETERMINATION OF MAXIMUM KILOWATT DEMAND: The maximum kilowatt demand for any billing period shall be the highest integrated kilowatt load during any fifteen (15) minute period occurring in the billing period for which the determination is made.

OFF-PEAK DEMAND BILLING (June 1 - October 31, only): Customers with demands of 500 KW or more for three consecutive months, and that have magnetic tape or similar time-of-use metering installed may be billed on an off-peak rate comprised of a coincident and non-coincident demand billing component. All other provisions and requirements of this rate schedule remain intact. (Amd. Ord. 1636; 09/20/05)

For purposes of this schedule, coincident peak shall mean the customer's peak demand occurring at the same time as that of the City. Non-coincident demand shall be the positive difference between the customer's measured peak monthly demand and their coincident peak demand.

Ratcheted demand for October 1 through May 31 shall be based upon the customer's coincident summer peak. The ratchet for June 1 through October 31 is waived for non-coincident demand. (Amd. Ord. 1636; 09/20/05)

Special metering equipment used to qualify for OFF-PEAK DEMAND BILLING will be provided at the expense of the customer.

DETERMINATION OF BILLING DEMAND: Customers taking service under this schedule shall contract for their estimated capacity requirements (expressed in kilowatts) but not less than 2,500 kilowatts. The billing demand shall be highest of (a), (b), or (c) below:
The highest adjusted integrated kilowatt load over a thirty (30) minute period occurring during the monthly billing period.
Sixty-five (65%) percent of the highest adjusted integrated kilowatt load during any thirty (30) minute period occurring from June 1 through October 31 of the preceding eleven (11) months. (Amd. Ord. 1636; 09/20/05)
Twenty-five hundred (2,500) kilowatts or the minimum kilowatt billing demand set forth in the customer contract, whichever is higher.
TRANSFORMER OWNERSHIP CHARGE: The demand charge shall be increased ten (.10) cents per kilowatt of demand above city-owned transformer capacity where the customer supplies a portion of the transformation facilities (other than metering equipment) connected to and receiving power and energy from the City's primary distribution line at that location.

METERING ADJUSTMENT: At the City's option, metering shall be on the high or low side of any transformation. When service is metered at a voltage lower than that of the City's existing transmission voltage level, adjustment shall be made for billing purposes by multiplying the meter readings by 1.02.

POWER FACTOR ADJUSTMENT: If the customer's power factor at the time of the maximum demand is less than ninety (90%) percent lagging or leading, the City may, at its option, adjust the demand to ninety (90%) percent by multiplying the billing demand by ninety (90%) percent and dividing by the customer's actual power factor (expressed in percent).

TERMS OF PAYMENT: Bills are due and payable upon receipt and delinquent if not paid in ten (10) days.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS: Service will be furnished under then City's general terms and conditions and special terms and conditions as provided in contracts for service under this schedule. Extensions made for service under this schedule are subject to the provisions of the City's rules governing extension of service and facilities.

FLUCTUATING LOADS: Customers operating equipment having a highly fluctuating or large instantaneous demand, such as welders or X-ray machines, shall be required to pay all non-betterment costs of isolating the load from the balance of the City's system so that the load will not unduly interfere with the service of the City's lines. In addition, customers who fail to provide adequate corrective equipment may be required to own and maintain their own transformers.

In case of customer equipment having abnormally low utilization factors or unusual operating characteristics, or abnormally low power factors, special minimum charges may be prescribed by the City.
IRRIGATION SERVICE IP:

AVAILABLE: Within the Crete electric service area.

APPLICABLE: To seasonal irrigation service for customers served from existing single or three-phase lines, whose entire requirements are taken through one meter, under a contract of standard form.

CHARACTER OF SERVICE: Nominally 60 cycles, AC, single or three-phase, at any of the City's standard voltages (35,000 volts or less) where the service may be supplied by a single power transformation.

IRRIGATION SEASON: Defined as the period of June 1 to October 31. (Amd. Ord. 1636; 09/20/05)

DETERMINATION OF CONNECTED LOAD: The connected load in horsepower will be taken from the nameplate rating of the motor, or determined by actual measurement of horsepower input to the motor operation under maximum load conditions. The City reserves the right at any time to check the Customer's load for recalculation of the minimum bill.

POWER FACTOR: For motors 15 H.P. or larger, customer shall install secondary capacitors in conformance with City policy. When customer refuses to install said capacitors, the City shall increase the H.P. charge often (10%) percent.

TERMS OF PAYMENT: All customers will pay the on-peak fixed charge as the minimum bill each season. The minimum bill shall be due and payable in full on May 15 of each year. If payment is received before May 15, service will be energized by June 1. If payment is received after May 15, service connections will be made at the City's convenience and an additional service charge of $25.00 will be made. For those customers that are on the off-peak rate for the entire irrigation season, the difference between the on-peak rate and the rate contracted for shall be credited to the energy charge.

All energy and fixed charges for the previous season must be paid in full before service is connected for the coming season.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
Usage may be fractionalized on the actual days of service for an application of a change in rate.
Service will be furnished under the City General Terms and conditions.
Extensions made for service under this schedule are subject to provisions of the City's rules governing Extension of Service and Facilities.
Rates for service under this classification may be increased by any new or increased governmental tax imposed and levied on transmission, distribution, production, or the sale of electrical power.
LIGHTING:
CITY & STREET LIGHTING SL: APPLICATION: This rate shall apply to electric energy used for lighting for the streets and alleys for the City.
RENTAL LIGHTING PL: APPLICATION: These monthly rates shall apply to lighting devices owned, installed and maintained by the Crete Electric Department where the electric energy for these lights does not pass through the customer's electric meter.
RENTAL LIGHTING ML: APPLICATION: These monthly rates shall apply to lighting devices owned, installed and maintained by the Crete Electric Department where the electric energy for these lights does pass through the customer's electric meter.
CONTRACT LIGHTING CL: APPLICATION: These monthly rates shall apply to lighting devices owned, installed and maintained by the customer, but where electric energy for these lights does not pass through the customer's meter.
COGENERATION PURCHASE OF POWER AND ENERGY:
COGENERATION Gl:

AVAILABLE: Within the Crete electric service area.

APPLICABLE: For the purchase of power and/or energy by the City from small power and energy producers with production capability of less than one hundred Kilowatts (100 KW), without time-of-day metering.

MINIMUM CHARGE PER MONTH: The producer shall pay a minimum monthly charge to the City for each measured interconnection.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS: Owners of small power and energy production facilities must execute a small power and cogeneration agreement with the City.

For sale of power to small power production and cogeneration facilities for standby or supplemental use to cogenerator, the City will use the applicable rate schedule for the class of service of the cogenerator.
CONGENERATION G2:

AVAILABLE: Within the Crete electric service area.

APPLICABLE: For purchase of power and/or energy by the City from small power and energy producers within production capability of less than one hundred Kilowatts (100 KW).

MINIMUM CHARGE PER MONTH: The producer shall pay a minimum monthly charge for each measured interconnection.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS: Owners of small power and energy production facilities must execute a small power and congeneration agreement with the City.

For sale of power to small power production and congeneration facilities for standby or supplemental use to congenerator, the City will use the applicable rate schedule for the class of service of the cogenerator, $.012 per KWH, plus the fuel and energy adjustment applied to the City electric rate classification for retail power and energy sales to the producer.
GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR ALL RATES:
TERMS OF PAYMENT: Bills are due and payable upon receipt and delinquent if not paid by the due date noted on the bill. There will be a ten (10%) percent late payment charge added to all accounts that are not paid by the close of business at five (5:00) o'clock P.M. on the due date shown on the bill.
TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
Usage may be fractionalized on the actual days of service for application of a change in rate. Service will be furnished under the City General Terms and Conditions.
The electric service rates set forth in section 3-123 of the City Code may be increased by the amount of any new or increased governmental tax imposed and levied on transmission, distribution, production, or the sale of electrical power.
The summer rate shall apply to the Customer's use from the billing month of June 1 through October 31. (Amd. Ord. 1636; 09/20/05)
The winter rate shall apply to the Customer's use from the billing month of October through the billing month of May.
All rates listed shall be subject to application of Production Cost Adjustment.
PRODUCTION COST ADJUSTMENT: When a rate schedule provides for the application of a "Production Cost Adjustment," such adjustment shall be determined as follows:

Production costs shall be calculated and all applicable tariff sheets revised every six (6) months, or as otherwise deemed necessary by the City, to reflect actual changes in the cost of electric production. For these purposes the "Cost of Production" shall mean the total cost of fuel and purchased power less capacity lease payment and fuel reimbursements from MEAN. Said calculations and adjustments shall be made and become effective with the first billing after April 1 and October 1 of each year, at the City's option.

Costs for the subsequent six (6) month period shall reflect the costs as may be reasonably anticipated, plus or minus any corrective adjustments from the previous period. All costs for the previous period shall be based upon estimated purchase costs divided by 0.951 (loss adjustment).
(Ord. No. 873, 3/17/81) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 1079, 4/18/89; 1130, 2/19/91; 1168, 4/21/92; 1216, 12/7/93; 1333, 7/16/96)

3-120 Electric Department; Billing; Collecting
Accounts between the customer and the City shall be kept by the Public Works Director under such bookkeeping system as shall be provided by the Mayor and Council. A customer's ledger shall be kept current with a separate account for each customer. All electric meters shall be read monthly under the direction of the Public Works Director. City bookkeepers and cashiers shall collect the same under the supervision of the Public Works Director. Customers shall pay City bookkeepers and cashiers at the Utilities Office in the City Hall the amount due the City for electric service. All bills for electric service shall be due on the billing date, and shall become delinquent on the due date as shown on the bill. If the customer shall neglect or refuse to pay his bill in full on or before five (5:00) o'clock P.M. on the due date shown on the bill, the amount due will be increased by the late payment charge, if applicable. If the bill is not paid in full on or before the due date, a notice will be mailed to the customer that electric service will be discontinued no earlier than ten (10) nor more than sixteen (16) days after the due date shown on the bill, with no further notice, and that service will not be restored until the bill is paid in full, together with a collection charge and a reconnection charge and a deposit repayment, if applicable. There is hereby established a minimum charge of $35.00 for reconnection during regular business hours, and a minimum of $50.00 for reconnection outside of regular business hours. Deposit repayments will be based on eighty percent (80%) of two (2) months average billing for that customer. If the cost for reconnection exceeds the minimum set forth above, customer shall be responsible for any additional costs incurred.

(Amended by Ord. No. 1226, 1/18/94; Ord. No. 1430, 10/20/98)

3-121 Electric Department; Service Deposit; Refund
An applicant shall be required to accompany their application for electric service with a Service Deposit, to insure the payment of electric bills and other charges. The Service Deposit amounts are set by ordinance by the City Council. The Service Deposit shall remain in the custody of the Utility Department for a minimum of ten (10) years. Service deposits shall be refunded to the customer when service has not been disconnected, or payment waived past disconnect date, on no more than one (1) occasion, for two (2) consecutive years, for residential service; or three (3) consecutive years for commercial customers, or when service is no longer desired or otherwise permanently terminated. In the event of disconnection after refund, the customer will be required to pay reconnect fees in addition to new deposit which will be based on eighty percent (80%) of averaged two (2) months billing. Any Service Deposit may be transferred by a customer between service locations in the City, but may not be transferred by a customer to any other customer.

(Amended by Ord. No. 1431, 10/20/98; Ord. No. 1676, 04/03/07)

3-122 Electric Department; Liability Of City
The City does not guarantee the delivery of electric current over the lines of its distribution system at any time to any person. The City expressly reserves the right to disconnect or discontinue service for any of the following reasons: For repairs necessary to be made on any part of its plant, power house, equipment or distribution system; for nonpayment of bills when due, for fraudulent representations in regard to the consumption of current for light, cooking, heat and power; for the protection of persons or property; for violation of any of the rules and requirements of this Article, or the subsequent amendments thereto. The City shall use due and reasonable diligence to provide and supply uninterrupted service to customers, but shall not be liable for damages resulting from interruption of service due to causes over which the City has no control, for damages arising out of any wiring or motors inside any building whether inspected by agents of the City or not, and the City expressly reserves the right to refuse to connect or to discontinue or disconnect customer's service without any preliminary notice, for reasons set forth in this Article or for any other reason. The customer shall have interior wiring or other wiring about the place or premises on which electric service is to be used, done by a licensed and bonded electrician, but under no circumstances shall connections be made with the wires of the electric distribution system and supply wire or wires of the City and the wires of the customer except at the order of the Public Works Director. All wires of customers shall be installed in accordance with the rules of the National Electrical Code incorporated by reference in Chapter 9.

3-123 Electric Department; Rates
The following monthly rate schedules shall apply to all Customers of the Municipal Electric Department, according to the applicable service classification, effective October 1, 2017:

RESIDENTIAL SERVICE
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE R

Customer Charge, per month $14.09

PLUS:
Summer
All kWh used, per month $0.1106/kWh

Winter
First 650 kWh used, per month $0.1030/kWh
Balance used, per month $0.0813/kWh

Minimum Bill, per month $14.09

LOAD MANAGEMENT CREDIT (SUMMER ONLY):
Per controlled kW or HP $2.50 per month
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE, SPACE HEATING RH

Customer Charge per month $14.09

PLUS:
Summer
All kWh used, per month $0.1106/kWh

Winter
First 650 kWh used, per month $0.1030/kWh
Balance used, per month $0.0813/kWh

Minimum Bill, per month $14.09

LOAD MANAGEMENT CREDIT (SUMMER ONLY):
Per controlled kW or HP $2.50 per month
GENERAL SERVICE
GENERAL SERVICE G

Customer Charge, per month
Single Phase Service $31.44
Three Phase Service $55.28
PLUS:
Summer
First 1,200 kWh used, per month $0.1127/kWh
Balance used, per month $0.1127/kWh
Winter
First 1,200 kWh used, per month $0.1127/kWh
Balance used, per month $0.0932/kWh

LOAD MANAGEMENT CREDIT (SUMMER ONLY):
Per controlled kW or HP $2.50 per month
GENERAL SERVICE, SPACE HEATING GH

Customer Charge, per month
Single Phase Service $31.44
Three Phase Service $55.28
PLUS:
Summer
First 1,200 kWh used, per month $0.1127/kWh
Balance used, per month $0.1127/kWh
Winter
First 1,200 kWh used, per month $0.1127/kWh
Balance used, per month $0.0932/kWh

LOAD MANAGEMENT CREDIT (SUMMER ONLY):
Per controlled kW or HP $2.50 per month
GENERAL SERVICE, DEMAND GD

Customer Charge, per month $81.30
PLUS:
Summer
On-peak demand charge $28.73
Off-peak demand charge $9.76
Energy charge, all kWh used, per month $0.0444/kWh

Winter
On-peak demand charge $20.87
Off-peak demand charge $20.87
Energy charge, all kWh used, per month $0.0444/kWh

Minimum Bill
The greater of:
The customer charge; or
The customer charge plus the demand charge associated with 65% of the maximum recorded billing demand for the previous summer (June-September) months; or
One dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per KVA of installed transformer capacity.

LARGE POWER SERVICE
LARGE POWER SERVICE LP1

Customer Charge, per month $205.96
PLUS:
Summer
On-peak demand charge $26.02
Off-peak demand charge $8.13
Energy charge, all kWh used, per month $0.0390/kWh
Winter
On-peak demand charge $20.33
Off-peak demand charge $0.00
Energy charge, all kWh used, per month $0.0390/kWh

Minimum Bill
The greater of:
The demand charge plus the energy charge and the customer charge; or
One dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per KVA of installed transformer capacity

LARGE POWER SERVICE LP2

Customer Charge, per month $205.96
PLUS:
Summer
On-peak demand charge $26.02
Off-peak demand charge $8.13
Energy charge, all kWh used, per month $0.0379/kWh
Winter
On-peak demand charge $18.97
Off-peak demand charge $0.00
Energy charge, all kWh used, per month $0.0379/kWh

Minimum Bill
The greater of:
The demand charge plus the energy charge and the customer charge; or
One dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per KVA of installed transformer capacity
IRRIGATION SERVICE IP

Customer Charge, per month $43.36
PLUS:
Annual Fixed Charge
On-peak HP charge $92.14
(connected per season)
Off-peak HP charge $31.44
(connected per season)
Off-peak: Minimum 30 HP, restricted hours use
Energy charge, all kWh used $0.0813/kWh

Subject to application of fuel and energy adjustment as provided in Section 3-124.

Irrigation Season
The period from June 1 through September 30

Off-Season Service
The period from October 1 through May 31
Energy charge, all kWh used, Billed at General Service G rate

Minimum Seasonal Charge
The greater of:
The HP charge; or
A charge of $120.

Billing HP shall be the nameplate rating of the motor(s) connected to this service.
LIGHTING
CITY STREET LIGHTING SL

Customer Charge, per month $7.05
PLUS:
Summer
Energy charge, all kWh used, per month $0.0565/kWh
(where applicable)
Winter
Energy charge, all kWh used, per month $0.0603/kWh
(where applicable)

OR: Rental lighting charge, PL or ML, as applicable.
RENTAL LIGHTING PL

Customer Charge, per month
PL1 175 watt mercury vapor light $8.16/fixture
PL2 100/150 watt sodium vapor light $7.37/fixture
PL3 400 watt mercury vapor light $14.05/fixture
PL4 400 watt sodium vapor light $14.05/fixture
PL7 1000 watt mercury vapor light $21.17/fixture
RENTAL LIGHTING ML

Customer Charge, per month
ML1 175 watt mercury vapor light $4.39/fixture
ML2 100/150 watt sodium vapor light $4.16/fixture
ML3 400 watt mercury vapor light $5.44/fixture
ML4 400 watt sodium vapor light $5.12/fixture
ML7 1000 watt mercury vapor light $6.81/fixture
COGENERATION

Owners of small power and energy production facilities must execute a small power and cogeneration agreement with the City.
COGENERATION G1. The producer shall pay a minimum monthly charge to the City for each measured interconnection.

Customer Charge, per month:
240 Volts or Less:
Single phase meter $13.00/ meter
Three phase meter $29.00/ meter

Over 240 Volts:
Single phase meter $29.00/ meter
Three phase meter $51.00/ meter

For energy purchased by City:
Per month $0.0378/kWh
PLUS:
The fuel and energy adjustment applied to the City electric rate classification for retail power and energy sales to the producer.

COGENERATION G2. For the purchase of power and/or energy by the City from small power and energy producers with production capability of more than 100 kW.

The producer shall pay a minimum monthly charge to the City for each measured interconnection.

Customer Charge, per month:
240 Volts or Less:
Single phase meter $29.00/ meter
Three phase meter $51.00/ meter

Over 240 Volts:
Single phase meter $29.00/ meter
Three phase meter $51.00/ meter
For energy purchased by City:
Per month $0.0378/kWh
PLUS:
The fuel and energy adjustment applied to the City electric rate classification for retail power and energy sales to the producer, based on the pooled energy adjustment assessed by the City's power supplier.
Time-of-day Metering
Single phase meter $29.00/ meter
Three phase meter $51.00/ meter
PRODUCTION COST ADJUSTMENT
The base production cost for the tariffs presently in effect is 75.24 mills/kWh ($0.07524/kWh), including purchased power costs and transmission service.
(Amended by Ord. No. 1629, 05/17/05) (Ord. No. 1722, 12/02/08) (Ord. No. 1754, 05/20/10; 1833, 9/18/12; 1849, 4/16/13; 1866, 6/18/13. 1929, 05/19/15; 2003, 6/6/17)


3-124 Electric Department; Rate Adjustment, Availability
The City reserves the right to increase the cost per kilowatt-hour (kWh) to compensate for any increase in fuel and energy costs per kWh or any production cost adjustment or pooled energy adjustment assessed by the City’s power supplier.

(Amended by Ord. No. 1754, 05/20/10; 1833, 9/18/12; 1849, 4/16/13; 1929, 05/19/15)

3-125 Electric Department; Fees And Charges
Connection Charges
Connections or reconnections made during normal working hours: $3.00.
Connection or reconnections made outside normal working hours at customer's request: $35.00.
Late Payment Charges: 1.10%
Collection Charge: $5.00
Returned Check Charge: $20.00
Service Deposits: 

Minimum Service Deposits shall be: 

For R and RL applicants, other than mobile home owners or occupants: $100.00 

For RH and RHL applicants, and R and RL mobile home owners or occupants:
For single-dwelling units: $250.00
For multiple-dwelling units: $150.00
For G, GL, GH, and GHL applicants, minimum deposit $50.00. Actual deposit required to be 80% of the total amount of two months bills.

For GSD applicants, minimum deposit $50.00. Actual deposit required to be 80% of the total amount of two months bills.

Deposit amounts for LP1 and LP2 customers will be set by contract by the City Council. Any service deposit collected according to this schedule from above-referenced RH and RHL applicants may be reduced by thirty percent (30% upon the applicant’s paying in a timely manner twelve (12) consecutive monthly bills for electric service. This percentage reduction in service deposit shall apply only once to each applicant’s account and any remaining service deposit shall remain with the City and shall be refunded as per the first paragraph of this section. 

The above service deposits shall apply to all new applications for electrical service but shall not apply to existing accounts, nor do they apply to transfers of service within the service area of the utility within the same customer classification A, B, C, D, E, or F, as defined in section 3-123 of this Chapter of the Municipal Code. 

Any agency of the Federal Government may be exempt from the requirement to post a service deposit on electrical service on written request approved by the City Council. (Amended by Ord. No. 1080, 4/18/89; 1112, 3/6/90; 1115, 4/17/90; 1131, 2/19/91; 1213, 10/19/93; 1432, 10/20/98)
WAIVER OF PAYMENT DUE DATE The Public Works Director, or his designee, may grant waivers to allow payment of utility bills after the due date, which waivers will be granted based on each situation presented and shall be at the discretion of the City. Any waiver granted shall be based on extenuating, unusual and non-reoccurring circumstances. 

Any waiver granted shall require the person receiving the waiver to pay a minimum of $2.00 per day charge for each day of any extension granted and also require the payment by the customer of the $5.00 collection fee.
(Ord. No. 1530, 11/06/01)

Article 2 Water Department
3-200 Water Department; Operation And Funding
3-201 Water Department; Administration
3-202 Water Department; Definitions
3-203 Water Department; Customer Contract
3-204 Water Department; Customer Application
3-205 Water Department; Service To Non-Residents
3-206 Water Department; Tap Fee
3-207 Water Department; Supply Line Installation
3-208 Water Department; Separate Taps Required
3-209 Water Department; Service Line Installation
3-210 Water Department; Water Meters
3-211 Water Department; Meter Pits
3-212 Water Department; Access To Premises
3-213 Water Department; Repairs And Maintenance
3-214 Water Department; Water Shortages
3-215 Water Department; Fire Hydrants
3-216 Water Department; Contamination Prohibited
3-217 Water Department; Destruction Of Property
3-218 Water Department; Mains Construction
3-219 Water Department; Customer Classifications
3-220 Water Department; Accounts And Billing
3-221 Water Department; Service Deposit
3-222 Water Department; City Liability
3-223 Water Department; Rates
3-224 Water Department; Multiple-Occupancy Service
3-225 Water Department; Fees And Charges
3-226 Water Department; Maintenance Service Charge

3-200 Water Department; Operation And Funding
The Municipality owns and operates the Municipal Water Department through the Public Works Director. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management, and maintenance of the Municipal Water Department may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Water Fund and shall remain in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-201 Water Department; Administration
(1) The Public Works Director shall have the direct management and control of the Municipal Water Department and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his office. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to adopt regulations for the proper and efficient management of the Water Department subject to the supervision and review of the City Council.

(2) The City Council shall set the rates to be charged for services rendered by ordinance and shall file a copy of the rates in the office of the Public Works Director and in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-681; 19-1305



3-202 Water Department; Definitions
The following definitions shall be applied throughout this Article. Where no definition is specified, the normal dictionary usage of the word shall apply:

(1) Main. The term "main" is hereby defined to be any pipe four inches in diameter or larger, other than a supply or service pipe, that is used for the purpose of carrying water to and dispersing the same in the Municipality.

(2) Supply Pipe. The term "supply pipe" is hereby defined to be any pipe tapped into a main and extending from there to a point where the curb stop and box are located at or near the outer sidewalk line of the street in which the main is laid.

(3) Service Pipe. The term "service pipe" is hereby defined to be any pipe extending from the curb stop at or near the outer sidewalk line to and beyond the property line of the consumer to the location on the premise where the water is to be dispersed.

(4) Separate Premises. The term "separate premises" is hereby defined to be a separate dwelling or apartment, a building or structure used for a separate business, or each distinct business in a business building or structure.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-203 Water Department; Customer Contract
(1) The Municipality shall furnish water to persons within its corporate limits whose premises abut a street or alley in which a water main now is laid. The Municipality may furnish water to persons within its corporate limits whose premises do not abut a street or alley in which a water main is now or hereafter may be laid by resolution of the City Council and at the expense of the owner of the premises to be served. The rules, regulations, and water rates hereinafter named in this Article shall be considered a part of every application hereafter made for water service and shall be considered a part of the contract between every consumer now or hereafter served.

(2) Without further formality, the making of an application on the part of any applicant or the use or consumption of water service by present consumers thereof and the furnishing of water service to said consumer shall constitute a contract between the consumer and the Municipality to which said contract both parties are bound. The Municipality reserves the right to change rates, charges, and conditions of service from time to time in connection with furnishing water to the consumer. If the consumer shall violate any of the provisions of said contract or any reasonable rules and regulations that the City Council may hereafter adopt, the Public Works Director or his agent may cut off or disconnect the water service from the building or premises or place of such violation. No further connection for water service to said building, premises, or place shall again be made save or except by order of the Public Works Director or his agent.

(3) Contracts for water service are not transferable. Any person wishing to change from one location to another shall make a new application. If any consumer shall move from the premises where service is furnished or if the said premises is destroyed by fire or other casualty, he shall at once inform the Public Works Director who shall cause the water service to be shut off at the said premises. If the consumer should fail to give such notice, he shall be charged for all water used on the said premises until the Public Works Director is otherwise advised of such circumstances.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-681



3-204 Water Department; Customer Application
Every person or persons desiring a supply of water must make application therefor to the Public Works Director. The Director shall require any applicant to pay a connection fee in such amount as has been set by the City Council and placed on file at the office of the Utilities Department. Water may not be supplied to any premises except upon the order of the Director.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-681



3-205 Water Department; Service To Non-Residents
The Department shall not supply water service to any person outside the corporate limits without special permission from the City Council; provided, such applicants whose property is situated outside the City shall pay tap and installation fees in such sums as determined in each case by the Public Works Director and set by resolution of the City Council. Nothing herein shall be construed to obligate the Municipality to provide water service to non-residents or, once service is provided, to continue to provide service to non-residents.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-2701 



3-206 Water Department; Tap Fee
Upon application for installation of a water supply line, the Public Works Director shall determine the required tap fee to be paid by the applicant. The schedule of tap fees shall be set in section 3-225. The fee shall be paid in full in advance of installation of the water tap and the water supply line.


Source: Ord. 1335 (1996); Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-207 Water Department; Supply Line Installation
Upon payment of the appropriate tap fee, the Public Works Director shall make or cause to be made the connection to the water main and shall install the supply pipe to the curb stop at a point at or near the outer sidewalk line in the street in which the main is laid.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-208 Water Department; Separate Taps Required
Not more than one separate premises as hereinafter defined, except by special permission of the City Council, shall be supplied from the same tap and supply pipe, except as follows: 

(1) Mobile home and trailer courts and multiple family dwellings will be served through one service and supply pipe; provided, however, individual meters will be required for each occupancy as per section 3-224.

(2) Not more than one water supply and service line shall be run to one premises, excepting supply lines for fire protection, sprinkler systems, and by special permission of the City Council.

(3) Fire suppression or sprinkler lines are required to have separate taps and supply lines from domestic taps and supply lines to each premises. Fire suppression or sprinkler lines are required, at a minimum, to have a valve located with outside access, at the proximity of the property line where the supply lines enter the property. Where building or fire codes require a post indicator valve, one will be required in place of the valve. The post indicator valve will be placed in a location plainly visible at or near the property line unless required by building or fire codes. The customer will be responsible for all costs associated with installation of the separate tap or supply line.


Source: Ord. 1195 (1993); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1477 (2000)



3-209 Water Department; Service Line Installation
(1) All service lines from the curb stop to the premises to be served will be installed by a plumber licensed by the City of Crete. Service lines will be installed, repaired, or replaced at the expense of the owner of the premises served. If the applicant's property does not abut a street in which a water main is laid, such applicant shall petition the City Council to cause the water main to be laid in the abutting street and to specially assess the cost as provided by law. The City Council may, by resolution, permit the applicant, at his own expense, to construct a water service line from the curb stop at or near the outer sidewalk line on the street in which the water main is laid to his own premises, regardless of the distance.

(2) All installations, repairs, or replacements of service pipes require two inspections by the Public Works Director. The first inspection will be made when connections or repairs are completed and before the pipes are covered. The second  inspection will be made after the work is completed. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to notify the Public Works Director at the time the work is ready for each inspection. All work shall be done under the supervision of and in accordance with rules, regulations, and specifications prescribed for such work by the Public Works Director; provided, that the said rules, regulations, and specifications have been reviewed and approved by the City Council.

(3) If the connection of a new supply pipe and service pipe is to be made to any water main or mains, which have been laid and constructed in a water district or water extension district of the City of Crete, wherein special assessments have been levied upon the property in said district to pay all or any part of the cost of the construction thereof and the property to which said connection is to be made has not been assessed in said district or if the connection is to be made to any water main or mains hereafter laid or constructed by the City without the levying of any special assessments on the premises to be served for the construction thereof, the person desiring said connection shall pay the Crete Water Department a special connection charge set by the City Council. The aforesaid fees and charges shall be in addition to the other connection fees and charges provided for in this Chapter. The said special connection charge shall be paid only once with respect to said property. For the purposes of this section, front footage of the lot is determined as that portion of the lot facing the water main to which the person wishes to connect. Such connection charge shall be paid in advance of connection.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-681



3-210 Water Department; Water Meters
(1) All water meters shall be provided by and shall remain the property of the Municipality. All meters shall be of the straight reading type, meeting AWWA Standard C-700, and shall be placed on all water services. Approved connections will be furnished by the Municipality to be installed by the licensed plumber, and the meter will be installed by the Municipality. A remote water meter reading device furnished by the Municipality shall be installed at any premises where required by the Public Works Director. The location of the remote meter reading device on the customer's premises shall be determined by the Public Works Director.

(2) All water meters shall be installed in a horizontal position with the register facing directly upward at a height and in a location where they may be easily read, and as near as possible to the point where the water service pipe enters the premises served. Meters must be kept readily accessible. Water meters shall be protected from damage from freezing, either by installation in a heated area of the building or by special permission, by installation in a meter vault designed and constructed in accordance with specifications provided by the Public Works Director, said vault to be constructed and maintained by the owner of the premises served. The customer shall pay all costs incurred by the Water Department in repairing or replacing water meters damaged by freezing or any cause other than normal wear.

(3) All water meters shall be sealed upon installation by the Municipality, and no person shall deface, injure, or break any of said seals unless authorized to do so by the Public Works Director.

(4) The owner of a premises connected to the water system must have a valve in the service pipe, not more than five  feet from the meter, between the meter and the curb stop, and for services one inch in diameter or larger, an additional valve, within two feet of the meter, on the outlet side of the meter. If a consumer's water service cannot be interrupted during normal working hours for water meter servicing or replacement, then the customer must provide a three valve bypass or similar plumbing arrangement capable of being locked and sealed in the closed position. Furnishing, repairing, or replacing the valves required shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises.

(5) It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to tamper with any water meter or by means of any contrivance or device to divert the water from the service pipe so that the same will not pass through the meter or while passing through the meter cause the same to register inaccurately. If any water meter is found to have been tampered with, the water bill will be estimated for the period of time the meter is judged to have been inaccurate. The cost of replacing the meter or restoring its accuracy shall be paid by the customer.

(6) The Municipality shall have the exclusive power to repair and test all meters. All repairs for normal wear and tear and scheduled tests shall be made at the expense of the Municipality. The Municipality reserves the right to test any water meter at any time. The customer is hereby granted the reciprocal right to have his water meter tested a reasonable number of times, upon his written request. One meter test will be made at no cost to the customer. Subsequent tests will be made on the customer's agreement, in advance, that the customer will pay all costs of testing the meter if the tests show the meter to be accurate within AWWA standards. If the meter is inaccurate, all testing and repair costs will be paid by the Municipality.

(7) Should a water meter get out of repair or fail to register properly, the customer shall be billed and charged and shall pay for water during the time the meter is out of order on the basis of monthly consumption during the like period of the preceding year, or if no such basis for comparison exists, the customer shall be charged such amount as reasonably fixed by the Public Works Director.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-211 Water Department; Meter Pits
Meter pits permitted by section 3-210 shall be constructed by the applicant near the lot line of the premises served and shall conform with specifications provided by the Public Works Director. If the Public Works Director determines that the pit does not provide adequate access to the meter for servicing or reading or that the meter is subjected to freezing, flooding, or other hindrance to its intended use, then the Public Works Director may give notice to the owner of the premises of the deficiency and require that the owner repair or replace the meter pit, have the meter location changed, or otherwise correct the deficiency. If the owner should fail or neglect to correct the deficiency within thirty days of the notice, the Public Works Director may order the correction made, and the costs thereof shall be billed to the owner and will be collected by the Municipality in the same manner as other water charges.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-212 Water Department; Access To Premises
The various persons employed by the Public Works Director and every person delegated for that purpose shall have free access at reasonable hours of the day to all parts of every building and premises to which water is delivered to examine the pipes and fixtures and to ascertain whether there is any unnecessary waste of water, improper metering of water, or any exposure of the water system to contamination of any kind, on or in the premises served.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-213 Water Department; Repairs And Maintenance
The Municipality shall repair or replace, as the case may be, all supply pipe between the commercial main and the stop box. If the customer permits or allows a water meter to be damaged, injured, or destroyed through his own recklessness, carelessness, or negligence so that the meter must be repaired or replaced, the Public Works Director shall bill and collect from the customer the cost of such meter repair or replacement. Permitting a water meter to be damaged or destroyed by freezing shall always be considered negligence on the part of the customer. The customer, at his own expense, shall replace and keep in repair all service pipe from the stop box to the place of dispersion. When leaks occur in service pipes, the Public Works Director shall shut off water service until the leak is repaired at the expense of the customer to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-214 Water Department; Water Shortages
The Mayor or the Public Works Director may order a reduction in the use of water or shut off the water on any premises in the event of a water shortage due to fire or other good and sufficient cause. The Municipality shall not be liable for any damages caused by shutting off the supply of water of any consumer while the system or any part thereof is undergoing repairs or when there is a shortage of water due to circumstances over which the Municipality has no control.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-215 Water Department; Fire Hydrants
All hydrants for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to be public hydrants, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than members of the Municipal Fire Department under the orders of the Fire Chief or the Assistant Fire Chief or members of the Water Department to open or attempt to open any of the hydrants and draw water from the same or in any manner to interfere with the hydrants.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-216 Water Department; Contamination Prohibited
(1) No person shall place in or near or around the wells, reservoir, meter pits, valves, hydrants, or any other part of the waterworks system any dirt, filth, or impure substance whatsoever or any substance or fluid by which the water shall be rendered impure, unpalatable, or dangerous for human or animal consumption.

(2) Devices for protection against backflow will be installed on the service lines of all premises where in the judgment of the Public Works Director the possibility exists for contamination of the water system through backflow from the consumer's premises. The cost of such devices, installation, and maintenance shall be paid by the consumer. Specifications for the devices and their installation, inspections, repair, and maintenance shall meet standards set by the Public Works Director.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-217 Water Department; Destruction Of Property
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure, or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment, or appurtenance of the Municipal Water Department. No person may deposit anything in a stop box or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of any of the above-mentioned property without the written permission of the Public Works Director.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-218 Water Department; Mains Construction
The cost of constructing and laying water mains, pipes, or such parts thereof shall be assessed to the property benefited by said constructing and laying water mains, pipes, or such parts thereof, including cost of construction and laying water mains, pipes, or such parts thereof in the intersections of streets and alleys and opposite property belonging to the City, State, or the United States, pursuant to the laws of the State as now exist and as the same may be amended. Water main assessments shall be based on a main size of six inches inside diameter in residential areas. Smaller mains will be installed only by resolution of the City Council. All water main improvement districts will provide a complete loop or grid system and will extend to the limits of the district.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-219 Water Department; Customer Classifications
Customers of the Water Department shall be classified as follows for purposes of setting rates, charges, and other conditions of service:

(1) Residential Service R-1. All single-family residences and individually metered apartments for all domestic services when all service is supplied through a single meter.

(2) Residential Service R-2. All multi-family residences and individually metered apartments for all domestic services when all service is supplied through a single meter.

(3) Commercial Service C-1. Any customer for general uses other than residential domestic service where service is taken through a two-inch or smaller meter.

(4) Industrial Service I-1. Any customer for general uses other than residential domestic service where service is taken through a larger than two-inch meter.

(5) Churches and Schools B. Churches and schools for uses other than residential domestic of service taken on the off-peak schedule.

(6) Off-peak BL. Qualifying facilities using water only at times permitted by the applicable rate scheduled through an approved delivery installation and at no other times.

(a) For the purposes of this subsection, off-peak irrigation customers are defined as property owners who have installed separate meters for soil irrigation system, use the water solely for soil irrigation purposes, use water only during off-peak periods (peak periods being defined as from three o'clock p.m. to nine o'clock p.m. from April 1st to November 1st), and who have installed special control and monitoring devices as required by the Public Works Director to insure compliance with off-peak usage. Any customer who qualifies for off-peak water rate usage who violates the terms of this Article shall be billed for such water used at the normal residential and commercial rate.

(b) Exemption from the monthly minimum rates as aforesaid shall be allowed for the time service has been discontinued only when such service has been discontinued after notice to the Public Works Director. No deduction shall be made for the time any service remains out of use.

(7) Cash Water Sales CW. This classification applies to sales of water made through City water dispensing facilities into tanks or vessels owned or operated by the customer or water delivered otherwise to customers other than through a regularly metered private premises.

(8) Interruptible Service D. This service is available to any water system customer with a non-community water system licensed by or operating under a permit from the State of Nebraska, said system having capability to produce the customer’s total water use requirements from a source or sources approved by the State of Nebraska and these sources independent of the Crete Water System.

(a) The City will provide, and the customer will purchase from the City, total water requirements within the City's capability to deliver water at all times. Should the City’s capability to supply water be limited by equipment or control failure, unforeseeable water use by customers in other classifications, fire flows, hydrant flushing, nondeferrable maintenance, or other circumstances, the customer may supplement the City supply for the customer’s approved independent source to the extent of the City’s deficiency. Water produced by customer from independent source shall not be permitted to enter the City water system.

(b) The customer will continuously maintain a State license or permit to operate the customer’s water system and will continue to sample, analyze, and monitor the water within the customer’s water system as required by this license or permit and will meet water operator certification requirements of the State of Nebraska.

(c) The rate for water herein shall be only for industrial or commercial production purposes and the City does not agree herein to furnish water for any other purposes, including fire protection.

(9) Mobile Contractor Service Metering CM. This service is available to commercial builders, contractors, or others who cannot provide a protected environment for permanent placement of water service meters but require nondomestic water service on a temporary basis at varying locations.

(a) The City will provide tested and approved meters equipped with permanent affixed backflow prevention devices for persons desiring this service. Any person wishing service under these terms and conditions must first make a deposit with the Public Works Director for each meter before being issued a meter. The person issued the meter will then be responsible for the care and condition of the meter until annual inspection or the meter is returned and service is no longer desired.

(b) The person issued the meter is required to return the meter for inspection each January. If the meter or backflow device is found to be damaged in any way, the deposit will be forfeited and the meter will not be reissued. If the person wishes to continued service, another deposit will be posted.

(c) Commercial water rates and minimums based on meter size will be billed monthly for water used.


Source: Ord. 1035 (1987); Ord. 1336 (1996); Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-220 Water Department; Accounts And Billing
(1) Accounts between the customer and the City shall be kept by the Public Works Director under such bookkeeping system as shall be provided by the Mayor and Council. A customer's ledger shall be kept current with a separate account for each customer. All water meters shall be read monthly under the direction of the Public Works Director. Customers shall pay Utilities Department bookkeepers and cashiers at the Utilities Department Office the amount due for water service.

(2) All bills for water service shall be due on the billing date and shall become delinquent on the due date as shown on the bill. If the customer shall neglect or refuse to pay his bill on or before five o'clock p.m. on the due date shown on the bill, the amount due will be increased by the late payment charge, if applicable. If the bill is not paid on or before the due date, a notice will be mailed to the customer that water service will be discontinued no earlier than ten nor more than sixteen  days after the due date shown on the bill, with no further notice, and that service will not be restored until the bill is paid in full, together with collection fees, reconnection fees, and repayment of deposit, if applicable, as set by ordinance.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1433 (1998)



3-221 Water Department; Service Deposit
An applicant shall be required to accompany his application for water service with a service deposit to insure the payment of water bills and other charges. The service deposit amounts are set by ordinance by the City Council. The service deposit shall remain in the custody of the Utility Department for a minimum of two years. Service deposits shall be refunded to the customer when service has not been disconnected or payment waived past disconnect date on no more than one occasion for two consecutive years, three for commercial customers, or when service is no longer desired or otherwise permanently terminated.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1434 (1998)



3-222 Water Department; City Liability
(1) The City does not guarantee the delivery of water in the lines of its distribution system at any time to any person. The City expressly reserves the right to disconnect or discontinue service for any of the following reasons: supply shortage; repairs necessary to be made on any part of its plant, pumps, pump house, equipment, or distribution system; nonpayment of bills when due; fraudulent representations in regard to the consumption or use of water; the protection of persons or property; or, violation of any of the rules or requirements of this Article, or subsequent amendments thereto. 

(2) The City shall use due and reasonable diligence to provide and supply uninterrupted service to customers but shall not be liable for damages resulting from interruption of service due to line breaks, freezing, or other causes over which the City has no control or for damages arising out of any plumbing or equipment inside any building, whether inspected by agents of the City or not, and the City expressly reserves the right to refuse to connect or to discontinue or disconnect a customer's service, without any preliminary notice, for reasons set forth in this Article or for any other reason.

(3) The customer shall have interior house plumbing, or other plumbing about the place or premises in which water service is to be used, done by a licensed and bonded plumber, but under no circumstances shall connections be made with the pipes of the water distribution system and supply pipes of the City and the pipes of the customer except at the order of the Public Works Director. All plumbing of customers shall be installed in accordance with the rules of the Uniform Plumbing Code incorporated by reference in Chapter 9.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-223 Water Department; Rates
The following monthly rate schedules shall apply to all customers of the Municipal Water Department according to the applicable service classifications:

(1) Minimum Monthly Service Charge. This charge is determined by the size of the meter through which the customer receives service according to the following table for service under all classifications except cash water sales:

Beginning January 1, 2020

Meter Size
Meter Equivalent
Monthly Service Charge
3/4"	1.67	$16.95
1"	2.67	$27.73
1 1/2"	3.33	$56.16
2"	5.33	$89.78
3"	10.00	$167.58
4"	16.66	$279.88
Beginning January 1, 2021

Meter Size
Meter Equivalent
Monthly Service Charge
3/4"	1.67	$17.77
1"	2.67	$29.05
1 1/2"	3.33	$58.84
2"	5.33	$94.05
3"	10.00	$175.56
4"	16.66	$293.21
Beginning January 1, 2022

Meter Size
Meter Equivalent
Monthly Service Charge
3/4"	1.67	$18.57
1"	2.67	$30.37
1 1/2"	3.33	$61.51
2"	5.33	$98.33
3"	10.00	$183.54
4"	16.66	$306.53
(2) Commodity Charge. This charge is determined by the amount of water measured through the meter which the customer receives according to the following table for all classifications except cash water sales:

Beginning August 1, 2020

$0.98 per 1,000 gallons for the first 50,000 gallons used per month
$0.81 per 1,000 gallons for the next 50,000 gallons used per month
$0.81 per 1,000 gallons for over 100,000 gallons used per month
Beginning August 1, 2021

$1.00 per 1,000 gallons for the first 50,000 gallons used per month
$0.83 per 1,000 gallons for the next 50,000 gallons used per month
$0.83 per 1,000 gallons for over 100,000 gallons used per month
Beginning August 1, 2022

$1.03 per 1,000 gallons for the first 50,000 gallons used per month
$0.85 per 1,000 gallons for the next 50,000 gallons used per month
$0.85 per 1,000 gallons for over 100,000 gallons used per month
(3) Off-peak Service. In addition to the minimum monthly service charge, the following shall be paid for water metered: $0.60 per 1,000 gallons per month for all use.

(4) Cash Water Sales: $4.00 per 1,000 gallons for all use, with a $3.00 minimum per request.


Source: Ord. 1035 (1987); Ord. 1193 (1993); Ord. 1276 (1995); Ord. 1400 (1998);  Ord. 1686 (2007); Ord. 1812 (2011); Ord. 1834 (2012); Ord. 1848 (2013); Ord. 2083 (2019)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-681



3-224 Water Department; Multiple-Occupancy Service
Individual water meters must be installed for each occupancy in all multiple occupancy facilities (i.e. apartment houses, trailer courts, mobile homes, apartments, condominiums) or other multiple family dwellings constructed from and after the passage of this ordinance. The owners of all such multiple occupancy facilities in existence at the time of the passage of this ordinance are required to install individual water meters for each occupancy by January 1, 1996 or pay a rate adjusted on a per occupancy basis.


Source: Ord. 1066 (1989); Ord. 1194 (1993); Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-225 Water Department; Fees And Charges
(1) Connection Charges:

(a) Connections or reconnections made during normal working hours: $2.00

(b) Connections or reconnections made outside normal working hours at customer's request: $25.00

(2) Late-payment Charges: 10% of total bill.

(3) Collection Charges: $5.00

(4) Service Deposits:

(a) Permanent meters: $10.00

(b) Mobile service meters: $100.00

(5) Tap Fees. All tap fees will be paid in full before any work is to commence. If costs exceed fee, the responsible party will be billed the balance. If water tap is installed in a water improvement or other improvement district, the charge for the tap will be as set and assessed according to the district. If less than the amount set forth herein, a refund shall be given to the customer and, if greater than the amount set forth herein, the responsible party will be charged the balance due.

(a) Minimum charges:

(i) 3/4" service: $588.00 plus $9.50 per foot over 60 feet.

(ii) 1" service: $642.00 plus $11.00 per foot over 60 feet.

(iii) 1 1/2" service: $883.00 plus $15.00 per foot over 60 feet.

(iv) 2" service: $1,284.00 plus $21.50 per foot over 60 feet.

(v) Over 2" service: As set by Public Works Director.

(b) Additional charges. All tap fees will include, in addition to the above charges, costs of removal and replacement of paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and any other such items that must be removed and replaced in order to install the service. Tap fees for larger service lines will be set by the Public Works Director on an individual basis.

(6) Special Connection Charges. Special connection charges are in addition to tap fees, connection fees, and other charges.

(a) Lots up to 44' of frontage: $308.00

(b) Lots over 44' of frontage: $7.00 per foot of frontage

(7) Service Calls:

(a) In normal working hours:

(i) Pressure/flow check: No charge.

(ii) Meter leak: No charge unless the result of freezing or mechanical damage, then minimum charge of $35.00.

(iii) Shut-off or turn-on for customer line or valve replacement: No charge.

(iv) Leak investigation: No charge, except for repair or replacement of damaged meters.

(b) Outside normal working hours:

(i) Pressure/flow check: No charge if the City Water Department facilities are at fault. Customer will be charged a minimum of $35.00 plus labor and materials if customer's facilities are at fault. No repair of customer's facilities will be made by Water Department personnel.

(ii) Meter leak: No charge unless the result of freezing or mechanical damage, then minimum charge of $35.00 plus labor and materials.


Source: Ord. 1339 (1996); Ord. 1400 (1998)



3-226 Water Department; Maintenance Service Charge
Effective January 1, 2006, there is hereby implemented a maintenance service charge of $10.00 per customer or account per month for each residence, business, or industry connected to the City Water System to help defray the cost of maintenance of the City Water System. This charge shall be in addition to all other charges for water service and shall apply to each separate residence, residential apartment, business, or industry, whether served by separate water service or meter or not. Funds received from this service charge may be used in any manner that the City Council shall so direct.


Source: Ord. 1639 (2005)



Article 3 Sewer Department
3-301 Sewer System; Operation And Funding
3-302 Sewer Department; Administration
3-303 Sewer Department; Definitions
3-304 Sewer Department; Customer's Contract
3-305 Sewer Department; Customer's Application
3-306 Sewer Department; Service To Non-Residents
3-307 Sewer Department; Tap Fee; Amount
3-308 Sewer Department; Building Sewer Installation Expense And Procedure
3-309 Sewer Department; Separate Taps Required
3-310 Sewer Department; Building Or House Sewer Service Line
3-311 Sewer Department; Abandoned Buildings Or House Sewers
3-312 Sewer Department; Access To Premises
3-313 Sewer Department; Repairs And Maintenance
3-314 Sewer Department; Unlawful Use
3-315 Sewer Department; Regulated Discharges
3-316 Sewer Department; Special Equipment
3-317 Sewer Department; Destruction Of Property
3-318 Sewer Department; Sewer Main Extensions
3-319 Sewer Department; Customer Classifications
3-320 Sewer Department; Billing, Collecting
3-321 Sewer Department; Service Deposits
3-322 Sewer Department; Liability Of City
3-323 Sewer Department; Rates
3-324 Sewer Department; Separate Fund; Rate Review; Notification
3-325 Sewer Department; Fees And Charges
3-325.01 Sewer Department; Slug Treatment Fees And Charges
3-326 Sewer Department; Lien
3-327 Sewer Department; Penalties
3-328 Sewer Department; Abandoned Building Sewer
3-329 Sewer Department; Repairs And Replacement
3-330 Sewer Department; Prohibited Facilities
3-331 Sewer Department; Mandatory Connection
3-332 Private Sewage Disposal System; When Applicable
3-333 Private Sewage Disposal System; Permit Required
3-334 Private Sewage Disposal System; Inspections Required
3-335 Private Sewage Disposal System; Specifications
3-336 Private Sewage Disposal System; Mandatory Connection To Public Sewer; When
3-337 Private Sewage Disposal System; Maintenance
3-338 Private Sewage Disposal System; Additional Requirements
3-339 Sewer Department; Severability

3-301 Sewer System; Operation And Funding
The Municipality owns and operates the Municipal Sewer System through the Public Works Director. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the construction of the Municipal Sewer System may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by State law on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Sewer Construction Fund. The Public Works Director shall have the direct management and control of the Sewer Department and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his office. He shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the sanitary and efficient management of the Department subject to the supervision and review of the Governing Body.

(Ref. 16-681, 16-699 RS Neb.)

3-302 Sewer Department; Administration
The Public Works Director shall have the direct management and control of the Sewer Department and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his office. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to adopt regulations for the proper and efficient management of the Sewer Department, subject to the supervision and review of the City Council.

The City Council shall set the rates to be charged for services rendered by ordinance and shall file a copy of the rates in the office of the Public Works Director and in the office of the city Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time.

(Ref. 18-503, 18509 RS Neb.)

3-303 Sewer Department; Definitions
The following definitions shall be applied throughout this Article. Where no definition is specified, the normal dictionary usage of the word shall apply.

BOD - The term "BOD" (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in 5 days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter.

BUILDING OR HOUSE SEWER - The terms "building sewer" and "house sewer," as used in this code, shall mean and include that part of a house or building drainage system extending from the house or building drain to its connection with the main sewer.

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE - The term "operation and maintenance" shall mean all expenditures during the useful life of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities, and other items which are necessary for managing and maintaining the sewage works to achieve the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.

REPLACEMENT - The term "replacement' shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement.

SEWER SYSTEM - The term "sewer system" as used in this Code, shall mean and include all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.

SEWAGE - The term "sewage" as used in this Code, shall mean and include a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.

SANITARY SEWER - The term "sanitary sewer" as used in this Code, shall mean and include a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.

SHALL - The term "shall" is mandatory, "may" is permissive.

SLUG - The term "slug" shall mean any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which is concentration of any given constituent or quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than 5 times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.

USEFUL LIFE - The term "useful life" shall mean the estimated period during which a treatment works will be operated.

3-304 Sewer Department; Customer's Contract
The Municipality, through the Municipal Sewer Department, shall furnish sewer services to persons within its corporate limits whose premises abut a street or alley in which a commercial main is now or may hereafter be laid. The Municipality may provide sewer service to persons within its corporate limits whose premises do not abut a street or alley in which a main is now or hereafter may be laid, by resolution of the City Council, and at the expense of the owner of the premises to be served. The rules, regulations, and rates, fees, and charges hereinafter referred to in this Article, shall be considered a part of every application hereafter made for sewer service, and shall be considered a part of the contract between every consumer now or hereafter served. Without further formality, the making of the application on the part of an applicant, or the discharge of wastewater to the sewer system by present consumers thereof, and the furnishing of sewer service to said consumer shall constitute a contract between the consumer and the Municipality to which said contract both parties are bound. The Municipality reserves the right to change rates, charges, and conditions of service from time to time in connection with furnishing sewer service to the consumer. If the consumer shall violate any of the provisions of said contract or any reasonable rules and regulations that the City Council may hereafter adopt, the Public Works Director or his agent may cut off or disconnect service from the building, premise or place of such violation, following notice and opportunity for hearing. No further connection for sewer service to said building, premises, or place shall again be made save or except by order of the Public Works Director or his agent. Contracts for sewer service are not transferable. Any person wishing to change from one location to another shall make a new application. If any customer shall move from the premise another shall make a new application. If any customer shall move from the premise where service is furnished, or if the said premise is destroyed by fire or other casualty, he shall at once inform the Public Works Director. If the customer should fail to give such notice, he shall be charged for sewer service on the said premise until the Public Works Director is otherwise advised of such circumstances.

(Ref. 18-508 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. 1090; 8/01/89)

3-305 Sewer Department; Customer's Application
Any person wishing to make a connection with the Sewer System shall make an application therefore to the Public Works Director. Such application must, when specified by the Director, be accompanied by a plan showing in detail the course and size of such drain through the building and property of applicant, the elevation to the foot of the soil pipe, the length of the drain between this point and the point where the drain connects with the public sewer, and a list of vaults, water closets, sinks, down spouts, and other fixtures to be connected therewith. Such plans and applications shall be filed with the Public Works Director. The Director may require any applicant to make a service deposit in such amount as has been set by the City Council and placed on file at the office of the Utilities Department. Sewer service may not be supplied to any house or building except upon the order of the Director. Permits granted hereunder shall be subject to the condition that the owner shall take all risk of damage that may result from water settling back in their premises from the main sewer, and, to prevent such settling back of water, the owner may, at his own expense, install a self-acting valve and keep the same in repair at his own expense.

(Ref. 17-149 RS Neb.)

3-306 Sewer Department; Service To Non-Residents
The Department shall not supply sewer service to any persons outside the corporate limits without special permission from the City Council; provided, such applicants whose property is situated outside the City shall pay tap and installation fees in such sums as determined in each case by the Public Works Director and set by resolution of the City Council. Nothing herein shall be construed to obligate the Municipality to provide sewer service to non-residents, or, once service is provided, to continue to provide service to non-residents.

(Ref. 19-2701 RS Neb.)

3-307 Sewer Department; Tap Fee; Amount
Upon application for installation of a building or house sewer line, the Public Works Director shall determine the required tap fee to be paid by the applicant. The schedule of tap fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council and kept on file in the Utilities Department Office. The fee thus determined shall be paid in full in advance of installation of the tap and the building or house sewer line.

3-308 Sewer Department; Building Sewer Installation Expense And Procedure
The customer, upon approval of his application for sewer service, shall procure a permit in writing before making any connection with the sewer system. The Public Works Director shall issue said permit upon payment of a tap fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council for each connection. The expense of removal and replacement of pavement, sidewalks and other obstacles shall be determined by the Public Works Director, and shall be paid by the owner on completion and certification of costs by the Director, in addition to the tap fee.

No person shall tap or make connection to the public sewers except under the supervision and direction of the Public Works Director. The Director, or his authorized agent, will make or cause to be made the tap or connection to the public sewer main and bring service to a point at or near the lot line or outer sidewalk line in the right-of-way of the street in which the sewer main is laid. The customer shall employ a licensed plumber or drain layer to connect the building sewer to the sewer system at that point, subject to inspection by the Public Works Director.

If the connection is made to a sanitary sewer main or mains and where there had not been a sanitary sewer assessment for the property, said owner desiring such connection shall pay a special connection charge in an amount set by resolution of the City Council. The aforesaid fees and charges shall be in addition to other fees and charges provided for in this article. Said special connection charges shall be paid only once with respect to said property. For the purpose of this Section, front footage of the lot is determined as that portion of the lot facing the sewer main to which the owner wishes to connect. Such special connection charge in addition to said tap fees shall be paid to the Municipal Sewer Department at the time the application is filed and said permit shall be issued only when the above fees are paid in advance.

If the property to be served by sewer service does not abut a street or alley in which a public sewer is now laid, the owner shall petition the City Council to cause the public sewer to be laid in the abutting street or alley and assess the cost thereof as provided by law. The City Council may, by resolution, permit a property owner to construct a building sewer from a point at or near the outer sidewalk line on the street where there is a public sewer, to the non-abutting property; Provided, such owner shall pay all applicable tap, excavation, and special connection fees.

3-309 Sewer Department; Separate Taps Required
Not more than one (1) separate premise as hereinafter defined, shall be supplied from the same tap and supply pipe, except Mobile home and trailer courts will be served through one (1) building or house sewer, where sewer lines within the mobile home or trailer court are installed.
In all Duplex (two family) dwellings, each such dwelling unit contained therein must have a separate building or house sewer.
(Amended by Ord. No. 1090, 8/1/89; 1340, 10/01/96)

3-310 Sewer Department; Building Or House Sewer Service Line
All building or house sewer lines from the connection to the main sewer to the premises to be served will be installed at the expense of the owner of the premises by a plumber licensed by the City of Crete. Building or house sewer lines will be installed, repaired or replaced at the expense of the owner of the premises served.

All installations, repairs, or replacements of building or house sewer lines require two (2) inspections by the Public Works Director. The first (1st) inspection will be made when connections or repairs are completed, and before the pipes are covered. The second (2nd) inspection will be made after the work is completed. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to notify the Public Works Director at the time the work is ready for each inspection. All work shall be done under the supervision of, and in accordance with rules, regulations, and specifications prescribed for such work by the Public Works Director; provided that the said rules, regulations and specifications have been reviewed and approved by the City Council.

(Amended by Ord. No. 1090. 8/1/89)

3-311 Sewer Department; Abandoned Buildings Or House Sewers
If a building sewer is disconnected or abandoned, it shall be disconnected or plugged at the other sidewalk line, or at the main, as directed by the Public Works Director, at the expense of the owner.

3-312 Sewer Department; Access To Premises
The Public Works Director and any person designated by him shall have fee access at reasonable hours of the day to all parts of every premise having a connection to the Sewer System to inspect for compliance with sanitary sewer rules and regulations.

3-313 Sewer Department; Repairs And Maintenance
The Municipality shall repair or replace, as the case may be, all pipe constituting major sewer mains. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to repair or replace, clean or maintain, all other sewer pipe and appurtenances from the main to and including the customer's property. All replacements and repairs made by the customer shall be done in the manner and with the materials approved by the Public Works Director; provided, that the same have been previously approved by the City Council.

3-314 Sewer Department; Unlawful Use
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, sub surface drainage, including interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters into the sanitary sewer. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes into the Municipal Sewer Systems:

Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans, animals, or create a public nuisance, (Ref. 17-145 RS Neb.) or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/1 as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
Waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or having other corrosive properties capable of causing damage to the structures, equipment, and personnel of the Municipal Sewer Department.
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the sewer system, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(Ref. 17-145 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 1090, 8/1/89)

3-315 Sewer Department; Regulated Discharges
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes, if it appears likely in the opinion of the Public Works Director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Public Works Director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:

Liquid or vapors having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150 ̊) degrees F.
Water or waste which may contain more than one hundred parts per million by weight of fat, oil, or grease, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32 ̊) and one hundred fifty (150 ̊) degrees F.
Garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Utilities Director.
Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances, to such degree that any such materials received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits which may be established by the Public Works Director for such materials.
Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Public Works Director as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits which may be established by the Public Works Director in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
Materials which exert or cause:
(such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium sulfate).
Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
Unusual BOD (chemical oxygen demand), or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
Water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
Any water or wastes having a 5-day BOD greater than 300 milligrams per liter (mg/l), containing more than 350 mg/l of suspended solids, or having an average daily flow greater than two (2%) per cent of the average wastewater flow of the Municipality shall be subject to the review of the Public Works Director. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, the owner shall provide, at this expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the BOD to 300 mg/l, reduce the suspended solids to 350 mg/1 or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes.

Any user which discharges any substance, which singly or by interaction with other substances, causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance, or replacement of the treatment works, shall pay for such increased costs. The charge to each such user will be as determined by the Public Works Director and approved by the City Council.
(Amended by Ord. No. 1090, 8/1/89)

3-316 Sewer Department; Special Equipment
In the event a customer of the Municipal Sewer Department discharges or proposes to discharge, waters which contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 3-316, and which, in the judgment of the Public Works Director, may have deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Public Works Director, subject to the review of the City Council, may:

Reject the wastes;
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by the existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of this Code.
If the Public Works Director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws, plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Public Works Director, and no construction of such facilities shall commence until said approvals are obtained in writing.

Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, sand, or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Public Works Director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.

Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be purchased and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the Owner at his expenses.

When required by the Public Works Director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Public Works Director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit a special agreement or arrangement between the Governing Body and an industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Municipality for treatment subject to additional rental fees or other charges.

Any sewer system customer using water on the premises served by the sanitary sewer system of the City, which water does not enter into the sanitary sewer system of the City, may, at the customer's expense, and in accord with specifications of the Public Works Director, provide metering to measure the water entering the sanitary sewer system.

All such water which is used on said premises connected with the sanitary sewer system of the City of Crete, Nebraska, which does not enter the sanitary sewer system aforesaid, and which is metered separately, shall be deducted from the total water consumed for the purpose of computing the sewer flow charge as hereinafter set forth. All meters which are required to be furnished and installed at the expense of a customer shall be made available to the City of Crete, Nebraska, and its representatives at any reasonable time for the reading or calibrating of the same. Where said devices are found to be defective in the opinion of the City of Crete or its representatives, the industrial customer shall have the same corrected at its own expense.

Any sewer system customer who has a source of water other than that furnished by the Crete water system, and where water not obtained from the Crete water system is introduced into the Crete sewer system will, at the customer's expense and in accordance with specifications of the Public Works Director, provide metering to measure the water entering the sewer system.

(Amended by Ord. No. 1090, 8/1/89)

3-317 Sewer Department; Destruction Of Property
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure, or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment, or appurtenance of the Municipal Sewer Department. No person may deposit anything in a manhole or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of any of the above mentioned property without the written permission of the Public Works Director.

3-318 Sewer Department; Sewer Main Extensions
The cost of constructing and laying sewer mains, pipes or such parts thereof shall be assessed to the property benefited by said constructing and laying sewer mains, pipes, manholes, or such parts thereof, including cost of construction and laying sewer mains, pipes or such parts thereof in the intersections of streets and alleys and opposite property belonging to the City, State, or the United States Government, pursuant to the laws of the State as now exist and as the same may be amended. Sewer assessments shall be based on a main size of eight (8") inches inside diameter in residential areas. Smaller mains will be installed only by resolution of the City Council. All sewer mains in sewer main improvement districts will extend to the limits of the district.

3-319 Sewer Department; Customer Classifications
Definitions. The word "customer" as used in this Article includes all users of the Municipal sanitary sewerage system or disposal plant of the City, including all persons, firms or corporations whether owners or tenants of real estate and building or buildings connected with said sanitary sewerage system or disposal plant or served thereby, and all users of said system who in any way use the same or discharge sanitary sewerage, industrial waste, water or other liquid, directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewerage system or disposal plant of the City.

For the purposes of this Section, customers shall be classified as R-1 Residential, R-2 Residential, C-1 Commercial, C-2 Commercial, I-1 Industrial or C-2 Industrial.

R-1 Residential Single family residential customers are defined as occupants of dwellings used exclusively for residential purposes, including individual mobile homes, where the same are permitted, and housing a single family.

R-2 Residential Multiple-family residential customers are defined as occupants of dwellings or apartment buildings used exclusively for residential purposes and housing more than one (1) family, including mobile home parks.

C-1 Commercial customers are customers other than single or multiple-family residential customers or industrial or major industrial customers in single occupancy premises.

C-2 Commercial customers are commercial customers occupying part of a multiple occupancy premises.

I-1 Industrial customers are defined as customers who contribute any such as whey, milk or cream, blood, fat, paunch manure, or any other waste liquid, grain or industrial waste into said sanitary sewer system or disposal plant.

I-2 Major Industrial customers are defined as customers who meet the definition of industrial customer as set out herein and who produce at least one million (1,000,000) gallons of sewage per month as measured in a manner as approved by the Public Works Director and are designated as major industrial customers by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Crete.

For the use of the said sanitary sewer system, each major industrial customer shall have rates set by resolution of the City Council.

The City of Crete, Nebraska, reserves the right to refuse the use of its sanitary sewer system and/or its disposal plant to any customer at the sole discretion of the City Council.
(Ref 16-681 RS Neb.)

3-320 Sewer Department; Billing, Collecting
All sewer use charges provided for by this Article shall be billed each month for service during the preceding month. Customers shall pay City bookkeepers and cashiers at the Utilities Department Office the amount due for sewer for sewer service shall be due on the billing date, and shall become delinquent on the due date as shown on the bill. If the customer shall neglect or refuse to pay his bill on or before five (5:00) o'clock P.M. on the due date shown on the bill, the amount due will be increased by the late payment charge, if applicable. If the bill is not paid on or before the due date, a notice will be mailed to the customer that water service will be discontinued or sewer service terminated no earlier than ten (10) nor more than sixteen (16) days after that service will not be restored until the bill is paid in full, together with a reconnection fee in an amount set by the City Council.

New residential accounts not having established the preceding winter months billings basis will be billed the average monthly rate billed for all residential accounts until the aforementioned winter months billings are established and determined. If the actual sewer usage of a new residential customer can be established from competent data, then new residential accounts may be adjusted to actual usage prior to the aforementioned lowest three (3) months of the five (5) winter months billings being established and determined. Consumers commencing their use of the sewerage system ten (10) days or less prior to the next meter reading period will not be rendered a separate bill for service for that period of ten (10) days or less service.

Customers commencing their use of the sewerage system more than ten (10) days prior to the next following meter reading will have rendered a bill for the full amount of the sewer use fee for a one (1) month period.

Customers ending their use of the sewerage system ten (10) days or less following the last meter reading will not be rendered a separate bill for that period of ten (10) days or less service.

Customers ending their use of the sewerage system more than ten days following the last meter reading will have rendered a bill for the full amount of the sewer use fee for a one (1) month period.

It shall be the duty of all consumers to forthwith notify the Public Works Director upon commencing or terminating the use of the sewerage system by such consumer. If the customer should fail to give such notice he shall be charged for service to the premises until the Public Works Director is otherwise advised of such circumstances.

3-321 Sewer Department; Service Deposits
An applicant may be required to accompany his application for sewer service with a service deposit to insure the payment of sewer bills and other charges. The service deposit amounts are set by ordinance by the City Council. The service deposit shall remain in the custody of the Utility Department as long as the applicant is a customer of the Sewer Department. Service deposits less such amount as the customer may owe the Sewer Department for service and other charges, if any, shall be refunded to the customer when service is no longer desired or otherwise permanently terminated.

3-322 Sewer Department; Liability Of City
The City does not guarantee the collection or treatment of sewage at any time to any person. The City expressly reserves the right to refuse or discontinue service for any of the following reasons: For repairs necessary to be made on any part of its sewage collection system or treatment plant, or other equipment for nonpayment of bills when due, for fraudulent representations In regard to the customer's sewage quantity or quality, for the protection of persons or property; for violation of any of the rules or requirements of this Article or the subsequent amendments thereto. The City shall use due and reasonable diligence to provide and supply uninterrupted service to customers, but shall not be liable for damages resulting from interruption of service or sewer line stoppages due to causes over which the City has no control, for damages resulting from materials introduced into the sewer by customers or others.

3-323 Sewer Department; Rates
The following monthly rate schedules shall apply to all customers of the Municipal Sewer Department, according to the applicable service classification:

ALL RESIDENTIAL SERVICE CLASSES:

Beginning, July 1, 2014
Minimum Charge: $18.77 per month
Plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons average monthly water consumption for the lowest three (3) months of water usage of the five (5) winter months of November, December, January, February, and March.

Beginning, January 1, 2015
Minimum Charge: $26.06 per month
Plus $2.52 per 1,000 gallons average monthly water consumption for the lowest three (3) months of water usage of the five (5) winter months of November, December, January, February, and March.

Beginning, July 1, 2015
Minimum Charge: $29.70 per month
Plus $2.63 per 1,000 gallons average monthly water consumption for the lowest three (3) months of water usage of the five (5) winter months of November, December, January, February, and March.
ALL COMMERCIAL SERVICE CLASSES:

Beginning, July 1, 2014
Minimum Charge: $20.48 per month
Plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons average monthly water consumption for the lowest three (3) months of water usage of the five (5) winter months of November, December, January, February, and March.

Beginning, January 1, 2015
Minimum Charge: $28.43 per month
Plus $2.52 per 1,000 gallons average monthly water consumption for the lowest three (3) months of water usage of the five (5) winter months of November, December, January, February, and March.

Beginning, July 1, 2015
Minimum Charge: $32.40 per month
Plus $2.63 per 1,000 gallons average monthly water consumption for the lowest three (3) months of water usage of the five (5) winter months of November, December, January, February, and March.
COMMERCIAL VARIABLE:

Beginning, July 1, 2014
Minimum Charge: $20.48 per month
Plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons of actual water consumption each month.

Beginning, January 1, 2015
Minimum Charge: $28.43 per month
Plus $2.52 per 1,000 gallons of actual water consumption each month.

Beginning, July 1, 2015
Minimum Charge: $32.40 per month
Plus $2.63 per 1,000 gallons of actual water consumption each month.
ALL INDUSTRIAL CLASSES:

Beginning, July 1, 2014
Minimum Charge: $2,250.00 per month
Plus $1.77 per 1,000 gallons of actual water consumption each month.

Beginning, January 1, 2015
Minimum Charge: $2,750.00 per month
Plus $1.82 per 1,000 gallons of actual water consumption each month.

Beginning, July 1, 2015
Minimum Charge: $3,000.00 per month
Plus $1.84 per 1,000 gallons of actual water consumption each month.
SURCHARGE FEES:

In addition to the flat and commodity fees listed herein, surcharge fees of $0.44 per pound of B.O.C, $0.22 per pound of T.S.S. and $0.81 per pound of T.K.N. will be assessed to any users who discharge high strength wastewater.
(Amended by Ord. Nos. 1051(a), 12/1/87; 1052, 12/15/87; 1090, 8/1/89; 1098, 11/7/89; 1447, 06/01/99; 1448, 06/01/99; 1703, 05/06/08; 1721, 10/07/08; 1730 05/19/09; 1824, 4/17/12; 1830, 8/7/12; 1894, 05/06/14)

3-324 Sewer Department; Separate Fund; Rate Review; Notification
The user charge system shall generate adequate annual revenues to pay costs of annual operation and maintenance, including replacement, and costs associated with debt retirement of bonded capital associated with financing the sewer system which the City may, by ordinance, designate to be paid by the user charge system.

At least once every two years, the City shall review the sewer user charge system in order to maintain its adequacy to pay the costs of operation and maintenance and the proportionality of charges among the users and user classes. Any excess revenues collected from a class of users shall be credited to that class for the next year and its rates will be adjusted accordingly.

That portion of the total user charge collected which is designated for operation and maintenance, including replacement, purposes shall be deposited in a separate non-lapsing fund and will be kept in two primary accounts as follows.

An account designated for the specific purpose of defraying operation and maintenance, excluding replacement, of the treatment works.
An account designated for the specific purpose of ensuring replacement needs over the useful life of the treatment works. Deposits in the replacement account shall be made annually from the operation, maintenance and replacement revenue in an amount specified and approved by the City Council. However, in no instance shall the amount so designated be less than $17,750 annually.
Fiscal year-end balances in the operation and maintenance account and the replacement account shall be carried over to the same accounts in the subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no other purposes than those designated for these accounts. Monies which have been transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the operation, maintenance, and replacement fund shall be returned to their respective accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user charge rates. The user charge rate shall be adjusted such that the transferred monies will be returned to their respective accounts within the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the monies were borrowed.

The City will notify each user, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate being charged for operation and maintenance, including replacement, of the treatment works.

(Ord No. 1090, 8/1/89)

3-325 Sewer Department; Fees And Charges
CONNECTION CHARGES:
Connections or reconnections made during normal working hours: None.
Connections or reconnections made outside normal working hours at customer's request: None.
LATE PAYMENT CHARGES:
Ten (10%) percent.
COLLECTION CHARGES:
$2.50
SERVICE DEPOSITS:
Residential - $10.00; Commercial and Industrial $10.00 minimum (the amount to be determined by the Public Works Director based on one and one half times the average monthly charge).
TAP FEES:

MINIMUM CHARGES:

4" Sewer Service $615.00

IN ADDITION TO THE ABOVE TAP FEES, costs of removal and replacement of paving, curb, gutter, sidewalks, and any other such items that must be removed and replaced in order to install the service will also be charged to the property owner.

Tap fees for larger service lines will be set by the Public Works Director on an individual basis.
(Amended by Ord. No. 1090, 8/1/89; 1337, 9/3/96)

3-325.01 Sewer Department; Slug Treatment Fees And Charges
Service Charges: $15.00 per visit
In addition to the service charge set forth herein, $20.00 per load, or the sum based on the following:

$3.00 per 100 pounds C.O.D. per load, plus
$5.00 per 100 pounds of dry solids per load, plus

$ .50 per 1,000 gallons of flow per load; whichever is greater.
In addition: $20.00/man hour (after the first hour) plus $10.00/barrel of grit
That all slug delivered for treatment is subject of inspection by the City of Crete. The City of Crete reserves the right to refuse any slug at any time and may require any person delivering slug for treatment to provide test results of the slug composition.
(Ord. No. 1170, 4/21/92) (Amended by Ord. No. 1237, 5/17/94)

3-326 Sewer Department; Lien
In addition to all other remedies, if a customer shall for any reason remain indebted to the Municipality for sewer service furnished, such amount due, together with any rents and charges in arrears shall be considered a delinquent sewer rent which is hereby declared to be a lien upon the real estate for which the same was furnished. Any delinquent sewer rentals which remain unpaid for a period of three (3) months after they become due may be, by resolution of the Council, assessed against said real estate as a special assessment, which special assessment shall be certified by the Municipal Clerk to the County Clerk of Saline County Nebraska. The County Clerk shall thereupon place the same on the tax rolls for collection, subject to the same penalties and to be collected in like manner as other city taxes; provided, the City shall notify in writing non-occupying owners of premises or their agents whenever their tenants or lessees are sixty (60) days delinquent in the payment of sewer rent. Thereafter if the owner of said real estate or his agent within such City shall notify the Council or Commission in writing to discontinue sewer service to said real estate or the occupants thereof, it shall be the duty of the officer in charge of the sewer department promptly to discontinue said service; and rentals for any sewer service furnished to the occupants of said real estate in violation of said notice shall not be lien thereon.

3-327 Sewer Department; Penalties
Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this ordinance, (except section 3-318) shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.

Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limits stated in such notice shall be charged with a violation of the Crete City Code, and on conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 3-1201 of the Crete City Code for each violation. Each day in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.

Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall become liable to the Municipality for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the Municipality by reason of such violation.

(Ord. No. 1090, 8/1/89)

3-328 Sewer Department; Abandoned Building Sewer
Any building sewer which is abandoned, for any reason, must be cut off from the City sewer, and capped in a manner and at such place, as the Public Works Director may approve, by the owner of the property being served by such building sewer.

3-329 Sewer Department; Repairs And Replacement
The Municipal Sewer Department may require the owner of any property which is within the Municipality and connected to the public sewers or drains to repair or replace any connection line which serves the owner's property and is broken, clogged or otherwise in need of repair or replacement. The property owner's duty to repair or replace such a connection line shall include those portions upon the owner's property and those portions upon public property or casements up to and including the point of junction with the public main.

The Municipal Clerk shall give the property owner notice by registered letter or certified mail, directed to the last-known address of such owner or the agent of such owner, directing the repair or replacement of such connection line. If within thirty (30) days of mailing such notice the property owner fails or neglects to cause such repairs or replacements to be made, the Public Works Director may cause such work to be done and assess the cost upon the property served by such connection.

(Ref. 18-1748 RS Neb.)

3-330 Sewer Department; Prohibited Facilities
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.

3-331 Sewer Department; Mandatory Connection
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the Municipality and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the Municipality, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Article within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so; Provided, that said public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.

3-332 Private Sewage Disposal System; When Applicable
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 3-208, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this Article.

3-333 Private Sewage Disposal System; Permit Required
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Public Works Director. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Municipality, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the Public Works Director.

3-334 Private Sewage Disposal System; Inspections Required
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Public Works Director when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within twenty-four (24) hours of the receipt of notice (except Saturday, Sunday and Holidays) by the Public Works Director.

3-335 Private Sewage Disposal System; Specifications
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health of the State of Nebraska. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.

3-336 Private Sewage Disposal System; Mandatory Connection To Public Sewer; When
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this Article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.

When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.

3-337 Private Sewage Disposal System; Maintenance
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Municipality.

3-338 Private Sewage Disposal System; Additional Requirements
No statement contained in Sections 3-332 thru 3-338 shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.

3-339 Sewer Department; Severability
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of Article 3, Chapter 3, of the Crete City Code shall not affect the validity of any other part of this City Code which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.

Article 4 Cogeneration
3-401 Cogeneration; Purpose
3-402 Cogeneration; Definitions
3-403 Cogeneration; Interconnections With Qualifying Facilities
3-404 Cogeneration; Rates For Sales Of Electric Energy To Qualifying Facilities
3-405 Cogeneration; Rates For Purchases Of Electric Energy From Qualifying Facilities

3-401 Cogeneration; Purpose
In order to comply with Sections 201 and 210 of the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 and with the rules and regulations of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission pertaining thereto, the following policies relating to interconnections of the electric system of the Municipality with cogeneration and small power production facilities, rates for sales of electric energy to such facilities, and rates for purchases of electric energy from such facilities are hereby established.

3-402 Cogeneration; Definitions
For the purpose of this Article the following definitions will apply.

COGENERATION FACILITY means a facility which produces electric energy and steam or other forms of useful energy (such as heat) which are used for industrial, commercial, heating, or cooling purposes.

QUALIFYING COGENERATION FACILITY means a cogeneration facility that meets the requirements of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission regarding ownership, fuel use, and operating and efficiency standards.

SMALL POWER PRODUCTION FACILITY means a facility which produces electric energy solely by the use, as a primary energy source, of biomass, waste, renewable resources, or any combination thereof totaling not greater than 80 megawatts at one site.

QUALIFYING SMALL POWER PRODUCTION FACILITY means a small power production facility that meets the requirements of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission regarding ownership, fuel use, fuel efficiency, and reliability.

INTERCONNECTION COSTS means the reasonable costs of connection, switching, metering, transmission, distribution, safety provisions, and administrative costs incurred by the electric utility directly related to the installation and maintenance of the physical facilities necessary to permit interconnected operations with a qualifying facility, to the extent such costs are in excess of the corresponding costs which the electric utility would have incurred if it had not engaged in interconnected operations, but instead generated an equivalent amount of electricity energy itself or purchased an equivalent amount of electric energy itself or purchased an equivalent amount of electric energy or capacity from other sources. (Interconnection costs do not include any costs involved in the calculation of avoided costs.)

AVOIDED COSTS means the incremental costs to an electric utility of electric energy or capacity or both which, but for the purchase from qualifying facilities, such utility would generate itself or purchase from another source.

3-403 Cogeneration; Interconnections With Qualifying Facilities
Qualifying facilities desiring to interconnect with the electric system of the Municipality shall make application to the Department of Utilities for such interconnection. Applicants shall use such forms as are prescribed by the Municipality and shall furnish all information requested.

The Municipality shall establish reasonable standards to be met by qualifying facilities to ensure system safety and reliability of interconnected operations. Such standards may include but shall not be limited to the following areas: power factor; voltage regulations; fault, overcurrent, and over-under voltage protection; harmonics; synchronization; and isolation.

Interconnection costs associated with the interconnection with a qualifying facility shall be paid for by such qualifying facility. Qualifying facilities shall be required to execute contractural agreements with the Municipality before any interconnection is established.

3-404 Cogeneration; Rates For Sales Of Electric Energy To Qualifying Facilities
Rates or sales of electric energy to qualifying facilities shall be those current standard rates adopted from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and City Council which apply to other customers of the utility in the same classification(s) of electric service.

3-405 Cogeneration; Rates For Purchases Of Electric Energy From Qualifying Facilities
Rates for purchases of electric energy from qualifying facilities shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and City Council.

Such rates shall be just and reasonable to the electric consumer of the utility and in the public interest, shall not discriminate against qualifying cogeneration and small power production facilities, and shall be related to avoided costs; however, in no case is the utility required to pay more than the avoided costs.

Standard rates shall be established for purchases from qualifying facilities with a design capacity of 100 kilowatts or less. Rates for purchases from qualifying facilities with a design capacity over 100 kilowatts may be standard rates or may be by individual contracts, the terms of which are fair and reasonable.

Article 5 Fire Department
3-501 Fire Department; Operation And Funding
3-502 Fire Department; Fire Chief
3-503 Fire Department; Membership
3-504 Fire Department; Records
3-505 Fire Department; Emergency Response And On-Call Compensation
3-506 Fire Department; Fires
3-507 Fire Department; Distant
3-508 Fire Department; Fighting Distant Fires
3-509 Fire Department; Preservation Of Property
3-510 Fire Department; Hose Tested
3-511 Fire Department; Fire Investigation

3-501 Fire Department; Operation And Funding
The Municipality operates the Municipal Fire Department through the Municipal Fire Chief and Firemen, The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the management, maintenance, and improving the Fire Department may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limits prescribed by State law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the Municipality that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Fire Maintenance Fund. The Fund shall be at all times in the possession of the Municipal Treasurer.

3-502 Fire Department; Fire Chief
The Fire Chief shall manage the Fire Department and it shall be his duty to inform the Governing Body when any of the fire engines, hose, ladders, or other apparatus needs repair. Upon the written consent and directive of the Governing Body, the Fire Chief shall cause the repair, improvement, or maintenance of the said equipment and shall personally supervise and approve of the same. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to come before the Governing Body at the regular meeting in January of each year to give an annual report to the Governing Body of the general condition and the proposed additions or improvements recommended by him.

3-503 Fire Department; Membership
The Fire Department shall consist of so many members as may be decided by the City Council. The members may organize themselves in any way they may decide, subject to the review of the City Council. The Fire Chief shall appoint no more then 25 members for each fire department company subject to the review and approval of the City Council. All vacancies shall be filled in this manner.
All members of the Fire Department shall be subject to such rules and regulations, and shall perform such duties, as may be prescribed or required of them by the Fire Chief or the City Council. The members of the Fire Department shall, during the time of a fire or great public danger, have and exercise the powers and duties of police officers and shall have full power and authority to arrest all persons guilty of any violation of the municipal code or the laws of the state of Nebraska.
Members of the Fire Department may hold meetings and engage in social activities with the approval of the City Council. The secretary shall, upon request, keep a record of all meetings and shall make a report to the City Council of all meetings and activities of the Fire Department.
Members of the Fire Department shall be considered to be employees of the city for the purpose of providing them with workers' compensation and other benefits. The City Council may compensate or reimburse any member of the Fire Department for expenses incurred in carrying out his or her duties in an amount set by resolution.
The City Council shall purchase and maintain in force a policy of group term life insurance to age 65 covering the lives of all of the city's active volunteer fire and rescue personnel, except that when any such person serves more than one municipality or rural or suburban fire protection district, the policy shall be purchased only by the first municipality or district which he or she serves. The policy shall provide a minimum death benefit of $10,000 for death from any cause and shall, at the option of the insured, be convertible to a permanent form of life insurance at age 65. The coverage of such policy shall terminate as to any individual who ceases to be an active volunteer member of the fire department of the City. (Neb. RS 35-108)
For purposes of Neb. RS 33-139.01, volunteer firefighters and rescue squad members testifying as witnesses in that capacity alone shall not be deemed employees of the city.
(Neb. RS 33-139.01) (Ord. No. 1619, 09/21/04)

3-504 Fire Department; Records
The Fire Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all meetings of the Fire Department, the attendance record of all members, a record of all fires, and shall make a full report of such records to the Municipal Clerk during the last week in April each year. The record of any fire shall include the cause, origin, circumstances, property involved, and whether criminal conduct may have been involved. In the event of sizable property damage, he shall include the information of whether such losses were covered by insurance, and if so, in what amount. All records shall be available to the public at any reasonable time.

3-505 Fire Department; Emergency Response And On-Call Compensation
(1) Each fire department member or officer that responds to a call for emergency response or ambulance service shall receive per call compensation for each such response at a rate set by the City Council via ordinance, resolution, or order.

(2) Each fire department member or officer scheduled to be on-call for weekday daytime, weekday overnight, weekend, and holiday coverage shall receive on-call incentive pay for each scheduled on-call period at a rate set by the City Council via ordinance, resolution, or order.

(3) Fire department members who receive any compensation provided for in this section shall not be considered officers or employees of the City for the purpose of any conflicts of interest that may arise by serving in any other position or capacity for the City, including, but not limited to, elected and appointed officer positions.


Source: Ord. 2115 (2020)

3-506 Fire Department; Fires
It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to use all proper means for the extinguishment of fires; to protect property within the Municipality; and to secure the observance of all ordinances, laws, and other rules and regulations with respect to fires and fire prevention.

3-507 Fire Department; Distant
Upon the permission of the Mayor or Fire Chief, such fire equipment of the Municipality as may be designated by the Governing Body as rural equipment may be used beyond the corporate limits to extinguish reported fires.

3-508 Fire Department; Fighting Distant Fires
The firefighters of the Municipality shall be considered as acting in the performance and within the scope of their duties in fighting fire or saving property or life outside the corporate limits of the Municipality when directed to do so by the Mayor or Chief of the Fire Department or some person authorized to act for such Chief and in so doing, may take such fire equipment of the Municipality as may be designated by the Governing Body.

3-509 Fire Department; Preservation Of Property
Any official of the Municipal Fire Department shall have the power during the time of a fire to cause the removal of any private or public property whenever it shall become necessary to do so for the preservation of such property from fire, to prevent the spreading of fire, or to protect adjoining property. The said officials may direct the Municipal firefighters to remove any building, structure, or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire, and the official in charge of the fire fighting effort shall have the power to blow up, or cause to be blown up, with powder or otherwise, any building or erection during the progress of a fire for the purpose of extinguishing or checking the same.

3-510 Fire Department; Hose Tested
All fire hose shall be pressure tested at least one (1) time each year.

3-511 Fire Department; Fire Investigation
It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to investigate or cause to be investigated, the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring in the Municipality in which property has been destroyed or damaged in excess of fifty ($50.00) dollars. All fires of unknown origin shall be reported, and such officers shall especially make an investigation and report as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness, accident, or design. Such investigation shall be begun within two (2) days of the occurrence of such fire and the State Fire Marshal shall have the right to supervise and direct the investigation whenever he deems it expedient or necessary. The officer making the investigation of fires occurring within the Municipality shall immediately notify the State Fire Marshal and shall, within one (1) week of the occurrence of the fire, furnish him with a written statement of all the facts relating to the cause and origin of the fire, and such further information as he may call for.

(Ref. 81-506 RS Neb.)

Article 6 Police Department
3-601 Police Department; Duties
3-602 Police Department; Arrest And Enforcement Jurisdiction

3-601 Police Department; Duties
The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such further number of regular policemen as may be duly ordered by resolution of the Council. The Chief of Police shall, subject to the direction of the Mayor, have control and management of all matters relating to the Police Department, its officers and members, and shall have the custody and control of all property and books belonging to the department. He shall devote his whole time to the municipal affairs, interests of the Municipality, and to the preservation of peace, order, safety, and cleanliness thereof. The Department shall execute and enforce all laws and also the orders of the Mayor. It shall be the duty of the Department to protect the rights of persons and property. There shall be a proper police force at all fires. The Department shall take notice of all nuisances, impediments, obstructions, and defects in the streets, avenues, alleys, business places, and residences of the Municipality. The Department shall execute, or cause to be executed, the processes issued and shall cause all persons arrested to be brought before the proper court for trial as speedily as possible. The Chief of Police and all regular and reserve police officers shall become thoroughly conversant with the laws of the Municipality, and shall see that the same are strictly enforced and shall make sworn complaints against any person or persons for violation of the same.

3-602 Police Department; Arrest And Enforcement Jurisdiction
Every municipal law enforcement officer has the power and authority to enforce the laws of this state and the municipality or otherwise perform the functions of that office anywhere within his or her primary jurisdiction. Primary jurisdiction means the geographic area territorial limits of the municipality.
Any municipal law enforcement officer who is within this state, but beyond his or her primary jurisdiction, has the power and authority to enforce the laws of this state or any legal ordinance of any city or incorporated village or otherwise perform the functions of his or her office, including the authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if enforcing the laws or performing the functions within his or her primary jurisdiction in the following cases:
Any municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh attempt to apprehend a person suspected of committing a felony, may follow such person into any other jurisdiction in this state and there arrest and detain such person and return such person to the officer's primary jurisdiction;
Any municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh attempt to apprehend a person suspected of committing a misdemeanor or a traffic infraction, may follow such person anywhere in an area within 25 miles of the boundaries of the officer's primary jurisdiction and there arrest and detain such person and return such person to the officer's primary jurisdiction;
Any municipal law enforcement officer has such enforcement and arrest and detention authority when responding to a call in which a local, state, or federal law enforcement officer is in need of assistance.
A law enforcement officer whose life is in danger; or
A law enforcement officer who needs assistance in making an arrest and the suspect:
Will not be apprehended unless immediately arrested; or
May cause injury to himself or herself or others or damage to property unless immediately arrested; or
May destroy or conceal evidence of the commission or a crime; and
If the municipality, under the provisions of the Inter-local Cooperation Act or the Joint Public Agency Act, enters into a contract with any other municipality or county for law enforcement services or joint law enforcement services, law enforcement personnel may have such enforcement authority within the jurisdiction of each of the participating political subdivisions if provided for in the agreement. Unless otherwise provided for in the agreement. Unless otherwise provided in the agreement, the municipality shall provide liability insurance coverage for its own law enforcement personnel as provided in Neb. RS 13-1802.
When probable cause exists to believe that a person is operating or in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle, motorboat, or aircraft while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. RS 28-1465, 28-1466, 28-1472, 37-1254.01, 37-1254.02, 60-4, 163, 60-4, 164, 60-6, 196, 60-6, 197, 60-6, 211.01, or 60-6, 211.02.
A municipal law enforcement officer has the power and authority to do any of the following or any combination thereof:
Transport such person to a facility outside of the law enforcement officer's primary jurisdiction for appropriate chemical testing of the person;
Administer outside of the law enforcement officer’s primary jurisdictions any post-arrest test advisement to the person; or
With respect to such person, perform other procedures or functions outside of the law enforcement officer's primary jurisdiction which are directly and solely related to enforcing the laws that concern a person operating or being in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle, motorboat, or aircraft while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any other drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. RS 28-1465, 28-1466, 28-1472, 37-1254.01, 37-1254.02, 60-4, 163, 60-4, 164, 60-6, 196, 60-6, 197, 60-6, 211.01, or 60-6, 211.02. (Neb RS 29-215)
If municipal law enforcement personnel are rendering aid in their law enforcement capacity outside the limits of the municipality in the event of disaster, emergency, or civil defense emergency or in connection with any program of practice or training for such disaster, emergency, or civil defense emergency when such program is conducted or participated in by the Nebraska Emergency Management Agency or with any other related training program, the law enforcement personnel have the power and authority to enforce the laws of this state or any legal ordinances or resolutions of the local government where they are rendering aid or otherwise perform the functions of their office, including the authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if enforcing the laws or performing the functions within their primary jurisdiction. The municipality shall self-insure or contract for insurance against any liability for personal injuries or property damage that may be incurred by it or by its personnel as the result of any movement made pursuant to this division. (Neb.RS 81-829.65)
Any municipal law enforcement officer may exercise police jurisdiction over any municipally owned or controlled airport, park, waterworks system, sewerage system, or any portion of the same, or any other municipal facility, outside the corporate limits with the same force and effect as though such properties were located within the corporate limits.
(Neb.RS 18-1715) (Ref 29-215 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 1280, 7/18/95; Ord. No. 1619, 09/21/04; Ord. No. 1852, 4/2/13)

Article 7 Parks And Recreation Department
3-701 Parks And Recreation Department; Operation And Funding
3-702 Parks And Recreation Department; Camping
3-703 Parks And Recreation Department; General Rules
3-704 Parks And Recreation Department; Swimming Pool; Operation And Funding
3-705 Parks And Recreation Department; Swimming Pool; Admission Charge
3-706 Parks And Recreation Department; Swimming Pool; Rentals
3-707 Parks And Recreation Department; Swimming Pool; Rules And Regulations

3-701 Parks And Recreation Department; Operation And Funding
The Municipality owns and operates the Municipal Parks and other recreational areas through the Recreational Director, subject to the general control and directives of the Committee on Parks and Recreation. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management, and maintenance of the Municipal Park may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by State law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Park Fund and shall remain in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. The Recreational Director shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the efficient management of the Municipal Parks and other recreational areas of the Municipality, subject to the approval of the Committee on Parks and Recreation. The Director shall not enter into a contract of any nature which involves an expenditure of funds, except for ordinary operating expenses, unless the contract has been approved by resolution of the majority of the members of the Governing Body prior to the contractual agreement.

(Ref. 16-695 RS Neb.)

3-702 Parks And Recreation Department; Camping
Camping is defined as the temporary lodging out-of-doors for recreational purposes and presupposes occupancy of a shelter designed for such purpose, such as sleeping bag, tent, trailer or other recreational vehicle.

Camping and the use of trailers or other camping units is permitted only at designated locations. Within designated locations, the pitching of tents or parking of trailers or other camping units is permitted only at designated sites.

Any persons desiring to use the designated camping area in Tuxedo Park for camping purposes shall pay a fee of eight ($8.00) dollars per day per camping unit, which fee shall be paid in advance to the Parks and Recreation Office during regular office hours, or to the Police Department after regular office hours. An appropriate receipt will be issued to persons so paying said fee to be displayed on the left front window of the vehicle of the person so camping. No camping shall be allowed in the City outside the designated camping area of Tuxedo Park. 

No camping shall be allowed for more than seven (7) consecutive days during a thirty (30) day period without express, written permission from the Park and Recreation Director.

(Amended by Ord. No. 1267, 4/4/95; 1393 12/2/97)

3-703 Parks And Recreation Department; General Rules
The rules and regulations governing the use of the Municipal Parks and Recreational facilities as prescribed and adopted by the Recreational Director shall be on file with the Municipal Clerk or published in pamphlet form and available for public inspection at any reasonable time. In addition, the following general rules shall apply:

It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or willfully cut down, injure, or destroy any tree, plant, or shrub. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or destroy any sodded or planted area, or injure or destroy any building, structure, equipment, fence, bench, table, or any other property of the Municipal Parks and recreational areas. No person shall commit any waste on or litter the Municipal Parks or other public grounds.

All pets, such as dogs, cats or other domestic animals, are prohibited unless they are crated, caged, on a leash or otherwise under physical control of the owner at all times. Horseback riding and the use of pack animals are permitted only on roadways and on designated areas.

The vending, including mobile vendors, of various goods and services, products and commodities, is permitted on park lands with the prior written authorization of the Recreational Director. Such vending without authorization is prohibited. Said vendors are prima facie responsible for the maintenance and restoration of any park facility used by them, to specifically include the proper disposal of paper trash and waste in and around the area of such vending operation.

All motor vehicles shall be operated in accordance with all provisions of Chapter 5 of the Crete Municipal Code and the laws of the State of Nebraska, The speed limits shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour in all areas of the park, except the entrance road leading from 13th Street to the bridge crossing the Big Blue River within said park, which speed limit shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour. No motor vehicle shall be parked or driven other than on designated areas, roadways, designated camping areas or parking areas. This shall include motorcycles, trail bikes, snowmobiles and all motor vehicles.

The use and leasing of cabins on Municipal property shall be in accordance with the rules adopted therefor by the Governing Body.

3-704 Parks And Recreation Department; Swimming Pool; Operation And Funding
The Municipality owns and manages the Municipal Swimming Pool. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the management, maintenance, and improvements of the Swimming Pool may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by State law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the Municipality that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Swimming Pool Fund and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests, or other valuable income-producing personal property and real estate from any source for the purpose of endowing the Swimming Pool. The Swimming Pool Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. The Recreational Director shall manage the Swimming Pool. The Director shall have the power and authority to hire and supervise the Swimming Pool Manager and such employees as he or she may deem necessary and shall pass such rules and regulations for the operation of the Swimming Pool as may be proper for its efficient operation. All actions by the Director shall be under the supervision and control of the Mayor.

(Ref. 16-695 RS Neb)

3-705 Parks And Recreation Department; Swimming Pool; Admission Charge
The Recreational Director may, for the purpose of defraying the expenses involved in maintaining, improving, managing, and beautifying the Swimming Pool, make a reasonable admission charge for the use by any person of the Municipal Swimming Pool. The said charges shall be on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and shall also be posted in a conspicuous place at the Municipal Swimming Pool for public inspection. Such rates may be structured for classes of persons in a reasonable manner; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed to permit or allow discrimination on the basis of race, creed, color, or national origin in the classification of persons for admission charges.

(Ref. 16-695 RS Neb)

3-706 Parks And Recreation Department; Swimming Pool; Rentals
The Recreational Director shall have the authority to rent the Municipal Swimming Pool to such organizations and other persons as he or she may in his or her discretion see fit, subject to the review of the Committee on Parks and Recreation. The Recreational Director shall prescribe rules and regulations for such rentals and shall require an appropriate number of qualified lifeguards to be in attendance during the rental period. Such fees and other costs shall be on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and posted in a conspicuous place at the Municipal Swimming Pool.

(Ref. 16-695 RS Neb.)

3-707 Parks And Recreation Department; Swimming Pool; Rules And Regulations
The Recreational Director shall have the power and authority to enact bylaws, rules, and regulations for the protection of those using the Swimming Pool and for the efficient management thereof. He or she may provide suitable penalties for the violation of such by-laws, rules, and regulations subject to the review and supervision of the Mayor.

(Ref. 16-695 RS Neb.)

Article 8 Library Department
3-801 City Library; Establishment And Authority
3-802 Municipal Library; Operation And Funding
3-803 Municipal Library; Annual Report
3-804 Municipal Library; Books
3-805 Municipal Library; Rules And Regulations
3-806 Municipal Library; Book Removal
3-807 Municipal Library; Damaged And Lost Books
3-808 Municipal Library; Cost Of Use
3-809 Municipal Library; Money Collected
3-810 Municipal Library; Circulating Libraries
3-811 Municipal Library; Amendment Of Rules
3-812 Municipal Library; Donations, Exemptions, Release And Renewal Of Mortgages
3-813 Municipal Library; Collection Of Penalties

Chapter 3, Article 8 was amended by Ordinance 1995, 01/03/2017

3-801 City Library; Establishment And Authority
Pursuant to Neb. R.R.S. § 16-251, there is hereby established a Crete City Library, and the Mayor and City shall have the authority to maintain the library; to provide the necessary ground or buildings therefor; to purchase the papers, books, maps, manuscripts, and works of arts, and objects of natural or scientific curiosity and instruction therefor; and to receive donations and bequests of money or property for the same in trust or otherwise. The City shall have the authority to pass necessary bylaws and regulations for the protection and government of the library, with the exception of the Board’s selection of the intellectual collection, displays or presentations. The ownership of the real and personal property of such library shall be in the City of Crete. The City shall govern and manage all library personnel in accordance with the City of Crete Personnel Manual, and shall manage all financial matters relating to the library.

3-802 Municipal Library; Operation And Funding
The Municipality owns and manages the Municipal Library through the Library Board and City Administrator. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of management, purchases, improvements and maintenance of the Library may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by State law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the Municipality that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Library Fund and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests, or other valuable income-producing personal property and real estate from any sources for the purpose of endowing the Municipal Library. The Library Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer.

(Ref. 51-201, 51-202, 51-211 RS Neb.)

3-803 Municipal Library; Annual Report
The Library Board shall, on or before the second Monday in February, of each year, make a report to the Mayor and Council of the condition of their trust on the last day of the prior fiscal year. The report shall show all moneys received and credited or expended, number of materials held, including books, video and audio materials, software programs, and materials in other formats; the number of periodical subscriptions on record, including newspapers; the number of materials added and the number withdrawn from the collection during the year; the number of materials circulated during the year; and other statistics, information, and suggestions as may be deemed of general interest or as the Council may require, which report shall be verified by affidavit of the President and Secretary of the Library Board.

(Neb. RS 51-213)

3-804 Municipal Library; Books
The Library Board may authorize the sale, exchange, or disposal of any surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete, or duplicate books in the Library. Records shall be kept of any such surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete, or duplicate books so disposed of.

(Ref. 51-207 RS Neb.)

3-805 Municipal Library; Rules And Regulations
The Library Board shall establish rules and regulations for the governing of the Municipal Library of the preservation and efficient management thereof. They shall fix and impose by general rules, penalties, and forfeitures for injury to the Library grounds, rooms, books, or other property, or for failure to return a book. All fees, penalties, and forfeitures may be collected in civil action in the event of failure, neglect, or refusal to pay the said assessments.

(Ref. 51-205, 51-214 RS Neb.)

3-806 Municipal Library; Book Removal
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the regulations made by the Library Board to take a book from the Library, without the consent of the Librarian, or an authorized employee of the Library. Any person removing a book from the Library without properly checking it out shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ref. 51-211 RS Neb.)

3-807 Municipal Library; Damaged And Lost Books
Any person who injures or fails to return any book taken from the Library shall forfeit and pay to the Library not less than the value of the book in addition to any replacement costs and penalty which the Library Board may assess.

(Ref. 51-211 RS Neb.)

3-808 Municipal Library; Cost Of Use
The Municipal Library shall be free for the use of the inhabitants of the Municipality. The Librarian may exclude from the use of the Library and reading rooms any person who shall willfully violate or refuse to comply with the rules and regulations established for the government thereof.

(Ref. 51-201, 51-212 RS Neb.)

3-809 Municipal Library; Money Collected
Any money collected by the Library shall be turned over monthly by the Librarian to the Municipal Treasurer along with a report of the sources of the revenue.

(Ref. 51-209 RS Neb.)

3-810 Municipal Library; Circulating Libraries
The Library Board shall have power to authorize any circulating library, reading matter of work of art of any private person, association or corporation to be deposited in the Public Library rooms to be used within the Library Room in the same manner as the books and property of the library; but to be drawn upon and used outside of the rooms only on payment of such fees or membership as the person, corporation or association owning the same may require; provided, that the books or other reading matter so deposited in the rooms of such Public Library shall be separately and distinctly marked, and kept upon shelves apart from the books of the Public Library.

3-811 Municipal Library; Amendment Of Rules
Any bylaws, rules or regulations established by the Library Board may be amended by the Mayor and Council.

3-812 Municipal Library; Donations, Exemptions, Release And Renewal Of Mortgages
Any person may make any donation of money, lands, or property for the benefit of such library, and the title to the property donated may be made to and shall vest in the City for the Public Library, and such property shall thereupon be exempt from taxation. The President shall have the power to release, upon full payment any mortgage constituting a credit to the Library Fund outstanding in the name of such Library Board and the signature of the President on any such release shall be authenticated by the Secretary of the Board. The President and Secretary in like manner, upon resolution duly passed and adopted by the Board, may renew any such mortgage.

3-813 Municipal Library; Collection Of Penalties
Penalties imposed or accruing by any bylaw, rule or regulation of the Library Board may be recovered in a civil action before any court having jurisdiction; such action to be instituted in the name of the Public Library Board and monies collected in such actions shall be forthwith placed in the Treasury to the credit of the Library Fund.

Article 9 Municipal Cemetery
3-901 Municipal Cemetery; Operation And Funding
3-902 Municipal Cemetery; Gifts
3-903 Municipal Cemetery; Improvements
3-904 Municipal Cemetery; Conveyance Of Lots
3-905 Municipal Cemetery; Lot Transfers
3-906 Municipal Cemetery; Reclamation
3-907 Municipal Cemetery; Perpetual Care

3-901 Municipal Cemetery; Operation And Funding
The Municipality owns and manages the Municipal Cemetery through the Cemetery Board. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management, maintenance, and beautification of the Cemetery may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by State law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the Municipality that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Cemetery Fund and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests, money, stocks, bonds, or other valuable income producing personal property and real estate from any source for the purpose of endowing the Cemetery. The Cemetery Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer.

(Ref. 12-301 through 12-403 RS Neb.)

3-902 Municipal Cemetery; Gifts
The Mayor and Council are empowered and authorized to receive by gift or devise real estate for cemetery purposes. The Mayor and Council are also empowered and authorized to receive by gift, grant, deed or conveyance, devise or bequest from any person, personal property of any kind or description, including money, stocks, bonds, securities, endowments, trust funds, equipment, supplies, records, and plats for cemetery purposes. The Mayor and Council are likewise empowered and authorized, for cemetery purposes, to receive by gift, devise or bequest real and personal property of any kind or description, including money, stocks, bonds, securities, endowments, trust funds, equipment, supplies, records and plats belonging to any cemetery association or associations, which said cemetery has already been properly surveyed and platted and used for cemetery purposes. In the event the City through its Mayor and Council, should desire to purchase any cemetery belonging to any corporation, partnership, association or individual, which said cemetery has already been properly surveyed and platted and used for cemetery purposes, then the Mayor and Council are authorized and empowered to purchase said cemetery. Where such real estate and personal property is acquired by gift, devise or bequest, the title shall then be in the City upon the conditions imposed by the donor and upon acceptance by the Mayor and Council. Where such real estate is acquired by purchase or by virtue of the exercise of the right of eminent domain, and the personal property is acquired by purchase, the title shall then absolutely be in the City.

3-903 Municipal Cemetery; Improvements
The Mayor and Council may survey, plat, map, grade, fence, ornament, and otherwise improve all burial and cemetery grounds and avenues leading thereto acquired or owned by the City. The Mayor and Council may construct walks and protect ornamental trees therein, and provide for paying the expenses thereof.

3-904 Municipal Cemetery; Conveyance Of Lots
The Governing Body may convey cemetery lots by Certificate signed by the Mayor, and countersigned by the Municipal Clerk under the Municipal Seal specifying that the person to whom the same is issued is the owner of the lot described therein by number for the purpose of interment. The said Certificate shall give a right in fee simple to the proprietor, his heirs, and assigns. The Certificate shall then be recorded in the office of the County Clerk.

The Mayor and Council may limit the number of cemetery lots which shall be owned by the same persons at the same time. They may prescribe rules for enclosing, adorning and erecting monuments, and tombstones on cemetery lots. They may prohibit any diversion of the use of such lots and any improper adornment thereof; but no religious test shall be made as to the ownership of lots, the burial therein, or the ornamentation of graves or of such lots.

(Ref. 16-243 RS Neb.)

3-905 Municipal Cemetery; Lot Transfers
Any person who wishes to transfer a certificate may do so by surrendering the original certificate to the Municipal Clerk, who shall issue a new certificate upon the receipt of the recording fee set by resolution of the Governing Body.

3-906 Municipal Cemetery; Reclamation
When any lot has been transferred by warranty deed or by a deed conveying a fee simple title, but there has been no burial in any such lot or subdivision thereof and no payment of annual assessments for a period of three (3) years, the Cemetery Board with the sanction of the Governing Body, may reclaim the unused portion of such lot or subdivision after notifying the recorded owner or this or her heirs or assigns, if known, by certified mail and publishing notice of its intention to do so. Such notice shall be published once each week for four (4) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the county in which the cemetery is located, shall describe the lot or subdivision proposed to be reclaimed, and shall be addressed to the person in whose name such portion stands of record or, if there is no owner of record, to all persons claiming any interest in such lot or subdivision. If no person appears to claim such lot or subdivision and pay all delinquent assessments with interest within fifteen (15) days after the last date of such publication, the Cemetery Board may by resolution reclaim such lot or subdivision. Such reclamation shall be complete upon a filing of a verified copy of such resolution, together with proof of publication, in the office of the Register of Deeds.

3-907 Municipal Cemetery; Perpetual Care
The Mayor and Council may set aside the proceeds of the sale of lots as perpetual funds to be invested as provided by ordinance. The income from the fund may be used for the general care, management, maintenance, improvement, beautifying, and welfare of the cemetery. The principal of the perpetual fund may be used for the general care, management, maintenance, improvement, beautifying, and welfare of the cemetery as long as no more than twenty percent (20%) of the principal is so used in any fiscal year and no more than forty percent (40%) of the principal is so used in any period of ten consecutive years. The principal of the perpetual fund may be used for the purchase and development of additional land to be used for cemetery purposes as long as no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the principal is so used in any fiscal year and no more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the principal is so used in any period of ten consecutive fiscal years.
The Mayor and Council may receive money by donation, bequest, or otherwise for credit to the perpetual fund to be invested as provided by ordinance or as conditioned by the donor. The income therefrom may be used for the general care, management, maintenance, improvement, beautifying, and welfare of the cemetery as the donor may designate. The principal therefrom may be used for the general care, management, maintenance, improvement, beautifying, and welfare of the cemetery as the donor may designate as long as no more than twenty percent (20%) of the principal is so used in any fiscal year and no more than forty percent (40%) of the principal is so used in any period of ten consecutive fiscal years. The principal therefrom may also be used for the purchase and development of additional land to be used for cemetery purposes as the donor may designate as long as no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the principal is so used in any fiscal year and no more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the principal is so used in any period of ten consecutive fiscal years.
This section does not limit the use of any money that comes to the City by donation, bequest, or otherwise that is not designed to be credited to the perpetual fund or that allows greater use for purchase or development of additional land to be used for cemetery purposes.
(Amended Ord. No. 1800, 08/02/11)

Article 10 Municipal Sanitary Landfill
3-1001 Municipal Solid Waste Management

3-1001 Municipal Solid Waste Management
(1) The Municipality, pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. Section 13-2001, et. seq., has entered into an Agency agreement with the Seward/Saline County Solid Waste Management Agency, pursuant to which the City is required to utilize the solid waste disposal area operated by Waste Connections, Inc., a California Corporation, located approximately one and one-half (1.5) miles south of Milford, Nebraska, generally known as the Cottonwood Landfill, for the disposal of its Solid Waste, and further the City has entered into a Limited Exclusive Garbage and Recyclable Collection Agreement (Agreement) with a private refuse hauler, (hauler) for the collection of solid waste and recyclables within the City of Crete. The Agreement grants to said hauler the limited exclusive right to collect garbage and recyclables within the corporate limits of said City, for mandatory, City wide collection from all single family residential households, two family residential households, and multi-unit residential complexes and from all business, commercial, institutional and industrial establishments that shall employ haulers service, under the rates specified in City Code, and under such other conditions as are prescribed by Agreement.

(2) The Municipality hereby finds that it is in the best interest of the public health and welfare of the City and the environment:

(a) That there be mandatory, City wide collection from all single family residential households, two family residential households, and multi-unit residential complexes. Each multi-unit residential complex, of three or more units, shall be provided by hauler a city approved container, for deposit of refuse (and recyclables if so requested by any resident), for use by residences of said complex, with a minimum capacity of 65 gallons (10 cubic feet)] for each residential unit for refuse, and (if so requested by any resident of said complex) with a minimum capacity of 30 gallons (4.6 cubic feet) for each residential unit, for recyclables.

(b) That business, commercial, institutional and industrial establishments shall have the limited right to haul its own garbage or refuse, but shall not have the right to hire another private refuse hauler other than the agreed to City hauler.

(c) That all solid waste of the Municipality be deposited in the Cottonwood Landfill, or such other landfill or such other landfill as may be designated by the City, and all recyclables, and any refuse separated therefrom shall be deposited at the location approved by the City.

(d) That a private refuse hauler, be granted such Limited Exclusive Garbage and Recyclable Collection Agreement for the collection of solid waste and recyclables within the corporate limits of the Municipality.

(3) It shall be unlawful for any solid waste to be deposited in any landfill other than Cottonwood Landfill, or such other landfill as may be designated by the City, or for any other commercial solid waste haulers to operate within the corporate limits of the Municipality or for any recyclables, or any refuse separated therefrom to be deposited at a location not approved by the City.


Source: Ord. 1203 (1993); Ord. 1575 (2003); Ord. 1727 (2009); Ord. 2043 (2018)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-2001, et. seq.



Article 11 Ambulance Service
3-1101 Ambulance Service; Ownership
3-1101.1 Ambulance Service; Level Of Certification
3-1101.2 Ambulance Service; Advanced Life Support Protocol
3-1102 Ambulance Service; Rate Schedule
3-1103 [Repealed]
3-1104 Ambulance Service; Alternate Equipment

3-1101 Ambulance Service; Ownership
The Municipality owns and manages the Municipal Ambulance Service through the Fire Chief. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the management, maintenance, and improvements on the Municipal Ambulance Service may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by State law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the Municipality that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Ambulance Fund and shall include all gifts, grants, deed of conveyance, bequests, or other valuable income-producing personal property and real estate from any source for the purpose of endowing the Municipal Ambulance Service. The Ambulance Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. The Fire Chief shall have the power to hire and supervise such employees as they may deem necessary and shall pass such rules and regulations for the operation of the Ambulance as may be proper for its efficient management. All actions by the Fire Chief shall be under the supervision and control of the City Administrator. All rate schedules for ambulance service and wages for drivers and attendants shall be set by ordinance and on file with the Municipal Clerk.


Source: Ord. 1643 (2006)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 12-303



3-1101.1 Ambulance Service; Level Of Certification
(1) The City, through the Fire and Rescue Department, may maintain two levels of certification. All members who respond to rescue or transfer calls shall maintain the minimum level of service, basic life support (BLS) as prescribed by the Department by-laws, which currently is EMT-B.

(2) The Department may also maintain staff certified at the Advanced Life Support (ALS) as prescribed by the Department by-laws, which currently is EMT-P.



3-1101.2 Ambulance Service; Advanced Life Support Protocol
The City, through the Fire and Rescue Department, may provide ALS service to the community in a role supporting and secondary to ALS service provided by Crete Area Medical Center (CAMC). If CAMC ALS personnel are unable to respond to a rescue call or medical transfer, Crete Fire and Rescue Department EMT-P personnel will assume the role of primary ALS care provider.



3-1102 Ambulance Service; Rate Schedule
(1) There is hereby established the following rate schedule for ambulance service provided by the City:

Basic Life Support (BLS)
Ambulance Service, non-emergency:
$ 1,030.00
Plus, mileage, per mile patient travels
$ 23.00
Ambulance Service, emergency:
$ 1,140.00
Plus, mileage, per mile patient travels
$ 23.00
Advance Life Support (ALS)
Ambulance Service, non-emergency:
$ 1,250.00
Plus, mileage, per mile patient travels
$ 23.00
Ambulance Service, emergency- Level-1
$ 1,410.00
Ambulance Service, emergency- Level-2
$ 1,760.00
Plus, mileage, per mile patient travels
$ 23.00
Lift Assist (No transport)
$ 175.00
Advanced Life Support Intercept
$ 100.00
(2) All ambulance calls include either two certified attendants or one non-certified driver and one attendant. Any additional attendants required will be paid scale rate and shall be billed to recipient of ambulance services. Advanced life support (ALS) services not provided by the City but provided by outside agencies shall be paid by mutual agreement with the City and billed to recipient of ambulance or rescue services. ALS calls provided by the City in the absence of or in addition to, outside agencies, will be billed directly by the City and paid to City fire and rescue accounts.

(3) The Crete Fire and Rescue Department of the City of Crete (Department), with approval of the City Council, shall determine on an annual basis the rate to be charged for ambulance stand-by service for special events that request and/or require such service.

(4) All charges for ambulance calls and/or use set forth herein shall be payable to the City or its designee. All amounts due for ambulance or rescue service provided for in this chapter shall be payable within ten days from the date of service.


Source: Ord. 1183 (1993); Ord. 1308 (1996); Ord. 1504 (2000); Ord. 1543 (2003); Ord. 1644 (2006); Ord. 1733 (2009); Ord. 1786 (2011); Ord. 1832 (2012); Ord. 1970 (2016); Ord. 2016 (2017)




3-1103 [Repealed]
Repealed. Ordinance No. 1790 (2011).



3-1104 Ambulance Service; Alternate Equipment
Should the transfer ambulance be out of service and an alternate unit used from the Fire Department, the Ambulance Service will reimburse the Fire Department for loaded patient mileage and any supplies used.


Source: Ord. 1183 (1993)




Article 12 Utilities Generally
3-1201 Utilities Generally; Diversion Of Services, Meter Tampering, Unauthorized Reconnection, Prohibited; Evidence
3-1202 Denial Of Utility Service; When Prohibited

3-1201 Utilities Generally; Diversion Of Services, Meter Tampering, Unauthorized Reconnection, Prohibited; Evidence
(1) Any person who connects any instrument, connects any pipe or conduit supplying gas or water, without the knowledge and consent of the Municipality, in such manner that any portion thereof may be supplied to any instrument by or at which electricity, electric current, gas, or water may be consumed without passing through the meter provided for measuring or registering the amount or quantity passing through it, and any person who knowingly uses or knowingly permits the use of electricity, electric current, gas, or water obtained in the above mentioned unauthorized ways, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.

(2) Any person who willfully injures, alters, or by any instrument, device, or contrivance in any manner interferes with or obstructs the action or operation of any meter made or provided for measuring or registering the amount or quantity of electricity, gas, or water passing through it, without the knowledge and consent of the Municipality shall be deemed guilty of an offense.

(3) When electrical, gas, or water service has been disconnected pursuant to sections 70-1601 to 70-1615 RS Neb. or this Code, any person who reconnects such service without the knowledge and consent of the Municipality shall be deemed guilty of an offense.

(4) Proof of the existence of any wire, pipe, or conduit connection or reconnection or of any injury, alteration, or obstruction of a meter, as provided in this section, shall be taken as prima facie evidence of the guilt of the person in possession of the premises where such connection, reconnection, injury, alteration, or obstruction is proved to exist.


Source: Ord. 1325 (1996)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 86-329 to 86-331



3-1202 Denial Of Utility Service; When Prohibited
No applicant for the services of a public or private utility company furnishing water, natural gas, or electricity at retail in this municipality shall be denied service because of unpaid bills for similar service which are not collectible at law because of statutes of limitations or discharge in bankruptcy proceedings.


Source: Ord. 1454 (1999)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 70-1601



Article 13 Penal Provision
3-1301 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision

3-1301 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provision of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a violation of a Municipal Ordinance. Unless otherwise specified in the particular Article or Section for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such violation shall be in any amount not to exceed $500.00 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said payment, the offender shall stand committed to the County jail until such fine and costs be paid.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-246



Chapter 4 Health And Sanitation
Article 1 General Health Provisions
Article 2 Garbage Disposal
Article 3 Nuisances
Article 4 [Repealed]
Article 5 Wellhead Protection Plan
Article 6 Penal Provision

Article 1 General Health Provisions
4-101 Health; Regulations
4-102 Health; Enforcement Official
4-103 Health; County Health Board

4-101 Health; Regulations
For the purpose of promoting the health and safety of the residents of the Municipality, the Board of Health shall, from time to time, adopt such rules and regulations relative thereto and shall make such inspections, prescribe such penalties, and make such reports as may be necessary toward that purpose.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-238



4-102 Health; Enforcement Official
The Municipal Police Chief, as the Quarantine Officer, shall be the chief health officer of the Municipality. It shall be his duty to notify the Governing Body and the Board of Health of health nuisances within the Municipality and its zoning jurisdiction.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-238



4-103 Health; County Health Board
It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to work closely with the County Health Board in protecting the health and welfare of the residents of the Municipality.



Article 2 Garbage Disposal
4-201 Garbage; Defined
4-202 Rubbish And Trash; Defined
4-203 Waste; Defined
4-204 Yard Waste; Defined
4-205 Garbage Accumulation; Health Hazard
4-206 Garbage; Trash, And Waste
4-207 Establishments; Refuse Receptacles
4-207.01 Residence; Refuse/Recycle Receptacles
4-207.02 Residence; Refuse/Recycle Receptacles; Placement At Curb
4-208 Dead Animals
4-209 Composting Organic Materials
4-210 Hauling Garbage Or Refuse
4-211 Unlawful Disposal Of Refuse
4-212 Garbage And Refuse Collection; Public Nuisance, Prohibited
4-213 Garbage Collection Agreement
4-213.01 Garbage Collection Rates
4-214 Garbage And Refuse Burning; Nuisance; Penalty
4-215 Solid Waste; Hazardous Item Handling Or Disposal And Items Requiring Special Handling Or Disposal

4-201 Garbage; Defined
The term "garbage" as used herein shall be defined to mean kitchen refuse, decayed waste, dead animals, or anything that may decompose and become offensive to the public health.



4-202 Rubbish And Trash; Defined
The terms "rubbish" or "trash" as used herein shall be defined as discarded machinery, chips, pieces of wood, sticks, dead trees, branches, bottles, broken glass, crockery, tin cans, boxes, papers, rags, or any other litter or debris that is not an immediate hazard to the health of the residents of the Municipality.



4-203 Waste; Defined
The term "waste" as herein defined shall mean cinders, ashes, plaster, brick, stone, sawdust, or sand.



4-204 Yard Waste; Defined
The term “yard waste” shall mean grass and leaves.


Source: Ord. 1073 (1989); Ord. 1274 (1995)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-2016.01



4-205 Garbage Accumulation; Health Hazard
The accumulation of, keeping or disposing of any garbage or refuse within the Municipal Limits is hereby declared to be a health hazard. The accumulation, keeping or disposal of such trash in any other manner than as provided by this Article is declared to be detrimental to the health of the citizens of the Municipality and is hereby declared a nuisance and the accumulation of, keeping or disposal of garbage and refuse except as herein provided shall be unlawful.



4-206 Garbage; Trash, And Waste
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in, on, or about any dwelling, building, or premise, or any other place in the Municipality, decayed vegetable or animal substance, garbage, or refuse matter of any kind that may be injurious to the public health or offensive to the residents of the Municipality unless the same is kept in receptacles not exceeding a thirty (30) gallon capacity and as nearly airtight as may be practical. It shall be unlawful to throw or sweep into the streets, alleys, parks, or other public grounds any dirt, paper, nails, pieces of glass, refuse, waste, or rubbish of any kind. No person may permit garbage, rubbish, waste, or refuse to collect and all persons shall remove the same from their property within twenty-four (24) hours after being notified to do so by the Municipal Police representing the Board of Health. Any person having garbage, rubbish, waste, or refuse that is subject to decay or fermentation within a short period of time shall be required to place the same in a standard garbage can with a tight cover, or a durable plastic container that is securely tied at its opening. All persons shall have the contents of their garbage cans removed at least once a week.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-2106



4-207 Establishments; Refuse Receptacles
It is hereby made the duty of any motel keeper, boarding house keeper, and restaurant keeper to provide and use a receptacle from substantial material, lined with or made of iron, tin or zinc and provided with a lid, for the purpose of receiving all the garbage, slop, offal and waste from his place of business. Such receptacle shall be in accordance with the specifications set forth in this Article. If the receptacle is maintained at an interior location with reference to said business, a plastic container may be used.



4-207.01 Residence; Refuse/Recycle Receptacles
It is hereby made the duty of all residential inhabitants to use a receptacle provided by the city licensed private refuse hauler. When the solid waste is collected at the street, the receptacle shall be placed adjacent to the curb and shall not block the sidewalk on the designated pick-up day and removed by the end of that same day. Receptacles shall be placed where they are away from obstacles such as vehicles, posts, overhead wires or tree limbs, etc., so that they may be picked up directly by the sanitation trucks. Receptacles may be set out on the street the night before and shall not remain set out after the designated day. Receptacles must be placed according to this code or such receptacle may not be picked up. Storage of the receptacles shall be adjacent to the residence and not at the street or in the front yard.


Source: Ord. 2033 (2017)



4-207.02 Residence; Refuse/Recycle Receptacles; Placement At Curb
(1) It shall be unlawful for any resident to place a receptacle adjacent to the curb or allow such receptacle to remain adjacent to the curb at any time other than the designated pick-up day or the night before such designated pick-up day.

(2) The penalty for violations of this section shall be:

(a) First offense: Ten dollars ($10.00);

(b) Second offense: Twenty five dollars ($25.00);

(c) Third and each subsequent offense: Fifty dollars ($50.00).



4-208 Dead Animals
All dead animals shall be immediately removed and buried by the owner of such animals; and if the owner of such animal cannot be found within two (2) hours after discovering the same, then such animal shall be removed by and at the expense of the Municipality. Dead animals shall not be buried within the corporate limits of the Municipality, nor within two (2) miles thereof, nor in or above the course of ground water that is used for drinking purposes by the Municipality or its inhabitants.



4-209 Composting Organic Materials
Except as of otherwise provided herein the composting of organic materials shall be permitted but shall be limited to plant residues only. Compost heaps shall not be permitted to smoke or emit odor. Compost heaps shall be kept in and surrounded by a woven wire fence or other suitable retaining material. Any compost heap which emits smoke or odor is declared a nuisance and upon service of notice from the City the same shall be abated by the person maintaining said compost heap or if such person cannot be found, such notice shall be served upon the owner of the premises where such compost heap is located. Provided, the composting of organic materials upon the City streets and street right-of-way is prohibited.



4-210 Hauling Garbage Or Refuse
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, it shall be unlawful to load, haul, transport or be in possession of garbage or refuse, unless the same are loaded and transported in receptacles with tight-fitting covers at all times, or in closed trucks or vehicles, or in trucks covered with a tarpaulin or similar equivalent cover.



4-211 Unlawful Disposal Of Refuse
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or suffer any offal, manure, rubbish, filth or any refuse, animal or vegetable matter, or any foul or nauseous liquors, oil or gasoline to be discharged out of or flow from any premises owned or occupied by him, or left in or thrown into, deposited or upon any street, alley, avenue, public square, vacant lot or other place in the City, and any person so offending shall be deemed maintaining a public nuisance.



4-212 Garbage And Refuse Collection; Public Nuisance, Prohibited
(1) The collection of garbage or refuse upon any lot or land within the corporate limits of the City of Crete or within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Crete, or upon the streets, roads, or alleys abutting said lot or land which constitutes a public nuisance is prohibited.

(2) The owner or owners duly authorized agent or tenant of said lot or land shall remove or cause to be removed all garbage and refuse from such lot or land and streets, roads, and alleys.

(3) The City, through its proper officers, shall remove or cause to be removed any collection of such garbage and refuse so found or existing upon failure of the owner or owners authorized agent or tenant, if any, of such lot or land to remove or cause to be removed such collection of garbage and refuse by complying with the provisions of this ordinance as hereinafter provided.

(4) Notice shall be given to such owner or owners duly authorized agent or tenant, if any, of such lot or land that the Mayor and Council intend to determine that said collection of garbage or refuse constitutes a public nuisance and set a date and time for hearing thereon. Upon hearing, if the Mayor and City Council determines such collection to be a public nuisance it shall by resolution declare and determine such collection of garbage and refuse a public nuisance and direct that notice shall be given to the owner or owners duly authorized agent or to the tenant, if any, of such determination. Such notice and a copy of the resolution as passed shall be served upon the owner or owners duly authorized agent or the tenant thereof, if any, by personal service or by certified mail. After providing such notice and service thereof, the City, through its proper officers shall remove the garbage or refuse or cause the same to be removed from said lot or land and streets, roads and alleys.

(5) If the Mayor or President of the Council in his absence of the City, declares in writing that the accumulation of such garbage or refuse upon any lot or land constitutes an immediate nuisance and hazard to public health and safety, the City, through its proper officers, upon order, shall remove the garbage or refuse, or cause it to be removed from such lot or land within forty-eight hours after notice by personal service or following receipt of certified letter by such owner or authorized agent or tenant, if any, if such garbage or refuse has not been removed.

(6) Upon removal by the City of the accumulation of garbage or refuse or causing it to be removed from any lot or land pursuant to this Section, the City shall after hearing and notice to the owner or authorized agent or tenant if any, assess the cost of removal against such lot or land.



4-213 Garbage Collection Agreement
The City hereby finds that it is in the best interest of the public health and welfare of the City and of the environment that the City enter into a garbage and recyclable collection agreement granting a private refuse hauler the limited exclusive right to collect garbage and recyclables within the corporate limits of said City, mandatory, providing for City wide collection from all single-family residential households, two-family residential households, and multi-unit residential complexes and from all business, commercial, institutional, and industrial establishments that shall employ its service, under the rates specified in the agreement and under such other conditions as are prescribed by agreement. The agreement shall impose upon the private refuse hauler the duty to make regular collections of garbage and recyclables, shall provide that no increase of rates shall be made without the consent of the Mayor and City Council upon the showing of reasonable necessity therefor, and the agreement shall be required to conform to the state statutes and the provisions of this Code relating thereto.


Source: Ord. 1576 (2003); Ord. 1728 (2009); Ord. 2033 (2017)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-2101 to 19-2106



4-213.01 Garbage Collection Rates
(1) Residential – 1 pickup per week

(a) 1-95 gallon cart: $18.18/per residence per month

(b) 2-95 gallon carts: $22.98/per residence per month

(c) 1-65 gallon cart: $17.89/per residence per month

(d) Seasonal yard waste: $12.19/per residence per month

(2) Commercial

Pickups per week
1-95 gallon cart
2-95 gallon carts
2-Yard
3-Yard
4-Yard
6 Yard
8-Yard
1x
$19.28
$31.12
$53.95
$70.60
$94.20
$141.31
$188.42
2x
$32.29
$43.58
$81.84
$105.31
$188.42
$282.61
$376.83
3x
$44.21
$55.78
$108.75
$141.19
$282.61
$423.93
$565.24
4x
$57.76
$68.57
$152.76
$177.07
$376.83
$565.24
$753.65
5x
$70.29
$81.86
$195.53
$212.94
$471.04
$706.55
$942.07
6x
$82.43
$94.01
$234.63
$248.82
$565.24
$847.87
$1,130.49

Source: Ord. 2044 (2018)



4-214 Garbage And Refuse Burning; Nuisance; Penalty
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any household waste or other garbage or refuse matter of any kind, either in the open or in a closed container.

(2) Any violation of this section or provision shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred ($100) dollars for any one offense, recoverable with costs. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every twenty-four hours of such failure to comply.


Source: Ord. 1450 (1999); Ord. 1937 (2015)



4-215 Solid Waste; Hazardous Item Handling Or Disposal And Items Requiring Special Handling Or Disposal
(1) No person shall put out any of the items specified below to be collected by the municipal solid waste collector for land disposal.

(a) Yard waste from April 1 through November 30 of each year unless such yard waste has been separated from its source and is put out for separate collection and delivery to the landfill for the purpose of soil conditioning or composting under the conditions otherwise specified.

(b) Lead-acid batteries.

(c) Waste oil.

(d) Waste tires in any form, except tires that are non-recyclable. Tires are not considered disposed if they meet the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-2039.

(e) Discarded household appliances.

(f) Unregulated hazardous wastes, except household hazardous wastes which are exempt from the regulations under the Environmental Protection Act.

(2) Any such items shall be disposed of only as permitted under the Nebraska Integrated Solid Waste Management Act or any amendments thereof.

(3) For purposes of this section:

(a) Land disposal includes, but is not limited to, incineration at a landfill.

(b) Non-recyclable tire means a press-on solid tire, a solid pneumatic shaped tire, or a foam pneumatic tire.

(c) Waste tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect.

(d) Yard waste means grass and leaves.


Source: Ord. 1619 (2004)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-2013.02; 13-2016.01; 13-2039



Article 3 Nuisances
4-301 Nuisances; Municipal Authority
4-302 Nuisances; Definitions
4-303 Nuisances; Control Authority; Established
4-303.01 Nuisances; Control Authority; Responsibilities
4-303.02 Nuisances; Control Authority; Officers
4-303.3 Nuisances; Control Authority; Access
4-304 Nuisances; Prevention; Responsibility
4-305 Nuisances; Corporate City Limits; Unlawful
4-306 Nuisances; Two-Mile Zoning Jurisdiction; Unlawful
4-307 Nuisances; Unregistered Vehicles; Unlawful
4-308 Nuisances; Abandoned Vehicles; Unlawful
4-309 Nuisances; Dumping In Waterways And Drainways; Unlawful
4-310 Nuisances; Order To Abate; Notice
4-311 Nuisances; Abatement; Appeal Hearing; Responsibilities
4-312 Nuisances; Imminent Threat; Abatement; Administrative Order
4-313 Nuisances; Appeal Hearing; City Attorney Representation
4-313.01 Nuisances; Appeal Hearing; Presentation Of Evidence
4-313.02 Nuisances; Criminal Prosecution
4-313.03 Nuisances; Court Order To Abate
4-313.04 Nuisances; Abatement; Special Assessment; Civil Action
4-314 Nuisances; Abatement; Parks And Recreation Department
4-315 Nuisances; Abatement; Public Works Department
4-316 Nuisances; Abatement; Police Department
4-317 Nuisances; Abatement; City Clerk
4-318 Nuisances; Abatement; Materials Collected
4-319 Discarded Items On Right-Of-Way; Unlawful; Penalty


4-301 Nuisances; Municipal Authority
The Governing Body may make laws, rules, and regulations for the protection of the public, the security of the public health, and for the prevention, abatement, and removal of nuisances within the corporate city limits and within its two-mile zoning jurisdiction.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230; 16-231; 16-240; 18-1541; 18-1720; 60-1901



4-302 Nuisances; Definitions
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context otherwise requires:

(1) Nuisances, General: Any condition or thing that: 

(a) Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of others; 

(b) Offends decency;

(c) Offends the senses;

(d) Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square, street, or highway;

(e) Renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property;

(f) Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property; or,

(g) Tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.

(2) Nuisances, Specific:

(a) Abandoned Vehicle: Any motor vehicle or trailer parked or left upon any lot or piece of ground, owned by another person or corporation, for more than seven days without the expressed permission of the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or person in possession, charge or control of said lot or piece of ground.

(b) Litter:

(i) Garbage: Any rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attend the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetables.

(ii) Junk: Any old and/or scrap metal or rubber; or any machine, appliance, in-door furnishing, vehicle, trailer or part(s) thereof which have lost their identity, character, utility, or serviceability as such through deterioration, dismantling, or the ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to perform their intended functions, or are cast off, discarded, or thrown away or left as waste or wreckage.

(iii) Refuse: Any odorous, putrid, unsound or unwholesome grain, meat, beef, pork, fish, fowl, hides, skins, blood, feathers, vegetable matter, or the whole or any part of any dead animal, creosote, ashes, blood, offal, decayed matter, solid market and industrial wastes, oils, fuels, tars, or any other unwholesome substance.

(iv) Rubbish: Any non-putrescible solid waste material, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, rags, cardboard, metal cans, yard clippings, tree limbs or branches, mattresses or other bedding material, and demolition debris such as metal shards, plaster, old lumber, plaster, broken glass, plastic, brick, crockery, stone, or cement.

(v) Waste Material: Any material appearing in a place or in a context not associated with that material's function or origin.

(c) Stagnant water.

(d) Unregistered vehicle: Any motor vehicle or trailer not registered in accordance with the laws of the State of Nebraska. This does not include any vehicle kept within a fully enclosed structure or any vehicle upon any commercially zoned lot or piece of ground which is owned by a commercial enterprise operating in a lawful manner exclusively for the selling or repairing of vehicles.

(e) Worthless Vegetation: Any uncontrolled or uncultivated grasses twelve inches or more in height or weeds in the Municipality including, but not limited to, bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), puncture vine (Tribulus terrestris), leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula), Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), perennial peppergrass (Lepidium draba), Russian knapweed (Centaurea picris), Johnson grass (Sorghum halepense), nodding or musk thistle, quack grass (Agropyron repens), perennial sow thistle (Sonchus arvensis), horse nettle (Solanum carolinense), bull thistle (Cirsium lanceolatum), buckthorn (Rhamnus sp.) (tourn), hemp plant (Cannabis sativa), and ragweed (Ambrosiaceae).

(f) Dilapidated structures: Any building not in conformance with the City’s Property Maintenance Code, which requires substantial remediation to conform to such Code or, when remediation is deemed impractical, must be demolished as the only means of abatement.

(3) Sewage System: Any pipelines, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, and all other constructions, devices, appurtenances, and facilities used for collecting or conducting wastes to an ultimate point for treatment or disposal.

(4) Treatment Works: Any plant or other works used for the purpose of treating, stabilizing, or holding wastes.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016); Ord. 1982 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230; 16-231; 16-240; 18-1541; 18-1720; 60-1901



4-303 Nuisances; Control Authority; Established
With oversight of the City Administrator, the City Police, Parks and Recreation, and Public Works Departments shall constitute the Nuisance Control Authority of the Municipality.



4-303.01 Nuisances; Control Authority; Responsibilities
The Nuisance Control Authority shall be responsible for:

(1) Identifying nuisances described within this Article;

(2) Enforcing nuisance laws and regulations of the Municipality and the State within the corporate city limits and within the City’s two-mile zoning jurisdiction;

(3) Citing violators of said nuisance laws and regulations;

(4) Coordinating with the City Attorney for the prosecution of violations;

(5) On order, abating, removing, collecting, and disposing of all materials which constituted the nuisance; and,

(6) Maintaining related records including costs incurred.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230; 16-240; 16-246; 18-1720



4-303.02 Nuisances; Control Authority; Officers
Police officers, community service officers, the Parks and Recreation Director, the Building Inspector, and the Street Supervisor shall have the responsibilities and authorities of nuisance control officers within the corporate city limits and within the City’s two-mile zoning jurisdiction. All nuisance control officers shall have the authority to enforce this Article. The Chief of Police shall ensure a certified law enforcement officer trains community service officers, the Parks and Recreation Director, the Building Inspector, and the Street Supervisor in the policies and procedures for the issuance of citations.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016); Ord. 1982 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230; 16-240; 16-246; 18-1720; 18-1757



4-303.3 Nuisances; Control Authority; Access
To fulfill the requirements of this Article, nuisance control officers and other employees of the Public Works Department shall:

(1) Have access to and upon any and all streets, roadways, highways, alleys, sidewalks, parks, right-of-ways, and all other public or city-owned properties within the corporate city limits and within the City’s two-mile zoning jurisdiction;

(2) Obtain permission of the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of any lot or piece of ground where a nuisance may be found to be on such lot or piece of ground;

(3) Obtain permission of the person in possession, charge, or control of any lot or piece of ground adjacent to or near any place where a nuisance may be found for the purposes of inspection;

(4) Obtain a court order to enter upon and inspect a lot or piece of ground with probable cause that a nuisance exists upon such lot or piece of ground; or,

(5) Obtain a court order to abate and remove or cause the abatement and removal of a nuisance from a lot or piece of ground.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016); Ord. 1982 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230; 16-240; 16-246; 18-1720



4-304 Nuisances; Prevention; Responsibility
It shall be the responsibility of every owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of any lot or piece of ground in the Municipality or within the City’s two-mile zoning jurisdiction to keep such lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys free of nuisances.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-230



4-305 Nuisances; Corporate City Limits; Unlawful
(1) It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of any lot or piece of ground to permit or maintain litter, stagnant water, or worthless vegetation upon any lot or piece of ground or upon adjoining streets and alleys within the corporate city limits.

(2) Nothing herein shall prevent the temporary retention of litter in receptacles used for such purposes or the transportation and dumping of non-putrefying waste in a place and manner approved by the Municipality.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230; 16-240; 16-246; 18-1720



4-306 Nuisances; Two-Mile Zoning Jurisdiction; Unlawful
(1) It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of any lot or piece of ground to permit or maintain litter or stagnant water upon any lot or piece of ground within the City’s two-mile zoning jurisdiction but outside the corporate city limits.

(2) Nothing herein shall prevent the temporary retention of litter in receptacles used for such purposes or the transportation and dumping of non-putrefying waste in a place and manner approved by the Municipality.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230; 16-240; 16-246; 18-1720



4-307 Nuisances; Unregistered Vehicles; Unlawful
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of any lot or piece of ground to permit or maintain any unregistered vehicle to remain on such lot or piece of ground within the corporate city limits or within its two-mile zoning jurisdiction for more than thirty days.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)



4-308 Nuisances; Abandoned Vehicles; Unlawful
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any vehicle owner or operator to park or leave any unattended vehicle upon a lot or piece of ground, not their own, for more than seven days without the expressed permission of the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of said lot or piece of ground within the corporate city limits and within its two-mile zoning jurisdiction. It shall also be unlawful to leave any vehicle upon such lot or piece of ground after permission of the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of said lot or piece of ground is terminated. The City, at the request any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of any lot or piece of ground, may tow and process any such vehicle as an abandoned vehicle, to include attempting to notify the last registered owner, after verifying it has been on the lot or piece of ground for more than seven days.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016); Ord. 1969 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-1901



4-309 Nuisances; Dumping In Waterways And Drainways; Unlawful
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, or corporation to place, or allow to be placed, any litter or discarded worthless vegetation into the Big Blue River, Walnut Creek, Timber Creek, Indian Creek, or any of their tributaries or in any drain, ditch, sewer system, or treatment works which discharges said materials, or any part thereof, into any of such waters. It shall be unlawful to place, leave, or permit any such material to escape in such manner that it or any part of it is, through the action of the elements or otherwise, carried into any such waters.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230; 18-1720; 37-555



4-310 Nuisances; Order To Abate; Notice
(1) Any nuisance control officer may issue a written order to abate and remove a nuisance to each owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of the lot or piece of ground upon which a nuisance is found.

(2) Such notice may be made by personal service or certified mail conspicuously marked as to its importance.

(3) If notice by personal service or certified mail is unsuccessful, notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City or by conspicuously posting the notice on the lot or ground upon which the nuisance is to be abated and removed.

(4) Any such notice shall include:

(a) The address or legal description of the lot or piece of ground;

(b) The description of the nuisance;

(c) The right and responsibility of any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of the lot or piece of ground upon which the nuisance is found to request a hearing by the City, if such owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of the lot or piece of ground desires to appeal, within five (5) days after receipt of such notice or publication or posting, whichever is applicable; and,

(d) If the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing with the City or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance within five days, the City may have such work done with the costs and expenses of any such work to be paid by the owner.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-230



4-311 Nuisances; Abatement; Appeal Hearing; Responsibilities
(1) Within five days after receipt of a notice to abate and remove a nuisance by certified mail, personal service, or publication or posting, whichever is applicable, each owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of the lot or piece of ground may request a hearing with the City to appeal the decision to abate or remove a nuisance. This request for a hearing must be filed, in writing, with the office of the City Clerk.

(2) The City Clerk shall maintain the original written appeal for the record and immediately deliver copies of the appeal to the Mayor, members of the Public Safety Committee, City Administrator, City Attorney, and Chief of Police.

(3) If the written request was filed within five days of the notice, the City Administrator, as hearing officer, shall arrange and convene a public hearing within fourteen days after the filing of the request.

(4) The Mayor shall form the Hearing Board, comprised of no less than three members of the Governing Body, to include: himself/herself and at least two members of the Public Safety Committee.

(5) The hearing will be opened with a majority vote of the Hearing Board.

(6) The City Administrator shall serve as the hearing officer and conduct the hearing. The City Attorney shall present the City’s evidence to the Board describing the nuisances. After such presentation, the appellant or the appellant’s representative may present evidence to the contrary. The City and the appellant may call and cross-examine witnesses in support of or in opposition to any testimony or evidence presented. The hearing officer may limit the presentation of extraneous information.

(7) The hearing will be closed with a majority vote of the Hearing Board. Once closed, the Hearing Board shall immediately deliberate in open session to:

(a) find the conditions upon the lot or piece of ground to be a nuisance as described by the City and in violation of city ordinance;

(b) find the conditions upon the lot or piece of ground to be a nuisance as described by the City, excluding specific items found not to constitute a nuisance, and in violation of city ordinance; or,

(c) find the conditions upon the lot or piece of ground not to be a nuisance as described by the City and therefore not in violation of city ordinance.

(8) Upon concluding deliberations, the Hearing Board shall immediately vote and render its finding in open session.

(9) If the Hearing Board finds the conditions upon the lot or piece of ground to be a nuisance and in violation of city ordinance, in part or whole, the City Administrator may direct:

(a) the Parks and Recreation Department to abate and remove nuisances consisting only of worthless vegetation, with any and all associated costs incurred by the City for such abatement, removal, and disposal to be paid by the violator, as billed by the City; or,

(b) the City Attorney to seek an order from the Court permitting the City to abate and remove or cause the abatement and removal of said nuisance to include the collection and disposal of all materials which constitute said nuisance.

(10) The City’s hearing process is independent of any subsequent or concurrent civil or criminal court action which the City may initiate.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-230



4-312 Nuisances; Imminent Threat; Abatement; Administrative Order
(1) When a nuisance presents or may present an imminent threat to the life, health, or safety of any person or persons, as determined by the City Administrator, the City Administrator shall direct the City Attorney to petition the Court for an order directing the City to immediately abate and remove or cause the immediate abatement and removal of said nuisance to include the collection and disposal of all materials which constitute said nuisance, with any and all associated costs incurred by the City for such abatement, removal, and disposal to be paid by the violator, as billed by the City.

(2) Upon receipt of the order, the City Administrator shall direct the Nuisance Control Authority to immediately abate and remove or cause the immediate abatement and removal of said nuisance to include the collection and disposal of all materials which constitute said nuisance.

(3) The Public Works Department shall submit a bill to the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground for the costs of abating and removing nuisances from such lot or piece of ground or upon adjoining streets and alleys.

(4) If the above costs are unpaid for two months after such work is done, the City Attorney shall:

(a) levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefited as a special assessment; or,

(b) recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016); Ord. 1969 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230; 16-231; 16-240; 16-246; 18-1720



4-313 Nuisances; Appeal Hearing; City Attorney Representation
The City Attorney shall represent the City’s interests in all matters brought before any Hearing Board or Court.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-230; 16-246; 18-1720



4-313.01 Nuisances; Appeal Hearing; Presentation Of Evidence
The City Attorney shall be responsible for presenting the City’s evidence to the City’s Hearing Board. This includes the notification and preparation of witnesses.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)



4-313.02 Nuisances; Criminal Prosecution
The City Attorney shall be responsible for prosecuting violations of nuisance laws and regulations of the Municipality within the corporate city limits and within the City’s two-mile zoning jurisdiction, should the City choose to pursue such action. Such prosecution shall be independent of any subsequent or concurrent civil court action which the City may initiate.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)



4-313.03 Nuisances; Court Order To Abate
Upon determination by the Court of a nuisance, the City Attorney shall seek an order from the Court requiring the City to abate and remove or cause the abatement and removal of said nuisance, to include the collection and disposal of all materials which constitute said nuisance, with any and all associated costs incurred by the City for such abatement, removal, and disposal to be paid by the violator, as billed by the City.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)



4-313.04 Nuisances; Abatement; Special Assessment; Civil Action
If the costs listed in Section 4-313.03, as billed by the City, are unpaid for two months after such work is done, the City Attorney shall:

(1) Levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefited as a special assessment; or,

(2) Recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016); Ord. 1969 (2016)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-230



4-314 Nuisances; Abatement; Parks And Recreation Department
The Parks and Recreation Department shall:

(1) At the direction of the City Administrator, abate and remove or cause the abatement and removal of worthless vegetation nuisances.

(2) Dispose of worthless vegetation so removed at a location designated by the City Administrator.

(3) Record and submit all costs incurred by the Department to the Public Works Department for all work and expenses associated with the abatement of any nuisance.

(4) Maintain related records, including costs incurred, for no less than five years.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)



4-315 Nuisances; Abatement; Public Works Department
The Public Works Department shall:

(1) At the direction of the City Administrator, abate and remove or cause the abatement and removal of worthless vegetation nuisances.

(2) Dispose of worthless vegetation so removed at a location designated by the City Administrator.

(3) Upon Court order permitting the City to abate and remove a nuisance and to dispose of the materials which constitute a nuisance and at the direction of the City Administrator, abate and remove or cause the abatement and removal of nuisances.

(4) Collect and dispose or cause the collection and disposal of all materials which constituted the nuisances.

(5) Consolidate all costs incurred by the City which are associated with the abatement and removal of any nuisance.

(6) Submit a bill to the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground for the costs of abating and removing nuisances from such lot or piece of ground or upon adjoining streets and alleys.

(7) Receive and submit any payment made by the owner of the lot or piece of ground to the City Clerk’s office.

(8) Should the owner or occupant fail to pay the costs of abating and removing nuisances, submit said bill and a report of such failure to pay to the City Administrator.

(9) Maintain related records, including costs incurred, for no less than five years.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016); Ord. 1982 (2016)



4-316 Nuisances; Abatement; Police Department
The Police Department shall:

(1) Document the Department’s observations related to any noted nuisances.

(2) Document the City’s abatement of any nuisance by photograph and report.

(3) Maintain related records, including costs incurred, for no less than five years.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)



4-317 Nuisances; Abatement; City Clerk
The City Clerk shall:

(1) Upon request of any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of the lot or piece of ground notified of a nuisance, provide such person a form upon which to make a written request for a hearing.

(2) Receive and maintain the original written request for a hearing from any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of the lot or piece of ground notified of a nuisance.

(3) Confer with the City Administrator to determine if such written request was submitted within five days of notice.

(a) If the written request for a hearing was submitted within five days of notice, immediately deliver copies of the appeal to the Mayor, members of the Public Safety Committee, City Administrator, City Attorney, and Chief of Police.

(b) If the written request for a hearing was not submitted within five days of notice, immediately confer with the City Administrator, who shall direct notification of such owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of the lot or piece of ground that said request failed to meet the requirements of law.

(4) Make and retain records of any hearing related to any nuisance held by the City.

(5) Receive and record payments related to the City’s abatement of any nuisance received from the owner of the lot or piece of ground through the Public Works Department.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)



4-318 Nuisances; Abatement; Materials Collected
(1) Materials constituting a nuisance which have been abated, removed, collected, or disposed of by the City through the abatement process need not be retained by the City nor returned to any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of the lot or piece of ground.

(2) No owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of the lot or piece of ground shall have claim to any materials which have been abated, or removed, or collected, or disposed of by the City through the abatement process.

(3) Should the City redeem any value of any nuisance item, such proceeds shall be applied to the cost of the abatement, removal, collection, and disposal of a nuisance.

(4) No city employee shall directly or indirectly profit from, take ownership of, or make personal use of any materials collected or disposed of by the abatement of any nuisance from any lot or piece of ground in the Municipality or within the City’s two-mile zoning jurisdiction.

(5) Should an owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or person in possession, charge, or control of the lot or piece of ground regain control or ownership of any materials collected or disposed of through the abatement process and return such materials to the original lot or piece of ground, such materials shall immediately constitute a nuisance and a separate violation.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)



4-319 Discarded Items On Right-Of-Way; Unlawful; Penalty
(1) For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:

(a) Furniture: Any item commonly used in a household as a seat, storage container, or platform, which is comprised of one or more of the following materials: metal, plastic, fabric, wood, or compressed wood fibers (including, but not limited to, tables, chairs, sofas, couches, desks, or cabinets).

(b) Household Items: Any items used within a household not otherwise described as furniture (e.g., sports and fitness equipment, cooking apparel, televisions, stereos, computers, computer monitors, electronic devices, bicycles, toys)

(c) Motor Vehicle Parts: Any items which, in collection with others, comprise a motor vehicle, as defined by Nebraska Revised Statutes.

(d) Discarded Material: Any item upon which or nearby is a placard, sign, or message offering the item to others.

(e) Utility Holder: The person who identifies themselves to the Public Works Department as responsible for utilities on or within any lot or piece of ground within the Municipality.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, resident, or utility holder of any lot or piece of ground to maintain or permit the maintenance of any furniture, household items, motor vehicle parts, litter, or discarded material upon the right-of-way within or adjacent to said lot or piece of ground for more than twenty-four hours.

(3) Any furniture, household items, motor vehicle parts, litter, or discarded material in violation of subsection (2) shall be considered abandoned.

(4) The City Administrator may direct municipal employees to immediately remove, transport, and dispose of any furniture, household items, motor vehicle parts, litter, or discarded material in violation of subsection (2).

(5) Any owner, tenant, resident, or utility holder who violates subsection (2) shall be guilty of a violation of Municipal Code and subject to the following penalties:

(a) First offense: one hundred dollars ($100.00), second offense: two hundred dollars ($200.00), third offense: three hundred dollars ($300.00), fourth and subsequent offenses: five hundred dollars ($500.00); and,

(b) Recoverable with costs incurred by the Municipality.


Source: Ord. 1967 (2016)



Article 4 [Repealed]
Repealed. Ordinance 1967 (2016).



Article 5 Wellhead Protection Plan
4-501 Wellhead Protection Plan

4-501 Wellhead Protection Plan
Definitions. Wellhead Protection Area means the surface and subsurface area surrounding a public water supply well or well field, supplying a public water supply system, through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward and reach such water well or well field.
The City Council designated a Wellhead Protection Area for the purpose of protecting the public water supply system as referred to in Ordinance No. 1881 on February 3, 2014.
That the Wellhead Protection Plan for the City of Crete, Nebraska, dated November 2013, prepared by JEO Consulting Group, Inc. for the City of Crete, approved by the Crete City Council, is hereby adopted as the Wellhead Protection Plan for the City of Crete, Nebraska.
That a copy of theWellhead Protection Plan and a map of the Wellhead Protection Area for the City of Crete, Nebraska are on file and shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. No. 1885, 02/04/14)

Article 6 Penal Provision
4-601 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision
4-602 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision

4-601 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provision of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a violation of a Municipal Ordinance. Unless otherwise specified in the particular Article or Section for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such violation shall be in any amount not to exceed $500.00 for any one (1) offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said payment, the offender shall stand committed to the County jail until such fine and costs be paid.

(Ref. 16-246 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 1887, 02/04/14)

4-602 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision
Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this Chapter, the Municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the manner provided by law.

Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists, the court may together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of abatement as part of the judgment in the case.

(Ref. 18-1720, 18-12722 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 1887, 02/04/14)

Chapter 5 Traffic Regulations
Article 1 Definitions
Article 2 Municipal Traffic Regulations
Article 3 Prohibitions And Enforcement
Article 4 Parking
Article 5 Operator And Vehicle Qualifications
Article 6 Bicycles And Mopeds
Article 7 Pedestrians
Article 8 Snowmobiles And Minibikes
Article 9 All-Terrain Vehicles
Article 10 Penal Provision

Article 1 Definitions
5-101 Definitions

5-101 Definitions
The words and phrases used in this Chapter, pertaining to motor vehicles and traffic regulations, shall be construed as defined in Chapter 60, Article 6 of the Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as now existing or hereafter amended. If not defined in the designated statute, the word or phrase shall have its common meaning. (Ref. 60-6,312 RS Neb.)

ALLEY. The term "alley" shall mean a highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.

ARTERIAL STREET. The term "arterial street" shall mean a street designated as such by resolution of the Governing Body. (Ref. 39-602 (4) RS Neb.)

AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. The term "authorized emergency vehicle" shall mean vehicles of the Fire Department and of the Police Department of the Municipality and ambulances. (Ref. 39-602 (5) RS Neb.)

CROSSWALKS. The term "crosswalk" shall mean that portion of a roadway included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections or any other portion of the roadway distinctly indicated as a pedestrian crosswalk.

DRIVER. The term "driver" shall mean every person who drives or is in the actual physical control of a vehicle.

FOUR LANE STREET. The term "four (4) lane street" shall mean a street constructed to provide for four (4) driving lanes, two (2) on one half (1/2) of the street for vehicular traffic moving in the same direction in said two (2) lanes and also two (2) lanes on the opposite one half (1/2) of the highway for vehicular traffic moving in the same direction in said two (2) lanes with vehicular traffic in one half (1/2) of said street but traveling in a direction opposite to vehicles traveling in the other one half (1/2) of said street.

HIGHWAY. The term "highway" shall mean the entire width between the boundary limits of any street, avenue, or way which is publicly maintained and open for public vehicular traffic.

INTERSECTION OR STREET INTERSECTION. The terms "intersection" or "street intersection" shall mean the space occupied by two (2) streets at the point where they cross each other, bounded by the lot lines extended and shall include the sidewalk space as well as the roadway.

MEDIAN. The term "median" shall mean a raised portion of concrete varied in width, constructed at or near the center of a four (4) lane street.

MOTOR VEHICLES. The term "motor vehicles" shall mean every land vehicle which is self-propelled and not operated upon rails except self-propelled invalid chairs.

MUFFLER. The term "muffler" shall mean a device consisting of a series of chamber or baffle plates, or other mechanical design for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine, and effective in reducing noise.

OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS OR DEVICES. The term "official traffic signs or devices" shall mean all official traffic signs, markings, and devices, other than mechanical or electrical signals, not inconsistent with this Chapter, placed or erected by authority of the Governing Body for the purpose of directing, warning, or regulating traffic.

OPERATOR. The term "operator" shall mean every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.

OWNER. Owner shall mean a person other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a vehicle, including a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person, but excluding a lessee under a lease not intended as security.

PARK. The terms "park," "parked," and "parking" shall refer to any vehicle waiting or standing in any street or alley except when such vehicle is waiting in compliance with the direction of a traffic officer, traffic sign or signal, or driving emergencies, and except when actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.

PEDESTRIAN. The term "pedestrian" shall mean any person on foot.

POLICE OFFICER. The term "police officer" or "traffic officer" shall mean every officer of the Police Department of the Municipality or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or make arrests for the violation of traffic regulation.

RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The term "residential district" shall include the residential districts as adopted by ordinance and as appears upon the zoning map of the City of Crete.

RIGHT-OF-WAY. The term "right-of-way" shall mean the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway of one vehicle or pedestrian over another vehicle or pedestrian.

SIDEWALK. The term "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines intended for pedestrian use.

STOP. The term "stop" shall mean to cause complete cessation of movement.

STORAGE, OR TURNING LANE. The term "storage or turning lane" shall mean a lane at or near the center of a four (4) lane street as it approaches an intersection in addition to the two (2) lanes provided for moving traffic and to the left thereof providing sufficient space for entry of one (1) or more vehicles for the purpose of turning left from any said storage lane at any intersection which said storage lane approaches.

STREET. The term "street" shall mean the entire width between the boundary limits of any street, avenue, or way which is publicly maintained and open for public vehicular traffic.

VEHICLE. The term "vehicle" shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.

OTHER STATUTORY DEFINITIONS That such other definitions as set out in Nebraska Revised Statutes §39-602, as it exists now, or may later be amended, are hereby adopted by reference herein as though set out in full.

(Amended by Ord. No. 1109, 1/16/90)

Article 2 Municipal Traffic Regulations
5-201 Automatic Lights And Signals
5-202 Automatic Signal System
5-203 Right Turn On Red
5-204 Loading Zones; Designation
5-205 Truck Routes
5-206 One-Way Traffic
5-207 Emergency Snow Routes; Designation
5-208 Traffic Lanes; Designation
5-209 Arterial Streets; Designation
5-210 Turning "U" Turns
5-211 Turning; Hand Signals
5-212 Turning; Generally
5-213 Turning; Cautious
5-214 Crossing Median
5-215 Parking Prohibited; Four (4) Lane Street
5-216 Left Turn Prohibited
5-217 Turning; Proper Lane
5-218 Changing Lanes; Signal
5-219 Right-Of-Way
5-220 Right-Of-Way; Overtaking Vehicles
5-221 Right-Of-Way; Slow Moving Vehicles
5-222 Right-Of-Way Emergency Vehicles
5-223 Position Of Vehicle On Highway; Generally
5-224 Change Of Direction
5-225 Position Of Vehicle On Highway; Passing
5-226 Position Of Vehicle On Highway; Slow Vehicles
5-227 Backing
5-228 Crosswalks
5-229 Signs, Signals
5-230 Stop Signs
5-231 Signs, Traffic Control Devices, Traffic Surveillance Devices; Defacing Or Interfering With
5-232 Emergency Routes
5-233 Establishment Of Snow Emergency Routes
5-234 Deposit Of Snow And Ice On Public Property
5-235 License To Remove Snow And Ice On Public Property
5-236 Limitations On Turning Across Traffic Lane To Park
5-237 Truck Routes; Establishment By Resolution

5-201 Automatic Lights And Signals
No vehicle shall turn at any intersection where an automatic signal system is in operation except when such signal system is displaying a green light; provided, vehicles may turn on a red signal when in compliance with the provisions of this Article governing such turns. No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction at any intersection where an automatic signal system is in operation.

5-202 Automatic Signal System
At each intersection where an automatic signal system is in operation, all vehicular and pedestrian traffic crossing such street intersection shall be governed by such automatic signal system. The display of the red signal light shall be a signal for traffic to stop outside of the street intersection. The display of the yellow signal light shall announce that traffic be at attention to stop when the red light is displayed, and the green signal light shall be a signal for traffic to promptly move forward. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such signal.

5-203 Right Turn On Red
Except where a traffic-control device is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicles facing a steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn after stopping. Such turning vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within the adjacent crosswalk and to other vehicular traffic lawfully using the intersection. The Governing Body of the Municipality has the authority to prohibit turning right on red at any intersection within the Municipality where it deems such a prohibition necessary; provided, those intersections where turning right on red is prohibited shall bear signs to that effect placed and printed in such a manner so as to be conspicuous from a vehicle about to enter the intersection.

5-204 Loading Zones; Designation
The Governing Body may, by resolution, designate any portion of a street as a loading zone and shall provide for appropriate signs or markings when such street has been so designated.

5-205 Truck Routes
The Governing Body may, by resolution, designate certain streets in the Municipality that trucks shall travel upon, and it shall be unlawful for persons operating such trucks to travel on other streets than those designated for trucks, unless to pick up or deliver goods, wares, or merchandise, and in that event, the operator of such truck shall return to such truck routes as soon as possible in traveling through, or about the Municipality. The Governing Body shall cause notices to be posted, or shall erect signs indicating the streets so designated as truck routes.

(Ref. 16-209, RS Neb.)

5-206 One-Way Traffic
The Governing Body may, by resolution, provide for one-way travel in any street, or alley located in the Municipality and shall provide for appropriate signs and markings when said streets have been so designated by resolution.

5-207 Emergency Snow Routes; Designation
The Governing Body may, by resolution, designate any street as a snow route and shall provide for appropriate signs or markings when such street has been so designated.

5-208 Traffic Lanes; Designation
The Governing Body may, by resolution, mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as it may deem advisable.

5-209 Arterial Streets; Designation
The Governing Body may, by resolution, designate any street or portion thereof as an arterial street and shall provide for appropriate signs or markings when such street has been so designated.

5-210 Turning "U" Turns
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction, except at a street intersection. No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction at any intersection where an automatic signal is in operation, or where a sign is posted indicating that U-turns are prohibited.

5-211 Turning; Hand Signals
A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100') feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm, or by a signal device of a type approved by the Department of Roads. The hand and arm signals herein required shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner: STOP or decreased speed, hand and arm extended downward; LEFT TURN, hand and arm extended horizontally; RIGHT TURN, hand and arm extended upward.

5-212 Turning; Generally
Vehicles turning to the right into an intersecting street shall approach such intersection in the lane of traffic nearest, to the right hand side of the highway and must turn the corner as near the right hand curb as possible to keep between the curb to the right and the center of the intersection of the two (2) streets. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left shall approach such center line of the highway, and in turning shall pass as near as possible to the center of the intersection, passing as closely as practicable to the right thereof before turning such vehicle to the left. For the purposes of this Section, the center of the intersection shall mean the meeting point of the medial lines of the highways intersecting one another.

5-213 Turning; Cautious
The operator of a vehicle shall, before stopping, turning, or changing the course of such vehicle, see that there is sufficient space to make such movement in safety. If any pedestrian might be affected by such movement, the operator shall give a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn, and whenever the operation of any other vehicle may be affected by such movement, he shall give some unmistakable signal to the driver of all other vehicles of his intention to make such movement.

5-214 Crossing Median
No person or vehicle shall use or travel over or on any medians for any purpose. No vehicle shall enter or traverse any opening provided in any median for a railroad track crossing.

5-215 Parking Prohibited; Four (4) Lane Street
No vehicle shall park or stop for any purpose whatsoever upon a four (4) lane street, or upon the right-of-way of such street.

5-216 Left Turn Prohibited
No vehicle shall turn left from the right traveling lane of either half of the traveling portions of a four (4) lane street.

5-217 Turning; Proper Lane
No vehicle shall make a left turn at any intersection on a four (4) lane street without first entering the storage or turning lane where a storage or turning lane is provided at any such intersection.

5-218 Changing Lanes; Signal
All traffic entering a four (4) lane street shall travel on either of the right two (2) lanes provided for travel. Before movement of a vehicle from one (1) lane to the other lane for any purpose, including passing, the operator of such vehicle shall give adequate signal of such movement. Adequate signal may be given by use of an automatic turn signal indicating left or right turn, or by arm signal indicating left or right turn.

5-219 Right-Of-Way
When two (2) vehicles approach, or enter an intersection at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right when the paths of such vehicles intersect and there is danger of a collision, unless otherwise directed by a Municipal Policeman stationed at the intersection.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection, or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
The driver of a vehicle on any street shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing such street within any clearly marked crosswalk or at any regular pedestrian crossing at the end of a block where the movement of traffic is being regulated by traffic officers or traffic direction devices. Every pedestrian crossing a street at any point other than a pedestrian crossing, crosswalk, or intersection shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles upon the street.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from or entering an alley, building, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian approaching on any sidewalk.
The driver of a vehicle entering a Municipal street from a private road or drive shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such streets.
The driver of a vehicle upon a street shall yield the right-of-way to authorized emergency vehicles when the latter are operated upon official business and the drivers thereof make proper use of visual or audible signals.
(Ref. 60-6,146 through 60-6,154 RS Neb.)

5-220 Right-Of-Way; Overtaking Vehicles
The driver of a vehicle about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle approaching from the rear shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle.

(Ref. 60-6,133 RS Neb.)

5-221 Right-Of-Way; Slow Moving Vehicles
Vehicles moving slowly shall keep as close as possible to the curb on the right, allowing more swiftly moving vehicles free passage to their left. Vehicles in motion shall be kept between the curb at the right and the center of the street.

(Ref. 60-6,133, 60-680 RS Neb.)

5-222 Right-Of-Way Emergency Vehicles
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, every vehicle within one (1) block of the route of such emergency vehicle shall immediately stop, except at the time they are on or crossing a street intersection. In which event, such vehicle shall drive clear of the street intersection and then stop. Every vehicle along the route of such emergency vehicle shall immediately move to a position as near the right hand curb as possible and remain there until such authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles have passed; provided, said vehicles are operated on official business and the drivers thereof make use of proper visual or audible signals.

(Ref. 60-6,151 RS Neb.)

5-223 Position Of Vehicle On Highway; Generally
Upon all highways of sufficient width, one-way streets excepted, the driver of a vehicle shall drive the same on the right half of the roadway. In passing or meeting other vehicles, drivers shall give each other at least one-half (1/2) of the main traveled portion of the roadway.

(Ref. 60-6,131 RS Neb.)

5-224 Change Of Direction
No vehicle shall cross from one (1) side of the street to the other except at a street intersection; provided, upon appropriate hand signal given indicating a change of direction, vehicles may cross from one (1) side of the street to another when entering or departing from alley entrance, filling station or garage. Vehicles moving in opposite directions must pass each other by keeping to the right, each giving to the other an equal portion of the street.

5-225 Position Of Vehicle On Highway; Passing
A vehicle shall not be driven to the left of the center line of the highway in overtaking or passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and free from oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance to permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety.

(Ref. 60-6,136 RS Neb.)

5-226 Position Of Vehicle On Highway; Slow Vehicles
Vehicles moving slowly shall keep as close as possible to the curb on the right, allowing more swiftly moving vehicles free passage on the left.

(Ref. 60-6,133, 60-680 RS Neb.)

5-227 Backing
Before backing, ample warning shall be given and while backing, unceasing vigilance must be exercised not to injure those behind. The driver of a parked vehicle about to back shall give moving vehicles the right-of-way.

(Ref. 60-6,169, 60-680 RS Neb.)

5-228 Crosswalks
The Governing Body may, by resolution, establish and maintain, by appropriate devices, markers, or lines upon the street, crosswalks, at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street, and at such other places as they may deem necessary.

(Ref. 60-680 RS Neb.)

5-229 Signs, Signals
The Governing Body may, by resolution, provide for the placing of stop signs, or other signs, signals, standards, or mechanical devices in any street or alley under the Municipality's jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, or prohibiting traffic thereon. Such resolution shall describe the portion of the street or alley wherein traffic is to be regulated or prohibited; the regulation or prohibition; the location where such sign, signal, standard or mechanical device shall be placed; and the hours when such regulation or prohibition shall be effective. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with such regulation, or prohibition.

(Ref. 60-6,119 through 60-6,121, 60-680 RS Neb.)

5-230 Stop Signs
Every person operating any vehicle shall, upon approaching any stop sign erected in accordance with the resolution prescribed heretofore, cause such vehicle to come to a complete stop before entering or crossing any street, highway, or railroad crossing. The vehicle operator shall stop at a marked stop line, or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk; but if neither is indicated, then as near the right-of-way line of the intersecting roadway as possible.

(Ref. 60-6,119 through 60-6,121, 60-680 RS Neb.)

5-231 Signs, Traffic Control Devices, Traffic Surveillance Devices; Defacing Or Interfering With
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously deface, injure, remove, obstruct, knock down or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal, traffic control device, or traffic control surveillance device.

(Ref. 60-6,129, 60-6,130 RS Neb.)

5-232 Emergency Routes
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or allow to remained parked any motor vehicle at any time on an emergency route as designated after an emergency has been declared by the Mayor or his/her designated representative.
Streets which are emergency routes shall be designated by ordinance. The City shall place appropriate signs or other traffic control devices indicating the existence of such emergency routes. A designation of any street, avenue, road or highway, or portion thereof as an emergency route shall in no way affect any previous designation of that street, avenue, road or highway for any other purposes.
Whenever the Mayor, or his/her designated representative, shall find, on the basis of falling snow, sleet or freezing rain, or on the basis of an official forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau, of snow, sleet, or freezing rain, or that other weather conditions, such as tornado or violent electrical storms, will make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on City emergency routes be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing, and/or other purposes, the Mayor or his/her designated representative may place into effect a parking prohibition on all emergency routes by declaring that an emergency condition exists. In such declaration of emergency conditions, the Mayor or his/her designated representative shall state the time that said emergency shall be in effect and from the time so designated, it shall be unlawful to park or allow to remain parked any motor vehicle on emergency routes. Once in effect, such parking prohibition imposed shall remain in effect until terminated by declaration of the Mayor or his/her designated representative; provided however, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other provision of law.
Whenever the Mayor or his/her designated representative shall find on the basis of accumulated snow, falling snow, sleet, freezing rain, on the basis of an official forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau, of snow, sleet or freezing rain, or by other weather conditions such as tornado or violent electrical storms, that conditions make it necessary that parking on local and residential streets, be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and/or other purposes, he or she may put into effect a parking prohibition on parts of or on all local and residential streets by declaring that parking be prohibited on one side of the local and residential streets, designating either the odd or even address numbered side, at his or her discretion, and, by declaring that parking be prohibited within the turnaround area of a circular area of a cul-de-sac. In such declaration, the Mayor or his/her designated representative shall state the date and time on which such parking prohibition shall take effect. The prohibition shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the Mayor or his/her designated representative, who may then declare that there shall be in effect a parking prohibition on the opposite side of those local and residential streets designated above, which prohibition shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the Mayor or his/her designated representative while the prohibition is in effect, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any side of a street whereon parking is prohibited.
Whenever any emergency has been declared pursuant to this Article, it shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle on an emergency route to allow such vehicle to become stalled or stuck for any reason. Whenever a motor vehicle becomes stalled or stuck for any reason whether or not in violation of this Article, on any emergency route on which there is a parking prohibition in effect, the person operating such vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway of such emergency route, either onto the nearest cross street which is not a emergency route, or other appropriate location. No person shall abandon or leave his vehicle in the roadway of an emergency route, except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time necessary to go to a nearby telephone or to a nearby garage, gasoline station, or other place of assistance and return without delay.
All members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove or have removed a vehicle from a street to another place or location on a street or to a lot, garage, storage yard, or other similar facility designated by the Police Department when:
The vehicle is parked on an emergency route on which a parking prohibition is in effect.
The vehicle is stalled on an emergency route on which there is a parking prohibition in effect and the person who is operating said vehicle does not appear to be removing it in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
The vehicle is parked on any street in violation of any parking prohibition or provision of law contained in this Article and is interfering or about to interfere with snow removal operations or any other weather conditions.
The Police Department may cause such vehicles to be removed to a private lot, garage, storage yard, or other similar facility, and such vehicle shall not be released there from except upon payment by the owner of the vehicle to the person or persons in charge of the lot, garage, storage yard or other similar facility for the cost of towing, and a receipt for such fees shall be issued to the owner of the vehicle. It shall be the duty of the person or persons in charge of the lot, garage, storage yard or other similar facility designed by the Police Department to keep a record of the name of the owner of all vehicles towed in under the provisions hereof, together with the registration number of each vehicle, and the nature and circumstances of each violation, and the amount of fees collected hereunder, and to deliver a report of each transaction to the Chief of Police weekly.
The Mayor or his/her designated representative shall cause, each declaration of an emergency made by him, to be publicly announced by means of broadcast or telecast from broadcasting stations with a normal operating range covering the City, and he/she may cause such declaration to be further announced in newspapers of general circulation whenever feasible. Each announcement shall describe the action taken by the Mayor or his/her designated representative, including the time it became or will become effective, and shall specify the streets or areas affected. The Mayor or his/her designated representative shall make or cause to be made a record of each time and date when any declaration is announced to the public by issuing an executive order as soon after the declaration of an emergency as is feasible. Whenever the Mayor or his/her designated representative shall find that some or all of the conditions which gave rise to a parking prohibition placed in effect pursuant to the provisions of this Article no longer exist, he/she may declare the prohibition terminated, in whole or in part, effective immediately upon announcement or at a later specified time.
Any provision of this Article which becomes effective by declaration of the Mayor or his/her designated representative upon the occurrence of an emergency, while temporarily in effect, takes precedence over other conflicting provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not take precedence over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a Police Officer.
5-233 Establishment Of Snow Emergency Routes
The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to establish snow emergency routes upon any street or highway of the city and may place appropriate signs, marks, lines, signals or other traffic control devices indicating the existence of said snow emergency routes. Such designation of any street, highway or portion thereof as a snow emergency route shall in no way affect any previous designation of the street or highway as an arterial or other road designation.

(Ord. No. 1604; 04/20/04)

5-234 Deposit Of Snow And Ice On Public Property
No person shall deposit, throw, blow or otherwise dispose of any snow, ice or hard packed snow on any public property, street, alley or other public way except for the sidewalks in the downtown area, as defined by the Director of Public Works, which snow shall be returned to the curb-line dividing the streets and sidewalks in said designated area.

(Ord. No. 1604; 04/20/04)

5-235 License To Remove Snow And Ice On Public Property
Definitions: For purpose of this ordinance the words "remove snow and/or ice on public property" shall be deemed to be any service or system which purports to furnish or does furnish, for consideration, any snow, ice and/or hard packed snow removal service from sidewalks or other public ways located on public property or for pushing or carrying of snow, ice and or hard packed snow on or across public property, but shall not include the removal of snow, ice and/or hard packed snow without consideration or remuneration, or for anyone under the age of 16 years performing the service, whether for consideration or not.
Permit required: It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as principal or agent, to engage in the business of conducting or maintaining or soliciting business for any snow, ice and/or hard packed snow removal on public property without first obtaining a permit from the Public Works Director for the City therefore, and without paying the annual license fee hereinafter provided for.
Applications; Granting Permit: Before any person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of conducting or maintaining any snow, ice and/or hard packed snow removal on public property in the City, he or she shall make an application in writing to the Public Works Director for permission to engage in such business, and describe therein what, where and how the service will be conducted.
Terms and Conditions of Permits:
Any such permit and license issued pursuant thereto may at any time be revoked, for cause, by the Public Works Director and shall be for a period of one year.
The person, firm or corporation operating service in the City shall comply with all laws ordinances and shall maintain such public liability property damage insurance and such an amount as may required by the City, from time to time.
Fee: Every person, firm or corporation as herein provided conducting any conducting any snow, ice and/or hard packed snow removal service shall pay a license fee to the City of ten dollars ($10.00) per annum, payable yearly, in advance.
(Ord. No. 1604; 04/20/04)

5-236 Limitations On Turning Across Traffic Lane To Park
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed into and or across the oncoming lane of traffic, on any two way, two or more lane street so as to turn into a parking stall on the opposite side of the street.

(Ord. No. 1627; 01/18/05)

5-237 Truck Routes; Establishment By Resolution
The City Council may by resolution designate certain streets in the City that trucks shall travel upon and it shall be unlawful for persons operating such trucks to travel on other streets than those designated by such resolution for trucks, unless to pick up or deliver goods, wares or merchandise, and in that event the operator of such truck shall return to such truck routes as soon as possible in traveling through or about the City. The council shall cause notices to be posted or shall erect signs indicating the streets so designated as truck routes.
For purposes of this section truck shall mean any motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
(Ord. No. 1863; 07/02/13)

Article 3 Prohibitions And Enforcement
5-301 Littering
5-302 Glass; Pointed Objects
5-303 Signs; Defacing Or Interfering With
5-304 Signs; Unauthorized Display
5-305 Siren Signaling Devices
5-306 Display Of Merchandise In Parking Zone
5-307 Intersections; Obstructing Prohibited
5-308 Service Charge
5-309 Speed Limits
5-310 Speed, Near Schools
5-311 Speed; Electronic Detection
5-312 Driving Under The Influence
5-312.01 Willful Reckless Driving
5-312.02 Reckless Driving
5-312.03 Careless Driving
5-312.04 Driving Under The Influence; Person Under Twenty-One Years Of Age
5-313 Negligent Driving
5-314 Backing
5-315 Unnecessary Stopping
5-316 Passing; Intersections
5-317 Passing; Hindrance
5-318 Driving Abreast
5-319 Following; Distance
5-320 Following; Fire Apparatus
5-321 Crowding; Front Seat
5-322 Dragging; Rope, Chain
5-323 New Pavement, Driving Over
5-324 Riding Outside Vehicle
5-325 Driving In Sidewalk Space
5-326 Emerging From Alley Or Driveway
5-327 Vehicle; Muffler
5-328 Soliciting Rides
5-329 Abandoned Vehicles
5-330 Advertising Vehicles
5-331 Accident; Driver's Duty
5-332 Accident; Penalty
5-333 Emergency, Regulations
5-334 Police; Enforcement
5-335 Police; Refusal To Obey
5-336 Police; Traffic Officers
5-337 Loads; Projecting
5-338 Loads; Spilling Or Shifting
5-339 Radar Device; Prohibited
5-340 Child Passengers; Use Of Restraint System Or Occupant Protection System
5-340.01 Occupant Protection Systems; Requirements
5-341 Speed Limits Established
5-342 Authorized Emergency Vehicles; Privileges Condition
5-343 Engine Compression Brakes; Use Unlawful; Penalty For Use
5-344 School Crossing Zones; Designation
3-345 School Crossing Zones; Overtaking And Passing

5-301 Littering
It shall be unlawful for any person to drop, or cause to be left, upon any municipal highway, street, or alley, except at places designated by the Governing Body, any rubbish, debris, or waste, and any person so doing shall be guilty of littering.

(Ref. 39-683 R.S. Neb.)

5-302 Glass; Pointed Objects
No person shall throw, cast, lay, or place upon any street any thorns, nails, tacks, glass, bottles, window glass, or other articles made of, or containing, glass, and in case of an accident causing the breaking of any glass upon any street, the owner or person in charge of such glass, or the person responsible for such breakage, shall at once remove, or cause the same to be removed, from the street.

(Ref. 39-683 R.S. Neb.)

5-303 Signs; Defacing Or Interfering With
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure, remove, obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal.

(Ref. 39-619 R.S. Neb.)

5-304 Signs; Unauthorized Display
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or display upon, or in view of any street, any unofficial sign, signal, or device which purports to be, is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic sign or signal which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view, or interferes with the effectiveness of any official sign or signal. Every such prohibited sign, signal, or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and any police officer is hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed, without notice.

(Ref. 39-618 RS Neb.)

5-305 Siren Signaling Devices
Siren signaling devices shall not be used on any vehicle except those operated by the Police Department, Fire Department, the Sheriff, and authorized utility vehicles when on emergency calls. No person shall make or cause to be made any unnecessary noise with any signal device or use the same except as a road signal.

5-306 Display Of Merchandise In Parking Zone
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any parking stall, lane, or space for the display of merchandise, goods, or wares, or for any purpose whatsoever, except the parking of motor vehicles; and no parking stall, lane, or space shall be blocked, or barricaded by any person; provided, however, parking areas may be temporarily blocked, used, or barricaded for construction and other necessary purposes, by obtaining special permission therefor from the Municipal Police.

5-307 Intersections; Obstructing Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, plant, construct, maintain or permit to exist any hedge, tree, bush, sign, fence, building or any other natural or artificial obstruction to vision of drivers of motor vehicles approaching on intersecting streets, whether said obstruction be on the street, the street parking, or on the private property of such person. When such obstruction is found to exist, the Municipal Police shall notify the owner or occupant of said premises to forthwith remove the same, and in the event the owner or occupant shall fail to remove the same within five (5) days of such notice, the City may remove the obstruction at the expense of the owner or occupant of said premises.

5-308 Service Charge
A charge shall be made upon the owners, renter, lessee or the person otherwise having possession or in charge of a trailer or vehicle designed and used for camping and camping living quarters for parking in the City Park in the amount of eight ($8.00) dollar for each day such trailer or vehicle is parked in the City Park. For the purpose of said service charge a day shall consist of one twenty-four (24) hour period. The Mayor and Council may by resolution increase or decrease the service charge and increase or decrease the number of days after which a service charge shall be made.

5-309 Speed Limits
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, alley, or other place at a rate of speed grater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour within the residential district, and twenty (20) miles per hour within the business district, unless a different rate of speed is specifically permitted by ordinance. In no instance shall a person drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions. Where a different maximum speed is set by ordinance, appropriate signs shall be posted.

(Ref. 39-662, 39-663 R.S. Neb.)

5-310 Speed, Near Schools
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, when passing premises on which school grounds are located, and which are used for school purposes, during school recess, or while children are going to, or leaving school during the opening or closing hours, to drive said vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour past said premises, unless a greater speed is allowed by resolution of the Governing Body, and such driver shall stop at all stop signs located at, or near, such school premises, and it shall be unlawful for such driver to make a U-turn at any intersection where such stop signs are located at, or near, such school premise.

(Ref. 39-663 R.S. Neb.)

5-311 Speed; Electronic Detection
Determinations made regarding the speed of any motor vehicle based upon the visual observation of any law enforcement officer may be corroborated by the use of radio microwaves or other electronic device. The results of such radio microwave or other electronic speed measurement may be accepted as competent evidence of the speed of such motor vehicle in any court or legal proceeding when the speed of the vehicle is at issue. Before the Municipality may offer in evidence the results of such radio microwave or other electronic speed measurement for the purpose of establishing the speed of any motor vehicle, the, Municipality shall prove the following:

The measuring device was in proper working order at the time of conducting the measurement;
The measuring device was being operated in such a manner and under such conditions so as to allow a minimum possibility of distortion or outside interference;
The person operating such device and interpreting such measurement was qualified by training and experience to properly test and operate the device; and
The operator conducted external tests of accuracy upon the measuring device, within a reasonable time both prior to and subsequent to an arrest being made, and the measuring device was found to be in proper working order.
The driver of any such motor vehicle may be arrested without a warrant under the authority herein granted if the arresting officer is in uniform or displays his or her badge of authority; provided, that such officer shall have observed the recording of the speed of such motor vehicle by the radio microwaves, or other electronic device or had received a radio message from the officer who observed the speed of the motor vehicle recorded by the radio microwaves or other electronic device. In the event of an arrest based on such a message, such radio message must have been dispatched immediately after the speed of the motor vehicle had been recorded, and must include a description of the vehicle and the recorded speed.

(Ref. 39-664 R.S. Neb.)

5-312 Driving Under The Influence
For purposes of this section:
Motor vehicle shall mean a vehicle required by Neb. RS 60-6,266 to be equipped with an occupant protection system; and
Occupant protection system shall have the meaning provided in Neb. RS 60-6,265.
Except as provided in subdivision B,2, no driver shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or street unless the driver and each front-seat occupant in the vehicle are wearing occupant protection systems and all occupant protection systems worn are properly adjusted and fastened.
The following persons shall not be required to wear an occupant protection system:
A person who possesses written verification from a physician that the person is unable to wear an occupant protection system for medical reasons;
A rural letter carrier of the United States Postal Service while performing his or her duties as a rural letter carrier between the first and last delivery points; and
A member of an emergency medical service while involved in patient care. (Neb. RS 60-6,270)
All persons being transported in a motor vehicle operated by a holder of a provisional operator's permit or a school permit shall use such motor vehicle's occupant protection system. (Neb. RS 60-6,267)
Enforcement of divisions B and C of shall be accomplished only as a secondary action when an operator of a motor vehicle has been cited or charged with a violation of some other offense. (Neb. RS 60-6,268, 60-6,271)
Regardless of the number of persons in such vehicle not wearing an occupant protection system pursuant to division B, only one violation shall be assessed against the driver of such motor vehicle for each time the motor vehicle is stopped and a violation of such section is found.
(Neb. RS 60-6,272) (Ord. No. 1593, 08/05/03)

5-312.01 Willful Reckless Driving
Any person who drives any motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate a willful disregard for the safety of persons or property shall be guilty of willful reckless driving.

(Ref. 60-6,214 R.S. Neb.)

5-312.02 Reckless Driving
Any person who drives any motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate an indifferent or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property shall be guilty of reckless driving.

(Ref. 60-6,213 R.S. Neb.)

5-312.03 Careless Driving
Any person who drives any motor vehicle in this state carelessly or without due caution so as to endanger a person or property shall be guilty of careless driving.

(Ref. 60-6,212 R.S. Neb.)

5-312.04 Driving Under The Influence; Person Under Twenty-One Years Of Age
It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to operate or be in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle:
When such person has a concentration of two-hundredths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of his or her blood but less than the concentration prescribed under subdivision (1)(b) of Neb. RS 60-6,196; or
When such person has a concentration of two-hundredths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of his or her breath but less than the concentration prescribed under subdivision (1)(c) of Neb. RS 60-6,196.
Any person who operates or has in his or her actual physical control a motor vehicle in the state shall be deemed to have given his or her consent to submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood or breath for the purposes of determining the concentration of alcohol in such blood or breath.
Any peace officer who has been duly authorized to make arrests for violations of traffic laws of this state or of ordinances of the municipality may require any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood or breath for the purpose of determining the concentration of alcohol in such blood or breath when the officer has probable cause to believe that such person was driving or was in actual physical control of a motor vehicle in the municipality in violation of this section. Such peace officer may require such person to submit to a preliminary breath test. Any person who refuses to submit to such preliminary breath test or whose preliminary breath test results indicate an alcohol concentration in violation of this section shall be placed under arrest.
Any person arrested as provided in this section may, upon the direction of a peace officer, be required to submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood or breath for a determination of the concentration of alcohol. If the chemical test discloses the presence of a concentration of alcohol in violation of this section, or such person refuses to submit to such test or tests required pursuant to this section shall be guilty of an offense.
Upon the conviction of any person for the violation of this section, there shall be assessed as part of the court costs the fee charged by any physician or any agency administering tests pursuant to a permit issued in accordance with Neb. RS 60-6,201, for the test administered and the analysis thereof if such test was actually made.
(Neb. R.S. 60-6,211.01; 60-6,211.02; 60-6,203) (Ord. 1453; 08/03/99) (Ord. 1496; 07/03/00)

5-313 Negligent Driving
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause unnecessary noise, spinning or squealing of tires, skids, slides, abrupt turns or sways or in any other manner as to indicate a want of ordinary care and caution that a person of ordinary prudence would use under like circumstances.

5-314 Backing
It shall be unlawful for any person to back a motor vehicle on the Municipal streets except to park in or to remove the vehicle from a permitted parking position, to move the vehicle from a driveway, or to back to the curb for unloading where such unloading is permitted; provided, a vehicle shall be backed only when such movement can be made in safety and in no case shall the distance of the backing exceed one and one half (1-1/2) lengths of the vehicle.

5-315 Unnecessary Stopping
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop any vehicle on any public street or alley, other than in permitted parking areas, except when such a stop is necessary for emergency situations, to comply with traffic control devices and regulations, or to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians or to other vehicles.

5-316 Passing; Intersections
The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, while traversing a street intersection, if such passing requires such overtaking vehicle to drive to the left of the center of the street.

5-317 Passing; Hindrance
The driver of a vehicle about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.

5-318 Driving Abreast
Two (2) or more vehicles shall not be driven abreast except when passing, or when traversing a multi-lane or one-way street; provided, motorcycles may be driven no more than two (2) abreast in a single lane.

5-319 Following; Distance
The operator of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent having due regard for the speed of the vehicles, and the traffic and condition of the street.

5-320 Following; Fire Apparatus
The driver of any vehicle shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred (500') feet, or drive into, or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.

5-321 Crowding; Front Seat
No person shall drive a motor vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there is in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of such vehicle.

5-322 Dragging; Rope, Chain
No person shall permit any rope, strap, chain or other article to drop behind any vehicle while in use on the streets, except persons operating vehicles transporting gasoline, benzene or other flammable materials.

5-323 New Pavement, Driving Over
No person shall drive any vehicle over or across any newly laid pavement in any public street, across or around which pavement there is a barrier or over or near which there is a person or a sign warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement. No person shall drive a vehicle over, against or upon any traffic barrier or sign stating that the street or alley is closed.

5-324 Riding Outside Vehicle
No person shall permit any other person to ride on the running board, hood, top, or fenders of any motor vehicle. Nor shall any person ride on the running board, hood, top, or fenders of any motor vehicle.

5-325 Driving In Sidewalk Space
No motor vehicle or livestock shall be driven or ridden within any sidewalk space, except a permanent or temporary driveway.

(Ref. 16-210 R.S. Neb)

5-326 Emerging From Alley Or Driveway
All vehicles before crossing a sidewalk when emerging from a garage, alley, filling station or other place within the Business District shall come to a complete stop, and, after giving sufficient warning, shall proceed slowly while crossing such sidewalk or leaving such garage, alley, filling station or other place. The term slowly shall be construed to mean such rate of speed as is reasonable and proper under the circumstances and the condition of the street and the traffic thereon.

Every driver of any vehicle when approaching or about to drive over any sidewalk or sidewalk space, except at a street intersection or at an alley intersection shall bring such vehicle to a complete stop and shall then proceed in a careful and cautious manner, having due regard for the use of such sidewalk or sidewalk space by pedestrians.

5-327 Vehicle; Muffler
Every motor vehicle operated within this Municipality shall be provided with a muffler in good working order to prevent excessive or unusual noise or smoke. No person shall modify or change the exhaust muffler, intake muffler or any other noise abatement device of a motor vehicle in a manner such that the noise emitted by the motor vehicle is increased above that emitted by the vehicle as originally manufactured. It shall be unlawful to use a "muffler cutout" on any motor vehicle upon any streets; provided, the provisions of this Section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.

(Ref. 60-2209 R.S. Neb.)

5-328 Soliciting Rides
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand on the traveled portion of any street or alley for the purpose of soliciting rides from the driver of a vehicle.

5-329 Abandoned Vehicles
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop at which has been left a motor vehicle of unknown ownership for a period of fifteen (15) consecutive days without being removed by its owner or any other person duly authorized to remove the same, shall report to the Police Department, giving the name, engine number, manufacturer's serial number, registration plate number, and the name and address of the person abandoning same, if known.

5-330 Advertising Vehicles
No advertising vehicle shall be allowed in any street or alley in the City. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the putting of business notices upon ordinary business vehicles, so long as such business vehicle is engaged in the usual business or regular work of the owner and not used merely or primarily for advertisement. No motor vehicle shall have any poster, sign, picture or advertising material on the windshield or glass of the side or rear window thereof and no person shall, by himself or through his agent, place or post any poster, sign, picture or advertising material on the windshield or glass of either his own motor vehicle or that of any other person.

5-331 Accident; Driver's Duty
Except as provided in subsection A,2 of this division, the driver of any vehicle involved in an accident either upon a public highway, private road, or private drive, resulting in damage to property, shall:
Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident; and
Give his or her name, address, telephone number, and operator's license number to the owner of the property struck or the driver or occupants of any other vehicle involved in the collision.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident either upon a public highway, private road, or private drive, resulting in damage to an unattended vehicle or property, shall immediately stop such vehicle and leave in a conspicuous place in or on the unattended vehicle or property a written notice containing the information required by subsection A,1 of this division. In addition, such driver shall, without unnecessary delay, report the collision, by telephone or otherwise, to an appropriate peace officer. (Neb. RS 60-696)
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident upon either a public highway, private road, or private drive, resulting in injury or death to any person, shall:
Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident;
Give his or her name and address and the registration number of the vehicle and exhibit his or her operator's license to the person struck or the driver or occupants of any vehicle collided with; and
Render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying of such person to a physician or surgeon for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or is requested by the injured person.
(Neb. RS 60-69.7) (Ord. No. 1589, 08/05/03)

5-332 Accident; Penalty
(Repealed by Ord. No. 1589, 08/05/03)

5-333 Emergency, Regulations
The Chief of Police and Police Officers shall direct all traffic in conformity with the law, or in event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to insure safety as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of law.

(Ref. 60-435 R.S. Neb.)

5-334 Police; Enforcement
The Municipal Police are hereby authorized, empowered, and ordered to exercise all powers, and duties, with relation to the management of street traffic and to direct, control, stop, restrict, regulate, and, when necessary, temporarily divert, or exclude, in the interest of public safety, health, and convenience the movement of pedestrian, animal, and vehicular traffic of every kind in streets, parks, and on bridges. The driver of any vehicle shall stop upon the signal of any police officer.

(Ref. 16-132 R.S. Neb)

5-335 Police; Refusal To Obey
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, or fail to comply with, any lawful order, signal, or direction of a police officer.

5-336 Police; Traffic Officers
The Governing Body or the Municipal Police may at any time detail officers, to be known as "traffic officers". As an extension of the Municipal Police, traffic officers shall be vested with the authority to regulate and control traffic at the location where assigned. It shall be their duty to direct the movement of traffic and prevent congestion and accidents. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any order or signal of any such traffic officer notwithstanding the directive of a stop sign or signal device located in the vicinity of such traffic officer.

(Amended by Ord. 1975, 7/5/2016)

5-337 Loads; Projecting
When any vehicle shall be loaded in such a manner that any portion of the load extends more than four feet (4') beyond the rear of the bed or the body of such vehicle, a red flag of not less than twelve inches (12") both in length and width shall be carried by day, and red light after sunset at the extreme rear end of such load.

5-338 Loads; Spilling Or Shifting
No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping from the vehicle.
No person shall transport any sand, gravel, rock less than two inches in diameter, or refuse in any vehicle on any hard-surfaced highway if such material protrudes above the sides of that part of the vehicle in which it is being transported unless such material is enclosed or completely covered with canvas or similar covering.
No person shall drive or move a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer upon any highway unless the cargo or contents carried by the motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer are properly distributed and adequately secured to prevent the falling of cargo or contents from the vehicle. The tailgate, doors, tarpaulins, and any other equipment used in the operation of the motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer or in the distributing or securing of the cargo or contents carried by the motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer shall be secured to prevent cargo or contents falling from the vehicle. The means of securement to the motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer must be either tie downs and tie down assemblies of adequate strength or sides, sideboards, or stakes and a rear end gate, end board, or stakes strong enough and high enough to assure that cargo or contents will not fall from the vehicle.
(Neb. RS 60-6,304) (Ord. No. 1591, 08/05/03)

5-339 Radar Device; Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or possess any radar transmission device while operating a motor vehicle on any road, street, highway, or interstate highway in this Municipality; except that this section shall not apply to any such device which has been lawfully licensed by the Federal Communications Commission or is being used by law enforcement officials in their official duties.

For purposes of this section unless the context otherwise requires:

Radar transmission device shall mean any mechanism designed to interfere with the reception of radio microwaves in the electromagnetic spectrum, which microwaves, commonly referred to as radar, are employed by law enforcement officials to measure the speed of motor vehicles;
Possession shall mean to have a device defined above in a motor vehicle if such device is not:
Disconnected from all power sources and
In the rear trunk, which shall include the spare tire compartment or any other compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while such vehicle is in operation. If no such compartment exists in a vehicle, then such device must be disconnected from all power sources and be placed in a position not readily accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle, and
Transceiver shall mean an apparatus contained in a single housing, functioning alternately as a radio transmitter and receiver.
5-340 Child Passengers; Use Of Restraint System Or Occupant Protection System
Any person who drives any motor vehicle which has or is required to have an occupant protection system shall ensure that:
All children up to six years of age being transported in such vehicle use a child passenger restraint system of a type which meets Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 213 as developed by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, as such standard existed on July 20, 2002, and which is correctly installed in such vehicle; and
All children six years of age and less than sixteen years of age being transported in such vehicle use an occupant protection system.

This division A shall apply to every motor vehicle which is equipped with an occupant protection system or is required to be equipped with restraint systems pursuant to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208, as such standard existed on July 20, 2002, except taxicabs, mopeds, motorcycles, and any motor vehicle designated by the manufacturer as a 1963 year model or earlier which is not equipped with an occupant protection system.
Whenever any licensed physician determines, through accepted medical procedures, that use of a child passenger restraint system by a particular child would be harmful by reason of the child's weight, physical condition, or other medical reason, the provisions of division A shall be waived. The driver of any vehicle transporting such a child shall carry on his or her person or in the vehicle a signed written statement of the physician identifying the child and stating the grounds for such waiver.
The drivers of authorized emergency vehicles shall not be subject to the requirements of division A when operating such authorized emergency vehicles pursuant to their employment. (Neb. RS 60-6,267)
The failure to provide a child restraint system for more than one child in the same vehicle at the same time, as required in division A, shall not be treated as a separate offense.
Enforcement of division A,2 shall be accomplished only as a secondary action when an operator of a motor vehicle has been cited or charged with a violation of some other offense.
(Neb. RS 60-6,268) (Ord. No. 1592, 08/05/03)

5-340.01 Occupant Protection Systems; Requirements
For purposes of this section:
Motor vehicle shall mean a vehicle required by Neb. RS 60-6,266 to be equipped with an occupant protection system; and
Occupant protection system shall have the meaning provided in Neb. RS 60-6,265.
Except as provided in subdivision B,2, no driver shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or street unless the driver and each front-seat occupant in the vehicle are wearing occupant protection systems and all occupant protection systems worn are properly adjusted and fastened.
The following persons shall not be required to wear an occupant protection system:
A person who possesses written verification from a physician that the person is unable to wear an occupant protection system for medical reasons;
A rural letter carrier of the United States Postal Service while performing his or her duties as a rural letter carrier between the first and last delivery points; and
A member of an emergency medical service while involved in patient care. (Neb. RS 60-6,270)
All persons being transported in a motor vehicle operated by a holder of a provisional operator's permit or a school permit shall use such motor vehicle's occupant protection system. (Neb. RS 60-6,267)
Enforcement of divisions B and C of shall be accomplished only as a secondary action when an operator of a motor vehicle has been cited or charged with a violation of some other offense. (Neb. RS 60-6,268, 60-6,271)
Regardless of the number of persons in such vehicle not wearing an occupant protection system pursuant to division B, only one violation shall be assessed against the driver of such motor vehicle for each time the motor vehicle is stopped and a violation of such section is found.
(Neb. RS 60-6,272) (Ord. No. 1590, 08/05/03)

5-341 Speed Limits Established
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any streets or other place within the City at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper having regard for the traffic and roadway and the condition of the streets or at such a speed as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person, and under no circumstances in excess of the following speeds, which are hereby declared to be prima facie lawful:

On State Highway No. 33 in the City, East City limits (Junction of State Highways Nos. 33 and 103) and Boswell Avenue, Fifty (50) miles per hour.

On State Highway No. 33 in the City, Boswell Avenue and 300 feet north of Seventeenth Street, forty (40) miles per hour.

On State Highway No. 33 in the City, between 300 feet north of Seventeenth Street and Kingwood Avenue, thirty (30) miles per hour.

On State Highway No. 33 between Kingwood Avenue and Oak Avenue, twenty-five (25) miles per hour.

On State Highway No. 33 between Oak Avenue and Sycamore Avenue, thirty-five (35) miles per hour.

On State Highway No. 33, between Sycamore Avenue and the west approach of the Big Blue River bridge, forty (40) miles per hour.

On State Highway No. 33 between the west approach of the Big Blue River Bridge and 600 feet west of the Junction of State Highways Nos. 33 and 103, fifty (50) miles per hour.

On Main Street between Thirteenth Street South to the South City Limits of the City of Crete, Nebraska, twenty-five (25) mile per hour.

On Thirteenth Street between Code Avenue and Four Hundred feet (400') East of Jasmine Avenue, twenty-five (25) miles per hour.

On Thirteenth Street between Four Hundred feet (400') of Jasmine Avenue and East City limits, forty (40) miles per hour.

On all other streets, alleys, and places within the City, twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation in compliance with law.
(Amended Ord. 1689, 09/04/07; Ord. 1826, 4/17/12)

5-342 Authorized Emergency Vehicles; Privileges Condition
The driver of an authorized vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to but not returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions stated in Chapter 5.
The driver of such emergency vehicle may stop, park, or stand, irrespective of the provisions of Chapter 5 and disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.
The driver of such emergency vehicle, except wreckers towing disables vehicles, and highway maintenance vehicles and equipment may also:
Proceed past as steady red signal, a flashing red signal, or a stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; and
Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life, limb, or property.
Except for such emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle, the exemptions granted in this section to such emergency shall apply only when the driver of such vehicle, while in motion, sounds a audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when such vehicle is equipped with a least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle.
(Ref. 396-608 R.S. Neb.)

5-343 Engine Compression Brakes; Use Unlawful; Penalty For Use
It shall be unlawful for anyone to use engine compression brakes within the City Limits of the City of Crete. In the event that anyone violates this section and is convicted of the same; he or she shall be fined in an amount not more than the sum of $100. Signs shall be posted on each of the highways entering the City Limits giving notice that Engine Braking is prohibited.

(Ord. 1514; 03/20/01)

5-344 School Crossing Zones; Designation
Section 60-682.01 RS Neb. provides fines for operating a motor vehicle in violation of authorized speed limits and states that the fines are doubled if the violation occurs within a school crossing zone.
Section 60-6,134.01 RS Neb. makes it unlawful for a person operating a motor vehicle to overtake and pass another vehicle in a school crossing zone in which the roadway has only one lane of traffic in each direction and provides fines for violation of that prohibition.
The Governing Body may, by resolution, designate to the public any area of a roadway, other than a freeway, as a school crossing zone through the use of a sign or traffic control device as specified by the Governing Body in conformity with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Any school crossing zone so designated starts at the location of the first sign or traffic control device identifying the school crossing zone and continues until a sign or traffic control device indicates that the school crossing zone has ended.
(Ref. 60-658.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 1587, 07/15/03)

3-345 School Crossing Zones; Overtaking And Passing
A person operating a motor vehicle may not overtake and pass another vehicle in any school crossing zone designated by the Governing Body in which the roadway has only one lane of traffic in each direction.

(Ref. 60-6,134.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 1588, 07/15/03)

Article 4 Parking
5-401 Parking; Designation
5-402 Parking; Bureau Of Violations
5-403 Parking; Tickets
5-404 Parking; Tickets; Destruction Of
5-405 Parking; General
5-406 Parking; Special Exemptions
5-407 Parking; Authorized Emergency Vehicles
5-408 Parking; Time Limit
5-409 Parking; Maximum Time Limit
5-410 Parking; Obstructing Street/Public Road
5-410.01 Parking; Obstructing Street/Public Road; C-1 Central Commercial District
5-411 Parking; Obstructing Alley
5-412 Parking; Obstructing Private Drive
5-413 Parking; Obstructing Sidewalk
5-414 Parking; City Right-Of-Way
5-415 Parking; Street Intersections
5-416 Parking; Fire Hydrants And Stations
5-417 Parking; Bridges
5-418 Parking; Railroad Crossing
5-419 Parking; Traffic Control Device
5-420 Parking; Left Side Of Roadway
5-421 Parking; Unattended Vehicles
5-422 Parking; Farm Machinery Prohibited
5-423 Parking; Display Or Repair
5-424 Parking; Current License Required
5-425 Parking; Trucks Other Than Pickups; Impoundment And Fee Therefore
5-426 Parking; Emergency Snow Routes; Snow Emergency
5-427 Parking; Zones; How Marked
5-428 Parking; "No Parking" Signs
5-429 Parking; Private Lots
5-430 Parking; Removal Of Illegally Parked Vehicles
5-431 Parking; Loading/Unloading Zones
5-432 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Designation Of Parking Spaces; Display Of Permits; Access Aisle, Defined
5-432.01 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons, Off-Street Parking Facility; On-Steet Parking; Designation Of Off-Street Parking Spaces
5-432.02 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Handicapped; Parking Infraction; Defined; Penalties
5-432.03 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Defined; Parking; Permits; Issuance; Procedure; Renewal
5-432.04 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Motor Vehicle Permit Issuance
5-432.05 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Permit Contents; Prohibited Issuance; Duplicate Permits
5-432.06 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Permits; Period Valid; Renewal
5-432.07 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Permits Nontransferable; Violation; Suspension
5-432.08 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Removal Of Unauthorized Vehicle; Penalty
5-432.09 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Citation, Requirements; Issuance; Procedure; Waivers; Complaint; Trial; Rights; Dismissal
5-433 Parking; Nuisance
5-434 Parking; Residential; Front Yards; Prohibited
5-435 Parking; Removal, Impound, Storage By Municipal Police
5-436 Parking; Fines, Costs, And Fees; Appeal
5-437 Parking; Notification Of Possesion; Abandoned Vehicle; Disposal

5-401 Parking; Designation
The Governing Body may, by resolution, designate any portion of any street where vehicles shall or shall not be permitted to stop, stand, or park and may designate the manner in which vehicles (either all vehicles or by vehicle classification) may stop, stand, or park.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-402 Parking; Bureau Of Violations
There is hereby created the Bureau of Violations within the powers and duties of the Municipal Police. A copy of each citation issued for non‐moving traffic violations shall be deposited with the Administrative Assistant at City Hall, whose duty it shall be to collect all parking fines and to maintain appropriate and accurate records of all such fines. Parking fines shall be payable at City Hall. Such fines shall be in the amount of ten ($10.00) dollars for each violation if paid within seventy‐two (72) hours from the date of issuance. After seventy‐two (72) hours the fine shall be twenty ($20.00) dollars. Fines pertaining to handicapped parking shall be one hundred ($100.00) dollars if paid within seventy‐two (72) hours and two hundred ($200.00) dollars after seventy‐two (72) hours. Should such fines not be paid within thirty (30) days from date of issuance, the Municipal Police shall forward all necessary information to the Municipal Attorney. The Municipal Attorney may file a complaint in the appropriate Court. All money collected by the Municipal Police under this section shall be transferred to the Municipal Treasurer who shall, in turn, transfer said money to the school district in which the Municipality lies.

(Ref. 60‐680, 60‐6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07; 1939, 08/04/15)

5-403 Parking; Tickets
All tickets issued for violations of nonmoving traffic regulations contained in this Article shall, in addition to information normally stated on such tickets, carry the following information:

The amount of the fine if paid within seventy-two (72) hours;
The amount of the fine if not paid within seventy-two (72) hours;
The location where payment may be made; and
The fact that a complaint will be filed with the Court and that a warrant may be issued if the fine is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the issuance.
(Ref. 18-1729 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-404 Parking; Tickets; Destruction Of
It shall be unlawful for any person to tear up, or destroy, a parking ticket placed upon any vehicle by the Municipal Police, or to disregard the summons contained on such ticket, and fail to appear in Court as described on said ticket.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-405 Parking; General
Unless otherwise prohibited or designated by sign or stall markings, the operator shall park the vehicle headed in the direction of traffic, parallel with and adjacent to the curb (or edge of roadway when no curb is present) with the both right wheels within twelve inches (12”) from the curb or edge of roadway, so as to leave at least four feet (4’) between the vehicle and any other vehicles, except where the Governing Body designates vehicles to be parked at an angle so as to have the front right wheel at the curb or edge of roadway. Where stalls are marked, vehicles shall park within such stalls.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-406 Parking; Special Exemptions
The provisions of this Article regulating the movement, stopping, standing, and parking of vehicles shall not apply to any operator moving, stopping, standing, and parking at the direction of any peace officer or firefighter in the necessary performance of public duties or any operator involved in a motor vehicle accident.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-407 Parking; Authorized Emergency Vehicles
The provisions of this Article regulating the movement, stopping, standing, and parking of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, while the operator of such vehicle is operating the same in the necessary performance of public duties.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-408 Parking; Time Limit
The Governing Body may, by resolution, entirely prohibit, or fix a time limit for, the parking and stopping of vehicles on any street(s), public roadway(s), or district(s) designated by such resolution, and the parking, or stopping, of any vehicle on such street(s), public roadway(s), or district(s) for a period of time longer than fixed in such resolution shall constitute a violation of this Article.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-409 Parking; Maximum Time Limit
Unless otherwise designated by sign(s) and/or appropriate curb paint which prohibit or provide a more restrictive time limit, no vehicle shall be parked upon any street, public road or public property for more than twenty-four (24) hours.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-410 Parking; Obstructing Street/Public Road
No vehicle shall be parked in a manner that obstructs, to any degree, any traveled portion of any Street or public road, except as stated in Sections 5-410.01 and 5-411. The Municipal Police may cause such vehicle to be immediately removed from such street or public road and stored at the expense of the owner/operator.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,166, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07; 1732 06/16/09)

5-410.01 Parking; Obstructing Street/Public Road; C-1 Central Commercial District
No delivery vehicle shall be parked in a manner that obstructs, to any degree, or projects into any street/public road located in or adjacent to a C-1 Central Commercial District, except for the purpose of expediently loading and/or unloading of material, which shall not exceed one-quarter (1/4) hour. During loading and/or unloading, delivery vehicles shall be parked in such a manner as will cause the least obstruction possible to traffic within the Street/public road. The municipal police may cause such delivery vehicle in violation to be immediately removed and stored at the expense of the owner/operator. Delivery vehicle shall be defined to include all delivery trucks or vehicles, intended to transport material or supplies, but shall exclude all private passenger vehicles.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,166, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1732 06/16/09)

5-411 Parking; Obstructing Alley
No vehicle shall be parked in a manner that obstructs, to any degree, or projects into any alley, except for the purpose of expediently loading and/or unloading of person and/or material, which shall not exceed one-half (1/2) hour. During loading and/or unloading vehicles shall be parked in such a manner as will cause the least obstruction possible to traffic within the alley. The municipal police may cause such vehicle in violation to be immediately removed and stored at the expense of the owner/operator.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07; 1731, 05/19/09)

5-412 Parking; Obstructing Private Drive
No vehicle shall be parked on any street, alley, or public road in a manner that obstructs, to any degree, or is within four feet (4’) of any private drive. Upon complaint of the owner of said drive, the Municipal Police may cause such vehicle to be immediately removed from such street, alley, or public road.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-413 Parking; Obstructing Sidewalk
No vehicle or trailer shall be parked in a manner that obstructs, to any degree, any sidewalk within the Municipality.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,166, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-414 Parking; City Right-Of-Way
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place, or to cause to be parked or placed any vehicle or trailer upon the City Right-of-Way adjacent to any street, as dedicated, within the Municipality.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-415 Parking; Street Intersections
Except in compliance with traffic control devices, or where permitted by City-designated parking stalls, no vehicle shall be parked or left standing for any purpose, except momentarily to load or discharge passengers, within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of curb lines, nor where said curb lines are painted red to indicate such prohibition.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,166, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-416 Parking; Fire Hydrants And Stations
No vehicle shall be parked within fifteen feet (15’) in either direction of any fire hydrant or within twenty feet (20’) of the driveway entrance to any fire station. The Municipal Police may cause such vehicles to be immediately removed from such street, alley, public road or public property.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,166, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-417 Parking; Bridges
No vehicle shall stop, stand, or park upon or within twenty (20) feet of any bridge within the Municipality. The municipal police may cause such vehicle in violation to be immediately removed and stored at the expense of the owner/operator.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,166, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07; 1731, 05/19/09)

5-418 Parking; Railroad Crossing
No vehicle shall stop, stand, or park upon or within fifty (50) feet of any railroad crossing within the Municipality. The municipal police may cause such vehicle in violation to be immediately removed and stored at the expense of the owner/operator.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,166, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07; 1731, 05/19/09)

5-419 Parking; Traffic Control Device
No vehicle shall stop, stand, or park within thirty (30) feet of any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or other traffic control device located at the side of a roadway within the Municipality.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,166, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-420 Parking; Left Side Of Roadway
Unless parking, standing, or stopping upon a one-way street, no vehicle shall be parked upon the left curb of any street, alley, or public road.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-421 Parking; Unattended Vehicles
No operator shall allow a vehicle to stand unattended on a highway without first stopping the motor of such vehicle, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition, and effectively setting the brakes thereon brakes thereon and, when standing upon any roadway, turning the front wheels of such vehicle to the curb or side of such roadway.

(Ref. 60-6,168 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-422 Parking; Farm Machinery Prohibited
No farm machinery shall be parked within the corporate residential limits of the City; provided, farm machinery may be parked in an enclosed structure for that purpose within such limits, or upon any area of land actually farmed, and provided further, this section shall not be construed to include machinery used for gardening purposes for consumption of products raised by the person or persons engaged in such gardening.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-423 Parking; Display Or Repair
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, displayed “For Sale,” to be parked upon any street, alley, or public property within this Municipality. No person shall adjust or repair any automobile or motorcycle, or race the motor of same, while standing on the public streets or alleys of this Municipality, excepting in case of breakdown or other emergency requiring the same. No person or employee connected with a garage or repair shop shall use sidewalks, streets, or alleys in the vicinity of such garage or shop for the purpose of working on automobiles or vehicles of any description. The Municipal Police may cause such vehicles to be immediately removed from such street, alley, public road or public property.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-424 Parking; Current License Required
Every vehicle parked or left standing upon any street, alley, public road or public property shall have license plates attached thereto which are issued to the vehicle to which said license plates are attached and registered in the name of the owner of the vehicles in accordance with the laws of the State of Nebraska, or the state wherein the license is issued. If any vehicle is found upon any street or alley in violation of any of the provisions of the ordinances and resolutions of the City regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation. The Municipal Police may cause such vehicles to be immediately removed from such street, alley, public road or public property.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-425 Parking; Trucks Other Than Pickups; Impoundment And Fee Therefore
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck with an overall length of more than twenty (20') feet to stop or park any such vehicle on a street which the Governing Body has designated to be within the "Central Commercial Zone," (see zoning map) except to load or unload, and then only when loading or unloading in an alley is impossible. Vehicles may stop or stand for a period of time not to exceed what is reasonably necessary to load or unload. In those cases where a vehicle, as defined above, must park on a street within the Central Commercial Zone to load or unload, the owner or driver thereof shall first obtain permission from the Police Department. Permission must be obtained each time parking within the Central Commercial Zone is necessary. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, regardless of length, to park said vehicle within a street intersection, on a crosswalk, in front of a private driveway, or on a sidewalk. The Governing Body may, by resolution, provide truck parking areas adjoining or adjacent to the Central Commercial Zone, and when such parking areas are provided, it shall be the duty of all truck operators to use such parking areas for all parking purposes.
No truck, truck tractor or semi-trailer (except pickup trucks), including oil tankers, shall park or stop for any period of time, within the limits of any streets within any residential district except for the purpose of loading, unloading the cargo thereof or performing a service in the area in the ordinary course of business, unless otherwise posted, and except when parking in special truck park areas provided by the Governing Body by resolution.
Any such truck (s) which are parked in violation of this Section or any resolution of the Governing Body adopted pursuant to authority of this Section, may be impounded by the Police Department by the application to such truck of a mechanism, the effect of which is to prevent the movement of such vehicles from the place where parked, by attachment of such mechanism to the wheels or wheel thereof. The owner or operator of such truck may cause the release and removal of such impoundment and by paying to the City an impoundment fee of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) to defray costs and extra work and time required for such impoundment and removal thereof and any other costs of administration and shall in addition thereto pay such parking fee or fees due the Bureau of Violations of the City for such parking violation. The impoundment fee provided for herein shall be paid over to the Treasurer of the City and credited to the General Fund of the City. When such truck has been so impounded so as to prevent its movement, written notice shall be placed on said truck visible to the operator thereof, giving notice that said vehicle has been impounded and rendered immobile by the attachment of the immobilizing mechanism authorized herein and that said impoundment will be released and discharged upon payment of impoundment fee of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) in addition to any parking fee due the Bureau of Violations of the City for such parking violation. In addition thereto, where possible and practicable, similar notice shall be given the owner or lessor of the truck so impounded. Within thirty (30) days after payment of such impoundment fee, the operator, owner or lessor may request a hearing before the City Council to contest said fee and request refund thereof; setting forth the reasons and grounds upon which such contest is based.
(Amended by Ord. 1680, 06/19/07; Ord. 1904, 06/26/14)

5-426 Parking; Emergency Snow Routes; Snow Emergency
The Municipal Public Works shall designate emergency snow routes through the Municipality which will be cleared of snow before other streets, alleys, and public roads during a snow emergency.
The Municipal Public Works shall identify emergency snow routes with signs marked, “EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTE.”
The Mayor shall have the authority to declare a snow emergency.
No vehicle may be parked upon a designated emergency snow route during a snow emergency so declared by the Mayor.
Upon declaration of a snow emergency, the Mayor may direct the Municipal Police and/or Public Works to immediately remove and store or cause the immediate removal and storage of any vehicles upon designated emergency snow routes.
(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-427 Parking; Zones; How Marked
Parking zones shall be designated and regulated by appropriate signs and/or the use of colored paint on the curb as follows:

Red and Yellow. No Parking: Stopping, standing, or parking of any vehicle is entirely prohibited within the area.

Orange. School Bus Stop: Stopping, standing, or parking of any vehicle, other than those operated or contracted by the Crete Public or Saint James Schools, and adjacent to such schools, is entirely prohibited within the area.

Green. Loading Zone: Stopping, standing, or parking is authorized within the area for the expedient loading and/or unloading of people and/or materials as described in Ordinance §5-407.

Blue. Handicapped Parking Zone: Stopping, standing, or parking is prohibited to any vehicle not lawfully displaying the distinguishing handicapped/disabled person license plate(s) and/or tags.

Colored paint may also be used to differentiate traffic lanes, parking stalls, and mark crosswalks. These markings do not infer parking regulations.

(Ref. 18-1,736, 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07; 1951, 10/20/15)

5-428 Parking; "No Parking" Signs
No vehicle shall be parked at any place designated by the sign, “NO PARKING.”

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-429 Parking; Private Lots
Any person parking a motor vehicle in a properly posted, restricted parking lot without the consent of the owner or tenant authorized to give permission shall be guilty of an infraction and the vehicle shall be subject to being towed away at the request of such lot owner or tenant. Any person found guilty under this section shall be subject to the penalties provided for infractions. If the identity of the operator of a motor vehicle in violation of this section cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such infraction. When any law enforcement officer observes or is advised that a motor vehicle may be in violation of this section, he or she shall make a determination as to whether a violation has in fact occurred and if so shall personally serve or attach to such motor vehicle a citation directed to the owner or operator of such vehicle, which shall set forth the nature of the violation. Any person who refuses to sign the citation or otherwise comply with the command of the citation shall be punished as provided by Section 29-426 RS Neb.

Signs designating a restricted parking lot shall be readily visible and shall state the purpose or purposes for parking on the restricted parking lot, state the hours for restricted parking, and state who to contact for information regarding a towed vehicle.

(Ref. 60-2401, 60-2402 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-430 Parking; Removal Of Illegally Parked Vehicles
Whenever any Police Officer shall find a vehicle standing upon a street or alley or upon the space between the curb and sidewalk of any street in the City, as dedicated, in violation of any of the provisions of this Article, such individual may remove or have such vehicle removed, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move such vehicle, to a position off the roadway of such street or alley or such space between the curb and the sidewalk, from such street or alley or location.

The owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of such vehicle may be charged with the reasonable cost of such removal and storage, payable before such vehicle is released. Any such towing or storage fee shall become a security interest in the vehicle prior to all other claims. This fee shall be in addition to any other fees or penalties owed the Municipality for such vehicle.

(Ref. 60-6,165, 60-680 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-431 Parking; Loading/Unloading Zones
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand, or park such vehicle within any designated loading/unloading zone for a period of time longer than is necessary for the expedient loading and/or unloading of passengers and/or materials, and in no event shall the operator of a vehicle stop, stand, or park in any loading zone for a period longer than thirty (30) minutes to load/unload materials, nor more than five (5) minutes to load/unload passengers, and then only when the operator thereof remains in said vehicle.

(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-432 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Designation Of Parking Spaces; Display Of Permits; Access Aisle, Defined
The Governing Body may designate parking spaces for the exclusive use of (a) handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the distinguishing license plates issued to handicapped or disabled persons pursuant to Section 60-311.14 RS Neb., (b) handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display a distinguishing license plate issued to a handicapped or disabled person by another state, (c) such other handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the Municipality, whose motor vehicles display the permit specified in Neb. RS 18-1739, and (d) such other motor vehicles, as certified by the Municipality, which display the permit specified in RS 18-1739. All such permits shall be displayed by hanging the permit from the motor vehicle’s rearview mirror so as to be clearly visible through the front windshield. The permit shall be displayed on the dashboard only when there is no rearview mirror.
If the Governing Body so designates a parking space or access aisle, it shall be indicated by posting aboveground and immediately adjacent to and visible from each space or access aisle a sign which is in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. In addition to such sign, the space or access aisle may also be indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to the space.
For purposes sections 18-1736 to 18-1742, access aisle means a space adjacent to a handicapped parking space or passenger loading zone which is constructed and designed in compliance with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and the federal rules and regulations adopted and promulgated in response to the act, as the act and the rules and regulations existed on May 31, 2001.
(Ref. 18-1736, 18-1737 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-432.01 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons, Off-Street Parking Facility; On-Steet Parking; Designation Of Off-Street Parking Spaces
The Governing Body and any person in lawful possession of any off-street parking facility may designate stalls or spaces, including access aisles, in such facility for the exclusive use of handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the distinguishing license plates issued to such individuals pursuant to Section 60-3113 RS Neb., (b) such other handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the Governing Body, whose motor vehicles display the permit specified in Section 5-431.05, and (c) such other motor vehicles, as certified by the Governing Body, which display such permit. Such designation shall be made by posting aboveground and immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space, including access aisles, a sign which is in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.

(Ref. 18-1737 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-432.02 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Handicapped; Parking Infraction; Defined; Penalties
For the purposes of this Article, handicapped parking infraction means the violation of any statue or ordinance regulating (a) the use of parking spaces, including access aisles, designated for use by handicapped or disabled persons, (b) the unauthorized possession, use, or display of handicapped or disabled parking permits, or (c) the obstruction of any wheelchair ramps constructed or created in accordance and in conformity with the federal Americans with Disability Act of 1990, as the act existed on May 31, 2001.
For any offense classified as a handicapped parking infraction, a handicapped parking citation may be issued by any peace officer or by any person designated by ordinance or resolution approved by the Governing Body to exercise the authority to issue a citation for any handicapped parking infraction.
Any person found guilty of a handicapped parking infraction shall be fined (1) not more than one hundred dollars for the first offence, (2) not more then two hundred dollars for a second offence within a one-year period, and (3) not more then three hundred dollars for a third or subsequent offence within a one-year period.
(Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-432.03 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Defined; Parking; Permits; Issuance; Procedure; Renewal
The Municipal Clerk shall take an application from a handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person or his or her parent, legal guardian, or foster parent for a permit which will entitle the holder thereof or a person driving a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting such holder to park in those spaces or access aisles provided for by this Article when the holder of the permit will enter or exit the motor vehicle while it is parked in such spaces or access aisles. For purposes of this section, the handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person shall be considered the holder of the permit.
For the purposes of this Article, handicapped or disabled person shall mean any individual with a severe visual or physical impairment which limits personal mobility and results in an inability to travel unassisted more than two hundred feet without the use of a wheelchair, crutch, walker, or prosthetic, orthotic, or other assistant device, any individual whose mobility is limited as a result of respiratory problems, any individual who has a cardiac condition to the extent that his or her functional limitations are classified as being Class III or Class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart Association, and any individual who has lost all or substantially all the use of one or more limbs.
Temporarily handicapped or disabled person shall mean any handicapped or disabled person whose personal mobility is expected to be limited in such a manner for no longer than one (1) year; and
A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit shall complete an application, shall provide proof of identity, and shall submit a completed medical form signed by a physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner certifying that the person who will be the holder meets the definition of handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person. No applicant shall be required to provide his or her social security number. In the case of a temporarily handicapped or disabled person, the certifying physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner shall indicate the estimated date of recovery or that the temporary handicap or disability will continue for a period of six (6) months, whichever is less. A person may hold only one permit under this section or a permit under 5-431.05, but not both.
Before issuing a permit, the Municipal Clerk shall enter all information required in the manner prescribed in Section 18-1739 RS Neb. The Municipal Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles the name, address, and license number of all persons receiving a permit pursuant to this section.
(Ref. 18-1738 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-432.04 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Motor Vehicle Permit Issuance
The Municipal Clerk shall take an application from any person for a motor vehicle permit which will entitle the holder thereof or a person driving the motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons to park in those spaces provided by this Article if the motor vehicle is used primarily for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons. Such parking permit shall be used only when the motor vehicle for which it was issued is being used for the transportation of a handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person and such person will enter or exit the motor vehicle while it is parked in such designated spaces or access aisles.
The Municipal Clerk shall not accept the application for a permit of any person making application contrary to Section 18-1738.02 RS Neb.
A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit pursuant to this section shall apply for a permit for each motor vehicle used for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, shall complete such forms as are provided to the Municipal Clerk by the Department of Motor Vehicles, and shall demonstrate to the Municipal Clerk that each such motor vehicle is used primarily for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons. A copy of the completed application form shall be given to each applicant.
No more than one such permit shall be issued for each motor vehicle. A person may hold either a permit under this section or a permit under Section 5-428.03, but not both.
The Municipal Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles the name, address, and license number of all persons applying for a permit pursuant to this section.
(Ref. 18-1738.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-432.05 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Permit Contents; Prohibited Issuance; Duplicate Permits
The permit issued for handicapped or disabled parking shall be constructed of a durable plastic designed to resist normal wear or fading for the term of the permit's issuance and printed so as to minimize the possibility of alteration following issuance. The permit shall be of a design, size, configuration, color, and construction and contain such information as specified in the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the United States Department of Transportation in the Uniform System for Parking for Persons with Transportation in the Uniform System for Parking for Persons with Disabilities 23 C.F.R. part 1235; as such regulations existed on May 31, 2001.
In addition to the requirements of subsection A of this section, the permit shall show the expiration date and such identifying information with regard to the handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person to whom it is issued as is necessary to the enforcement of this Article.
No permit shall be issued to any person or for any motor vehicle if any parking permit has been issued to such person or for such motor vehicle and permit has been suspended pursuant to Section 5-431.07. At the expiration of such suspension, a permit may be renewed in the manner provided for renewal.
A duplicate permit may be provided without cost if the original permit is destroyed, lost, or stolen. Such duplicate permit shall be issued in the same manner as the original permit, except that a newly completed medical form need not be provided if a completed medical form submitted at the time of the most recent application for a permit or its renewal is on file with the Municipal Clerk. A duplicate permit shall be valid for the remainder of the period for which the original permit was issued.
(Ref. 18-1739 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-432.06 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Permits; Period Valid; Renewal
Permanently issued permits authorized under this Article for handicapped or disabled parking issued prior to August 1, 2005, shall be valid for a period ending on September 30 of the third year following the date of issuance and shall expire on that date. Permanently issued permits issued on or after August 1, 2005 shall be valid for a period ending on the last day of the month of the applicant’s birthday in the third year after issuance and shall expire on that day.
All permits authorized under this Article for temporarily handicapped or disabled parking shall be issued for a period ending not more than six (6) months after the date of issuance but may be renewed for a one-time period not to exceed six months. For the renewal period, there shall be submitted an additional application with proof of a handicap or disability.
(Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-432.07 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Permits Nontransferable; Violation; Suspension
Permits issued under this Article shall not be transferable, and shall be used only by the party to whom issued or for the motor vehicle for which issued and only for the purpose for which it is issued. No person shall alter or reproduce in any manner a permit issued pursuant to this Article. No person shall knowingly hold more than one permit or knowingly provide false information on an application for a permit. No person who is not the holder of an handicapped or disabled parking permit issued to him or her as a handicapped or disabled person shall display a handicapped or disabled parking permit and park in a space or access aisle designated for the exclusive use of a handicapped or disabled person. No person who is the holder of a handicapped or disabled parking permit issued for the use of such person when transporting a handicapped or disabled person shall display his or her handicapped or disabled parking permit in a space or access aisle designated for the exclusive use a handicapped or disabled person unless a handicapped or disabled person is actually in the vehicle displaying the permit at the time it is parked, has left the vehicle while it is parked, and will return to the vehicle before it leaves the designated space or access aisle. No person who is not the holder of a handicapped or disabled parking permit issued for use when a vehicle is transporting a handicapped or disabled person shall display a handicapped or disabled parking permit in a space or access aisle designated for the exclusive use a handicapped or disabled person unless a handicapped or disabled person is actually in the vehicle displaying the permit at the time it is parked, has left the vehicle while it is parked, and will return to the vehicle before it leaves the designated space or access aisle. Any violation of this section shall constitute a handicapped parking infraction and shall cause for suspension of such permit for a period of six (6) months. In addition, the trial court shall impose a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) which may be waived by the court if, at the time of sentencing, all handicapped parking permits issued to or in the possession of the offender are returned to the court. At the expiration of such six-month period, a suspended permit may be renewed in the manner provided for renewal.

(Ref 18-1741 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-432.08 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Removal Of Unauthorized Vehicle; Penalty
The owner or person in lawful possession of an off-street parking facility, after notifying the Municipal Police, and the Municipality providing on-street parking or owning, operating, or providing an off-street parking facility, may cause the removal, from a stall or space, including access aisles, designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, or motor vehicles for the transportation of such persons, of any vehicle not displaying the proper permit or the distinguishing license plates specified in this Article if there is posted above ground and immediately adjacent to and visible from such stall or space, including access aisles, a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the area so designated as a tow-in zone.
Anyone who parks a vehicle in any on-street parking space or access aisle which has been designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the transportation of such persons, or in any so exclusively designated parking space or access aisle in any off-street parking facility, without properly displaying the proper permit or when the handicapped or disabled person to whom or for whom, as the case may be, the license plate or permit is issued will not enter or exit the vehicle while it is parked in the designated space access aisle shall be guilty of a handicapped parking infraction as defined in Section 5-431.02 and shall be subject to the procedures set forth in Section 5-431.09 and the penalty provided for in this Chapter. The display on a motor vehicle of a distinguishing license plate or permit issued to a handicapped or disabled person by and under the duly constituted authority of another state shall constitute a full and complete defense in any action for a handicapped parking infraction. If the identity of the person who parked the vehicle in violation of this section cannot be readily determined, the owner or person in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation and shall be guilty and subject to the penalty provided for in this Chapter.
In the case of a privately owned off-street parking facility, the owner or person in lawful possession of such facility shall not be required to inform the Municipality of a violation of this section prior to the Municipality issuing the violator a handicapped parking infraction citation.
(Ref 18-1737 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-432.09 Parking; Handicapped Or Disabled Persons; Citation, Requirements; Issuance; Procedure; Waivers; Complaint; Trial; Rights; Dismissal
For any offense classified as a handicapped parking infraction, a handicapped parking citation may be issued by any peace officer or by any person designated by ordinance to exercise the authority to issue a citation for any handicapped parking infraction.
When a handicapped parking citation is issued for a handicapped parking infraction, the person issuing the handicapped parking citation shall enter thereon all required information, including the name and address of the cited person or, if not known, the license number and description of the offending motor vehicle, the offense charged, and the time and place the person cited is to appear in court. Unless the person cited requests an earlier date, the time of appearance shall be at least three (3) days after the issuance of the handicapped parking citation. One (1) copy of the handicapped parking citation shall be delivered to the person cited or attached to the offending motor vehicle.
At least twenty-four (24) hours before the time set for the appearance of the cited person, either the Municipal Attorney or other person authorized by law to issue a complaint for the particular offense shall issue and file a complaint charging such person with a handicapped parking infraction or such person shall be released from the obligation to appear as specified.
A person cited for a handicapped parking violation may waive his or her right to trial.
For any handicapped parking citation issued for a handicapped parking infraction by reason of the failure of a vehicle to display a handicapped parking permit issued pursuant to Section 18-1738 or 18-1738.01 RS Neb., the complaint shall be dismissed if, within seven (7) business days after the date of issuance of the citation, the person cited files with the court the affidavit included on the citation, signed by a peace officer certifying that the recipient is the lawful possessor in his or her own right of a handicapped parking permit issued under Section 18-1738 or 18-1738.01 RS Neb. and that the peace officer has personally viewed the permit.
The trial of any person for a handicapped parking infraction shall be by the court without a jury. All other rights provided by the Constitution of the United States made applicable to the states by the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of Nebraska shall apply to persons charged with a handicapped parking infraction.
(Ref. 18-1741.01, 18-1741.04, 18-1741.06 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-433 Parking; Nuisance
No person shall park upon any street, alley, public road, or right-of-way adjacent to any street: (1) Any unregistered, inoperable or partially dismantled vehicle; or (2) Any vehicle discharging fuel, oil, coolant, or other liquid (other than water); or (3) Any vehicle presenting a health or safety hazard. Such vehicle is declared a nuisance. The Municipal Police may immediately cause any liquid(s) to be contained and/or removed and the vehicle removed and stored. All costs related to the containment and/or removal of liquid(s) and removal and storage of the vehicle shall be at the expense of the owner/operator.

(Ref 18-1720 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1898, 06/17/14)

5-434 Parking; Residential; Front Yards; Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle owner and/or the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or person in possession, charge or control of any lot or piece of ground which is residentially zoned or serves as a residence, regardless of zoning, to park or allow a vehicle to park upon the front yard of such lot or piece of ground unless the vehicle is on a surface of gravel, rock, asphalt or concrete maintained in good repair, without weeds or grass, and in conformance with Municipal building codes. For the purposes of this Section, the front yard shall include all sides of a lot adjacent to a Municipal street (Examples below). Exceptions to this Section shall include:

Vehicle(s) owned by a commercial vendor when the vendor’s employee(s) are performing work in conjunction with an open building permit granted by the Municipality for such lot or piece of ground and
As necessary for the expedient loading and/or unloading of materials.




(Ord. 1981, 8/16/16; 2035, 12/19/17)

5-435 Parking; Removal, Impound, Storage By Municipal Police
Unless immediate removal is authorized as described within this Article, the Municipal Police may remove or cause the removal of any vehicle or trailer in violation of any Article within this Chapter, and store such vehicle or trailer, upon the issuance of three (3) tickets within any thirty (30) day period.
If impoundment by physically removing any vehicle or trailer is deemed by the Municipal Police to be impractical, the Municipal Police may apply a mechanism to such vehicle or trailer, the effect of which is to prevent movement from the place where parked, by attachment of such mechanism to the wheels or wheel thereof.
Once removed, the Municipal Police shall store or arrange for the storage of such vehicle or trailer.
(Ref. 60-680, 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

5-436 Parking; Fines, Costs, And Fees; Appeal
The owner or operator of any vehicle or trailer removed and/or impounded by the Municipal Police as authorized within this Article, shall be responsible for any and all fines, costs, and fees associated with such impoundment, removal, and any subsequent storage.
The owner or operator of such vehicle or trailer may cause the release and/or removal of such removal and/or impoundment by paying to the City an impound fee of twenty‐five ($25.00) dollars to defray costs, extra work, and time required by the City for such removal and/or impoundment thereof, a storage fee of five ($5.00) dollars each day the vehicle or trailer is held, and any other costs of administration and shall in addition thereto pay such parking fee(s) due the Bureau of Violations of the City for such parking violation. The impoundment fee provided for herein shall be payable at City Hall and paid over to the Municipal Treasurer and credited to the General fund of the City.
The owner or operator of such vehicle or trailer shall also pay any private tow service for costs related to the impoundment, removal, and storage of said vehicle or trailer prior to release.
Within thirty (30) days after payment of such impoundment and/or storage fees, the owner or operator may request a hearing before the City Council to contest said fees and request refund thereof; setting forth the reasons and grounds upon which such contest is based. Requests for such hearing shall be made through the City Clerk. The Governing Body may, upon the conclusion of said hearing, direct the Municipal Treasurer to refund all or part of said fees.
(Ref. 60‐680, 60‐6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07; 1938, 08/04/15)

5-437 Parking; Notification Of Possesion; Abandoned Vehicle; Disposal
If the owner or operator has not reclaimed possession of an impounded vehicle or trailer within ten (10) days, the Municipal Police will make an inquiry concerning the last-registered owner and make reasonable attempt to notify the last-registered owner of the City’s possession of such vehicle or trailer by certified mail.
If the owner has not reclaimed possession of such vehicle or trailer after thirty (30) days from the date the certified notice was mailed, the Municipal Police may declare such vehicle or trailer as abandoned.
The Municipal Police shall dispose of all abandoned vehicles and trailers according to law.
(Ref. 60-680; 60-1,903; 60-6,167 RS Neb.) (Ord. 1680, 06/19/07)

Article 5 Operator And Vehicle Qualifications
5-501 Registration; Operator And Vehicle Licenses
5-502 Registration; Trailers
5-503 License Plates
5-504 Vehicles; Equipment And Maintenance
5-505 Vehicles; Unobstructed View

5-501 Registration; Operator And Vehicle Licenses
No person shall operate or park a motor vehicle upon any street, alley, or public highway within the Municipality without having first registered the same in accordance with Chapter 60, Article 3, RS Neb., and Section 60-321 RS Neb., except as provided in this subsection. A person may operate a motor vehicle without registration for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of purchase. Upon registration, such vehicle shall have the required number plates displayed upon said vehicle in the manner and places provided for by section 60-323 RS Neb. If a citation is issued to an owner or operator of a vehicle for a violation of this subsection and the owner properly registers and licenses the vehicle not in compliance and pays all taxes and fees due and the owner or operator provides proof of such registration to the prosecuting attorney within ten (10) days after the issuance of the citation, no prosecution for the offense cited shall occur.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any street, alley, or public highway without having obtained a motor vehicle operator's license in accordance with Chapter 60, Article 4, RS Neb. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street, alley, or public highway during the period that his or her operator's license has been revoked or canceled.
(Ref. 60-302, 60-320, 60-320.01, 60-321, 60-323, 60-4,186 RS Neb.)

5-502 Registration; Trailers
No trailer, semi-trailer, or cabin trailer shall be operated or parked on any street, alley, or public highway within the Municipality without having first registered the same in accordance with Chapter 60, Article 3, RS Neb., and Section 60-321 RS Neb., except as provided in this section. A person may pull such trailer, semi-trailer, or cabin trailer without registration for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of purchase. Upon registration, such trailer, semi-trailer, or cabin trailer shall have the required number plate displayed upon said trailer as provided for by section 60-311 RS Neb. If a citation is issued to an owner or operator of a vehicle for a violation of this section and the owner properly registers and licenses the vehicle not in compliance and pays all taxes and fees due and the owner or operator provides proof of such registration to the prosecuting attorney within ten (10) days after the issuance of the citation no prosecution for the offense cited shall occur.

(Ref. 60-302, 60-320, 60-321 RS Neb.)

5-503 License Plates
The license plates, required on every motor vehicle by laws of the State of Nebraska, or by laws of any other state while such vehicle is operated within the corporate limits, shall be kept clear and free from grease, dust, or other blurring matter so they will be plainly visible at all times, and shall be attached in such manner as to be clearly readable at a distance of one hundred feet (100') and under no circumstances shall they be obstructed by any portion of the vehicle.

(Ref. 60-324, 60-325 RS Neb.)

5-504 Vehicles; Equipment And Maintenance
Every motor vehicle, while in use on the streets, alleys, or highways of the Municipality shall be equipped with efficient brakes adequate to control the movement of, to stop, and to hold such vehicle, including two, (2) separate means of applying the brakes, and shall be further equipped with a good and sufficient horn in good working order, or other efficient signal devices. From sunset to sunrise, and any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons or vehicles upon the street, alley, or highway at a distance of five hundred feet (500'), every motor vehicle shall be equipped with lighted headlights, and every motor vehicle and trailer shall be equipped with one or more taillights, at the rear of the motor vehicle or trailer, exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the rear of such vehicle. No person shall operate any vehicle which is equipped with a electric light or lights that confuse travelers or pedestrians on streets or crosswalks within the Municipality. Every motor vehicle having a width of eighty inches (80") or more shall display clearance lights as required by State law. All vehicle brakes shall be maintained in good working order; provided, motorcycles need only be equipped with one (1) brake. All horns on motor vehicles shall be capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200'); provided, no vehicle except as herein provided, shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a vehicle, any siren, or horn otherwise than as reasonable warning; nor shall any person use any horn or warning device upon a vehicle to make any unnecessary, loud, or harsh sound; and provided further that, every Police and Fire Department vehicle, ambulance, or other authorized emergency vehicle used for emergency calls shall be equipped with a bell, siren, or whistle of the type approved by the Governing Body.

(Ref. 60-6,219, 60-6,220, 60-6,224, 60-6,235, 60-6,244, 60-6,285 RS Neb.)

5-505 Vehicles; Unobstructed View
No person shall drive on a street any motor vehicle constructed or loaded in such a way as to prevent the driver from obtaining a view of the street to the rear unless such vehicle is equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the street for a distance of at least two hundred feet (200') to the rear of such vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive upon a street, any vehicle with a sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side windows, or rear windows of such motor vehicle other than a certificate, or paper required to be so displayed by law. Every windshield on a motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for removing rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be operated by the driver within the vehicle.

(Ref. 60-6,254, 60-6,255, 60-6,256 RS Neb.)

Article 6 Bicycles And Mopeds
5-601 Bicycles; Definition
5-602 Bicycles; Traffic Laws Applied To Persons Riding
5-603 Bicycles; Riding Of; Prohibited Acts
5-604 Bicycles; Clinging To Vehicles; Prohibited
5-605 Bicycles; General Rules; Regulations
6-606 Bicycles; Equipment; Lights And Brakes
5-607 Bicycles; Turning; Signaling
5-608 Bicycles; Riding On Sidewalks
5-609 Bicycles; Parking
5-610 Bicycles; License
5-611 Bicycles; Transfer Of Ownership
5-612 Bicycles; Rental Agencies
5-613 Bicycles; Penalties
5-614 Clinging To Motor Vehicle
5-615 Mopeds; Defined
5-616 Mopeds; Operator's License Required
5-617 Mopeds; Traffic Regulations Applicable
5-618 Mopeds; Operation
5-619 Mopeds; Use Of Traffic Lanes
5-620 Mopeds; Equipment; Footrests; Handlebars
5-621 Mopeds; Equipment; Helmets

5-601 Bicycles; Definition
For the purpose of this, Article, the term "bicycle" shall mean every device propelled solely by human power, upon which any person may ride, and having two tandem wheels either of which is more than fourteen inches in diameter.

(Ref. 60-611 RS Neb.)

5-602 Bicycles; Traffic Laws Applied To Persons Riding
Any person who rides a bicycle upon any roadway shall have all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle under this chapter of the City Code of the City of Crete, except for special bicycle regulations and except for those provisions of this Code which by their very nature can have no application.
Regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle shall be operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside by the City of Crete with the exclusive use of bicycles.
(Ref. 60-6,314 RS Neb.)

5-603 Bicycles; Riding Of; Prohibited Acts
Any person who rides a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
Any person who rides a bicycle shall not remove his or her feet from the pedals and shall have at least one hand on the handlebars at all times.
Any person who rides a bicycle shall not carry any package, bundle, or article that prevents such operator from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Ref, 60-6,315 RS Neb.)

5-604 Bicycles; Clinging To Vehicles; Prohibited
Any person who rides any bicycle shall not attach himself, herself, or the bicycle to any vehicle upon a roadway.

(Ref. 60-6,316 RS Neb.)

5-605 Bicycles; General Rules; Regulations
Any person who operates a bicycle upon a roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under conditions then existing shall ride as near to the right-hand curb or right-hand edge of the roadway as practical except when:
Overtaking and passing another bicycle proceeding in the same direction;
Preparing for a left turn onto a private road or driveway or at an intersection;
Reasonably necessary to avoid conditions that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or right-hand edge of the roadway, including fixed or moving objects, stopped or moving vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, animals, or service hazards;
Riding upon a lane of substandard width which is too narrow for a bicycle and a vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane; or
Lawfully operating a bicycle on the paved shoulders of a highway included in the state highway system.
Any person who operates a bicycle upon a roadway with a posted speed limit of thirty five miles per hour or less on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement and which has two or more marked traffic lanes may ride it as near to the left hand curb or left-handed edge of the roadway has practicable. Whenever a person operating a bicycle leaves the roadway to ride on the paved shoulder or leaves the paved shoulder to enter the roadway, the person show clearly signal his or her intention and yield the right-of-way to all other vehicles.
Any person who operates a bicycle upon a highway shall not ride more than single file except on paths or parts of highways set aside for the exclusive use the bicycles.
(Ref. 60-6,317 RS Neb.)

6-606 Bicycles; Equipment; Lights And Brakes
When in use at nighttime, a bicycle shall be equipped with a light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet to the front on a clear night and with a red reflector on the rear which is visible on a clear night for all distances between one hundred feet and six hundred feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlights on a motor vehicle. A red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet to the rear may be used in addition to such red reflector.
Any bicycle used on a highway shall be equipped with a brake or brakes which will enable the operator to stop the bicycle within twenty-five feet of the point of breaking when moving at a speed of ten miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Ref. 60-6,318 RS Neb.)

5-607 Bicycles; Turning; Signaling
Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or public highway shall properly signal prior to turning at intersections.

(Ref. 60-6,317 RS Neb.)

5-608 Bicycles; Riding On Sidewalks
No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the business district. No person ten (10) or more years of age shall ride a bicycle on any sidewalk within the municipality. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle on a sidewalk, such a person shall yield the right of way to the pedestrian.

(Ref. 60-6,317 RS Neb.)

5-609 Bicycles; Parking
No person shall park any bicycle upon any road or highway, sidewalk or against any building in such a manner that obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic.

(Ref. 60-6,317 RS Neb.)

5-610 Bicycles; License
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle within the municipality unless said bicycle has been properly licensed by the Municipal Police. Upon receipt of proper application, the Municipal Police shall affix a license tag to the frame of the bicycle in a substantial manner. The removal of such tag, except by the Municipal Police, shall be unlawful.

(Ref. 60-6,317; 60680(h) RS Neb.)

5-611 Bicycles; Transfer Of Ownership
Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall make application to the Municipal Police for a new bicycle license. The new license tag will be affixed over the previous license tag.

(Ref. 60-6,317 RS Neb.)

5-612 Bicycles; Rental Agencies
A rental agency shall not rent, or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is licensed and a license tag has been affixed thereto as provided herein and such bicycle is equipped with the lights, reflectors and others equipment required by this code.

(Ref. 60-6,317 RS Neb.)

5-613 Bicycles; Penalties
Every person who violates any provision of this article shall be required to attend and successfully complete a bicycle safety program presented by the Municipal Police at the time and place designated by the Chief of Police.

(Ref. 60-6,317 RS Neb.)

5-614 Clinging To Motor Vehicle
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skis, or toy vehicle shall attach himself or the bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skis, or toy vehicle to any vehicle upon a roadway, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to suffer or permit any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skis, or toy vehicle to cling or attach himself or the bicycle to such vehicle driven and operated by him.

(Ref. 60-6,316 RS Neb.)

5-615 Mopeds; Defined
For the purposes of this Article, moped shall mean a bicycle with fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power, an automatic transmission, and a motor with a cylinder capacity not exceeding fifty (50cc) cubic centimeters, which produces no more than two (2) brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the bicycle at a maximum design speed of no more than thirty (30 m.p.h.) miles per hour on level ground. Mopeds, their owners, and their operators, shall be subject to Chapter 60, Article 4, R.R.S. of Nebraska, 1943, and amendments thereto, but shall be exempt from the requirements of Chapter 60, Articles 1, 3, 5, and 17, R.R.S. of Nebraska, 1943 and amendments thereto.

(Ref. 60-6,309 RS Neb.)

5-616 Mopeds; Operator's License Required
No person shall operate a moped upon the streets, alleys, or highways within the Municipality unless such person has (1) a valid Class 0 operator's license or (2) a valid school or learner's permit.

(Ref. 60-6,310 RS Neb.)

5-617 Mopeds; Traffic Regulations Applicable
Any person who rides a moped upon a roadway shall have all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle under Chapter 5 of this Code and sections 39-601 to 39-6,122 R.R.S. of Nebraska 1943 and amendments thereto, except for those provisions of such sections which by their nature can have no application. Such regulations applicable to mopeds shall apply whenever a moped shall be operated upon any street, alley, or public highway within the Municipality or upon any path set aside by the Department of Roads or local authority, for the use of mopeds. Notwithstanding any established maximum speed limits in excess of twenty-five (25 m.p.h.) miles per hour, no person shall operate any moped at a speed in excess of thirty (30 m.p.h.) miles per hour.

(Ref. 60-6,311 RS Neb.)

5-618 Mopeds; Operation
Any person who operates a moped shall ride only upon a permanent and regular seat attached to the moped. A person operating a moped shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a moped unless such moped is designed by the manufacturer to carry more than one (1) person.
A person shall ride upon a moped only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward.
No person shall operate a moped while carrying any package, bundle, or other article which prevents him or her from keeping both hands on the handlebars.
No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride, in a position that interferes with the operation or control of the moped or the view of the operator.
Any moped which carries a passenger shall be equipped with footrests for such passenger.
(Ref. 60-6,312 RS Neb.)

5-619 Mopeds; Use Of Traffic Lanes
A moped shall be entitled to full use of a traffic lane or any of any highway with an authorized speed limit of forty-five (45) miles per hour or less and no vehicle shall be operated in such a manner as to deprive any moped of the full use of such lane, except that mopeds and motorcycles may be operated two abreast in a single lane.
No person shall operate a moped between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles.
Mopeds shall not be operated more than two (2) abreast in a single lane.
Any person who operates a moped on a roadway with an authorized speed limit of more than forty-five (45) miles per hour shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable and shall not ride more than single file.
No person who rides upon a moped shall attach himself, herself, or the moped to any other vehicle on a roadway.
Mopeds shall not be operated on the sidewalks.
(Ref. 60-6,313 RS Neb.)

5-620 Mopeds; Equipment; Footrests; Handlebars
Any moped which carries a passenger shall be equipped with footrests for such passenger. No person shall operate any moped with handlebars more than fifteen inches (15") above the mounting point of the handlebars.

5-621 Mopeds; Equipment; Helmets
Commencing January 1, 1989, a person shall not operate or be a passenger on a motorcycle or moped on any highway, as defined in Section §39-602 RS Neb., unless such person is wearing a protection helmet of the type and design manufactured for use by operators of such vehicles and unless such helmet is secured properly on his or her head with a chin strap while the vehicle is in motion. All such protective helmets shall be designed to reduce injuries to the user resulting from head impacts and shall be designed to protect the user by remaining on the user's head, deflecting blows, resisting penetration, and spreading the force of impact. Each such helmet shall consist of lining, padding, visor, and chin strap and shall meet or exceed the standards established in the United States Department of Transportation's Federal Motor Vehicle-Safety Standard No. 218.49 C.F.R. 571.218, for motorcycle helmets.

(Amended by Ord. No. 1070, 2/21/89; 1442, 02/02/99)

Article 7 Pedestrians
5-701 Pedestrians; Rights And Duties; Right-Of-Way
5-702 Pedestrians; Rights And Duties At Controlled Intersections
5-703 Pedestrians Use Right Half Of Crosswalks
5-704 Parade Or March

5-701 Pedestrians; Rights And Duties; Right-Of-Way
No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
The driver of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any crosswalk, except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being regulated by police officers.
Whenever any vehicle has been stopped at a crosswalk or at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear to overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for pedestrians to walk in the roadway of any street or highway, except at crosswalks. Pedestrians shall use the side walk, if one is provided, when walking between intersections. Where no sidewalk is provided, pedestrians shall at all times walk on the left side of the roadway facing oncoming traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to oncoming vehicular traffic.
Pedestrians shall not stand, sit or otherwise place themselves in the roadway except when making emergency repairs on a vehicle to render it operable or when under the direction of a police officer.
Notwithstanding the provisions heretofore made in this Chapter and this section, every driver shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon a roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or handicapped person upon the roadway.
5-702 Pedestrians; Rights And Duties At Controlled Intersections
Colored Signals: At intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals, pedestrians shall not cross a street against a red signal and shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. A pedestrian crossing or starting to cross any such crosswalk on a green signal shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, including those making turns, until such pedestrian has reached the opposite curb or a safety zone. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail to yield the right-of-way to any such pedestrian.
Pedestrian "Walk" and "Don't Walk" Signals: Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows:

Walk: Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.

Don't Walk: No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't Walk" signal is showing.
5-703 Pedestrians Use Right Half Of Crosswalks
Pedestrians shall move whenever practicable upon the right half of a crosswalk.

5-704 Parade Or March
It shall be unlawful to conduct a parade or march in or on any public street, alley, or other public way or place in the City, unless a permit therefor is first obtained from the Council. Application for such permit shall be filed with the Clerk on forms provided for that purpose. Such application shall set forth the suggested route, the date such parade or march is to be conducted, the time of such parade or march, including preparation therefor, for which the street, alley, public way or other place may be used, shall begin, the approximate duration of such parade or march, the name of the person or persons or organization or organizations sponsoring or conducting such parade or march, any unusual equipment to be used, and such other information as may be required. The application shall be brought before the Council which may grant or deny such application, may alter or change the suggested route, may establish conditions and restrictions as to time and any other matters relating thereto, and may, in its discretion, require a bond of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), with good and sufficient personal sureties, as a condition to the granting of such permit, conditioned to indemnify the City for any loss, damage or liability incurred or caused by the conduct of such parade or march. If the application is approved by the Council, the Clerk shall issue a permit which shall include the conditions or restrictions or alterations, if any, made by the Council. In lieu of a personal surety bond, a corporate surety bond may be furnished. If bond is required by the Council, such permit shall not be issued until said bond and the sureties thereon are approved by the Clerk. Such permit shall be valid only for the time and date set forth therein.

Article 8 Snowmobiles And Minibikes
5-801 Snowmobiles; Definition
5-802 Snowmobiles; Equipment
5-803 Snowmobiles; Unlawful Acts
5-804 Snowmobiles; Firearms Prohibited
5-805 Snowmobiles; Public Lands
5-806 Minibikes; Unlawful Operation

5-801 Snowmobiles; Definition
A snowmobile is hereby defined as a self-propelled motor vehicle designed to travel on snow or ice or natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners and propelled by a belt-driven track with or without steel cleats.

5-802 Snowmobiles; Equipment
Every snowmobile operated within the Municipality shall be registered with the State of Nebraska, as required by law. No snowmobile shall be operated upon a public street or highway unless it is equipped with at least one head lamp, one tall lamp, reflector material of a minimum area of sixteen (16) square inches mounted on each side forward of the handle bars, and with brakes as prescribed by the Director of Motor Vehicles.

All laws applying to the operation of other motor vehicles shall apply to snowmobiles, except those relating to required equipment and those which, by their nature, have no application.

(Ref. 60-2002, 60-2013 RS Neb.)

5-803 Snowmobiles; Unlawful Acts
It shall be deemed a misdemeanor for any person to allow a snowmobile, either owned or operated by him, to be operated:

At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under the surrounding circumstances.
In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger person or property.
Without a lighted headlight and tail light when such would be required by conditions.
In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or destroys growing stock.
Upon any private lands without first having obtained permission of the owner, lessee or operator of such lands.
(Ref. 60-2013, 60-2015 RS Neb.)

5-804 Snowmobiles; Firearms Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any firearm, bow and arrow, or projectile device while operating or riding a snowmobile, unless such bow and arrow is enclosed in a carrying case, or such firearm or projectile device is unloaded and enclosed in a carrying case. Provided, this provision shall not apply to law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties.

5-805 Snowmobiles; Public Lands
Snowmobiles shall be prohibited from operation on the public lands owned by the Municipality, except where allowed by resolution of the Governing Body.

(Ref. 60-2016 RS Neb.)

5-806 Minibikes; Unlawful Operation
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a minibike upon any street or highway within the corporate limits of the Municipality. For purposes of this Article, "minibike" shall mean a two-wheel motor vehicle which has a total wheel and tire diameter of less than fourteen inches (14") or an engine rated capacity of less than forty-five (45) cubic centimeters displacement or any other two-wheel motor vehicle primarily designed by the manufacturer for off-road use only.

(Ref. 60-2101.01, 60-2107 RS Neb.)

Article 9 All-Terrain Vehicles
5-901 All-Terrain Vehicles; Definition
5-902 All-Terrain Vehicles; Operation
5-903 All-Terrain Vehicles; Headlights
5-904 All-Terrain Vehicles; Equipment, Requirement
5-905 All-Terrain Vehicles; Prohibitions
5-906 All-Terrain Vehicles; Competition
5-907 All-Terrain Vehicles; Accident Report
5-908 All-Terrain Vehicles; Penalty
5-909 All-Terrain Vehicles; Enforcement

5-901 All-Terrain Vehicles; Definition
As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, all-terrain vehicle means any motorized off-highway vehicle which (1) is 50 inches or less in width, (2) has a dry weight of 900 pounds or less, (3) travels on three or more low pressure tires, (4) is designed for operator use only with no passengers or is specifically designed by the original manufacturer for the operator and one passenger, (5) has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator, and (6) has handlebars or any other steering assembly for steering control.

(Neb. RS 60-6,355) (Ord. No. 1619, 09/21/04)

5-902 All-Terrain Vehicles; Operation
Except as provided in subsections B through D of this section, an all-terrain vehicle shall not be operated on any street, road, or highway within the Municipality. The crossing of any controlled-access highway shall not be permitted.
The crossing of a street, road, or highway shall be permitted only if:
The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety (90) degrees to the direction of the street, road, or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or roadway of the street, road, or highway;
The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that constitutes an immediate potential hazard;
In crossing a divided street, road, or highway, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such street, road, or highway with another street, road, or highway; and
Both the headlight and taillight of the vehicle are on when the crossing is made.
An all-terrain vehicle may be operated on a street, road, or highway when such operation occurs only between the hours of sunrise and sunset and such operation is incidental to the vehicle's use for agricultural purposes. Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle on a street, road, or highway shall have a valid Class 0 operator's license or a farm permit as provided in section 60-4-126 RS Neb., and shall not operate such vehicle at a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour. When operated on a street, road, or highway, the headlight and tail light of the vehicle shall be on and the vehicle shall be equipped with a bicycle safety flag which extends not less than five feet (5') above the ground attached to the rear of such vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not less than thirty (30) square inches and shall be day-glow in color.
All-terrain vehicles may be operated on streets, roads, or highways in parades which have been authorized by the State of Nebraska or the Municipality.
(Ref. 60-6,356 RS Neb.)

5-903 All-Terrain Vehicles; Headlights
Every all-terrain vehicle shall display a lighted headlight and tail light during the period of time from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise and at any time when visibility is reduced due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions.

(Ref. 60-2803 RS Neb.)

5-904 All-Terrain Vehicles; Equipment, Requirement
Every all-terrain vehicle shall be equipped with:

A brake system maintained in good operating condition;
An adequate muffler system in good working condition; and
A United States Forest Service qualified spark arrester.
(Ref. 60-2804 RS Neb.)

5-905 All-Terrain Vehicles; Prohibitions
No person shall:

Equip the exhaust system of an all-terrain vehicle with a cutout, bypass, or similar device;
Operate an all-terrain vehicle with an exhaust system so modified; or
Operate an all-terrain vehicle with the spark arrester removed or modified except for use in closed-course competition events.
(Ref. 60-2805 RS Neb.)

5-906 All-Terrain Vehicles; Competition
All-terrain vehicles participating in competitive events may be exempted from Sections 5-903 to 5-905 of this Article at the discretion of the Director of Motor Vehicles.

(Ref. 60-2806 RS Neb.)

5-907 All-Terrain Vehicles; Accident Report
If an accident results in the death of any person or in the injury of any person which requires the treatment of the person by a physician, the operator of each all-terrain vehicle involved in the accident shall give notice of the accident in the same manner as provided in Section 60-505.

(Ref. 60-2807 RS Neb.)

5-908 All-Terrain Vehicles; Penalty
Any violations of Sections 5-902 to 5-907 of this Article which is also a violation under Chapter 39 or Chapter 60 of RS Neb. may be punished under the penalty provisions of such Chapter.

(Ref. 60-2808 RS Neb.)

5-909 All-Terrain Vehicles; Enforcement
Any peace officer of the State or of any political subdivision, including conservation officers of the Game and Parks Commission shall be charged with the enforcement of the provisions of Sections 5-902 to 5-907 of this Article.

Article 10 Penal Provision
5-1001 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision

5-1001 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provision of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a violation of a Municipal Ordinance. Unless otherwise specified in the particular Article or Section for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such violation shall be in any amount not to exceed $500.00 for any one (1) offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said payment, the offender shall stand committed to the county jail until such fine and costs be paid.

(Ref. 16-246 RS Neb.)

Chapter 6 Police Regulations
Article 1 Animal Regulations
Article 2 [Reserved]
Article 3 Criminal Offenses
Article 4 Penal Provision

Article 1 Animal Regulations
6-101 Animal Regulations; Municipal Authority
6-102 Animal Control Authority; Established
6-102.01 Animal Control Authority; Responsibilities
6-102.02 Animal Control Authority; Animal Control Officers
6-102.03 Animal Control Authority; Bureau Of Violations
6-102.04 Animal Control Authority; Municipal Animal Pound
6-102.05 Animal Control Authority; Fees, Costs, And Expenses; Responsibility; Payment Prior To Release
6-102.06 Animal Control Authority; Fines
6-102.07 Animal Control Authority; Municipal Animal Pound; Euthenasia Of Severely Injured Or Ill Impounded Animals
6-103 Animal Regulations; Terms; Defined
6-104 Prohibited Animal; Posession Unlawful; Seizure; Disposition
6-105 Prohibited Animal; Running-At-Large Unlawful; Seizure; Disposition
6-106 Livestock; Prohibited; Exceptions
6-107 Exotic Animal; Prohibited; Exception
6-108 Dangerous Dogs; Prohibited
6-108.01 Dangerous Dogs; Declaration
6-108.02 Dangerous Dogs; Possession; Relocation Into Municipality
6-108.03 Dangerous Dogs; License; Application
6-108.04 Dangerous Dogs; License; Application Information; Photograph; Insurance; Microchip Implant; Rabies Vaccination; Enclosure; Inspection
6-108.05 Dangerous Dogs; License; Tax
6-108.06 Dangerous Dogs; License; Transfer; Refund Prohibited
6-108.07 Dangerous Dogs; License; Metallic Plate
6-108.08 Dangerous Dogs; License; Failure To Pay Tax; Immediate Confiscation; Permitted; Costs; Notice; Destruction
6-108.09 Dangerous Dogs; Running-At-Large; Destruction Permitted
6-108.10 Dangerous Dogs; Collar; Metallic Plates Required
6-108.11 Dangerous Dogs; Actions Required; Confinement; Costs; Limitations On Transport; Permanent Relocation; Procedure
6-108.12 Dangerous Dogs; Insurance; Responsibility
6-108.13 Dangerous Dogs; Attack Or Bite; Immediate Confiscation
6-108.14 Dangerous Dogs; Violation; Confiscation; Costs
6-108.15 Dangerous Dogs; Disposal By Court Order
6-108.16 Dangerous Dogs; Potentially Dangerous Dog; Declaration; Notification
6-109 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License
6-109.01 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License; Application Information And Rabies Vaccination
6-109.02 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License; Tax
6-109.03 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License; Metallic Plate
6-109.04 Domestic Dogs And Cats; Collar; Metallic Plates Required
6-109.05 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License; Transfer; Refund Prohibited
6-109.06 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License; Failure To Pay Tax; Destruction; Permitted
6-109.07 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License; Collarless; Owner
6-110 Domestic Dogs And Cats; Running-At-Large
6-110.01 Domestic Dogs And Cats; Running-At-Large; Impound; Destruction; Permitted
6-110.02 Domestic Dogs And Cats; Running-At-Large; Killing Permitted
6-110.03 Domestic Dogs And Cats; Running-At-Large; Penalty
6-111 Domestic Dogs; Inflict Injury
6-112 Service And Police Animals; License
6-112.01 Service And Police Animals; Service Animal; Access
6-112.02 Service And Police Animals; Interference With
6-113 Rabies Control; Rabies Control Authority
6-113.01 Rabies Control Authority; Responsibilities
6-113.02 Rabies Control; Rabies Vaccination
6-113.03 Rabies Control; Rabies Vaccination; Cost
6-113.04 Rabies Control; Rabies Vaccination; Certificate And Metallic Plate
6-113.05 Rabies Control; Rabies Vaccination; Exemption
6-113.06 Rabies Control; Suspected Rabid Animal; Owner; Impound; Observation; Release
6-113.07 Rabies Control; Suspected Rabid Animal; Unknown Owner; Impound; Tests
6-113.08 Rabies Control; Impoundment Fees; Establishment; Owner Responsibility
6-114 Rabies Control; Feral And Wild Animals; Destruction
6-115 Rabies Control; Public Notice Of Impoundment; Release Or Destruction
6-116 Animals; Torture; Poison; Slaughter; Injure
6-117 Animals; Cruelty
6-118 Animals; Noise; Offensive
6-119 Animals; Fighting; Unlawful
6-120 Animals; Restrictions On Multi-Pet Households
6-121 Animals; Enclosures
6-122 Animals; Ticket; Destruction
6-123 Interference With Animal Control Officers; Traps; Vehicles

6-101 Animal Regulations; Municipal Authority
The City may adopt and enforce ordinances for the protection of the public, public health, and animals within the Municipality.


Source: Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016)



6-102 Animal Control Authority; Established
The City Police Department shall be the Animal Control Authority of the Municipality.


Source: Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016)



6-102.01 Animal Control Authority; Responsibilities
The Animal Control Authority shall be responsible for:

(1) enforcing the animal control laws and regulations of the Municipality and the state within the corporate city limits;

(2) issuing tickets for violations of animal control laws and regulations of the Municipality and collecting fines established by the Municipality for such violations;

(3) processing applications as described in this Article;

(4) issuing licenses for domestic dogs, domestic cats, dangerous dogs;

(5) collecting taxes established by the Municipality for such licenses and applications;

(6) impounding animals as described within this Article;

(7) collecting fees and fines established by the Municipality;

(8) coordinating with the local veterinarians for the confinement, care, release or the expeditious and humane disposal of impounded animals; and,

(9) the maintenance of related records.


Source: Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016)



6-102.02 Animal Control Authority; Animal Control Officers
Police officers and community service officers employed by the City shall have the responsibilities and authorities of animal control officers within the Municipality. All animal control officers, as described within this Article, shall have the authority to enforce any provisions within this Article.


Source: Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1938, § 1 (2015); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016); Ord. 2014, § 1 (2017)



6-102.03 Animal Control Authority; Bureau Of Violations
There is hereby created the Bureau of Violations within the powers and duties of the Animal Control Authority. A copy of each ticket issued for violations of Municipal animal control laws and regulations shall be deposited with the Administrative Assistant at the Municipal police station whose duty it shall be to collect all fines and fees and to maintain appropriate and accurate records of all such fines and fees. All fines and fees, approved by the City Council as prescribed within this Article, shall be payable at the Municipal police station.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1938, § 2 (2015); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-102.04 Animal Control Authority; Municipal Animal Pound
The City shall enter into a cooperative agreement with a licensed veterinarian within 2 miles of the corporate City Limits for the establishment and operation of the Municipal Animal Pound.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-102.05 Animal Control Authority; Fees, Costs, And Expenses; Responsibility; Payment Prior To Release
The City Council approves and establishes the following fees:
Impound:
domestic dog, domestic cat, or domestic animal: Twenty dollars ($20.00) or forty dollars ($40.00) for any subsequent impound;
livestock animal: Seventy five dollars ($75.00) or one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) for any subsequent impound;
dangerous dog or prohibited animal: Two hundred dollars ($200.00) or three hundred dollars ($300.00) for any subsequent impound;
Care: As billed by the Municipal Animal Pound or competent authority;
Boarding: As billed by the Municipal Animal Pound or competent authority; and
Euthanasia: As billed by the Municipal Animal Pound or competent authority.
Owners are responsible for all fees, costs, and expenses associated with the impounding, care, keeping, and euthanasia of any animal impounded by any animal control officer regardless of the disposition of the animal. Owners shall pay such fees, costs, and expenses prior to the release of such animal.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-102.06 Animal Control Authority; Fines
The City Council approves and establishes the following fines for violations of this Article to be payable at the Municipal police station:
Possession of a prohibited animal (§6‐104): Four hundred dollars ($400.00);
Prohibited animal running-at-large (§6-105): Four hundred dollars ($400.00);
Possession of a dangerous dog in violation of any provision of this Article (§6-108) other than those listed within this Section: Three hundred dollars ($300.00);
Dangerous dog running-at-large (§6-108.09): Three hundred dollars ($300.00);
No collar on dangerous dog (§6-108.10): Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
No metallic plate (e.g. rabies vaccination or dangerous dog license or name of owner) on collar of dangerous dog (§6-108.10): Twenty five dollars ($25.00) each.
Failure to secure and maintain liability insurance for dangerous dog (§6-108.12): Two hundred dollars ($200.00);
Dangerous dog bite or attack (§6-108.13): Four hundred dollars ($400.00);
Failure to license domestic dog or cat (§6-109): Fifty dollars ($50.00);
No collar on domestic dog or cat (§6-109.04): Ten dollars ($10.00).
No metallic plate (e.g. rabies vaccination or domestic dog or cat license or name of owner) on collar of domestic dog or cat (§6-109.04): Ten dollars ($10.00) each.
Domestic dog or cat running-at-large (§6-110): Twenty five ($25.00);
Domestic dog inflict injury on human or domestic dog, domestic cat, or domestic animal (§6-111): One hundred dollars ($100.00).
Interference with service or police animal (§6-112.02): Four hundred dollars ($400.00);
No rabies vaccination (§6-113.02): One hundred dollars ($100.00);
Torture, poison, slaughter, or injure of any animal (§6-116): Five hundred dollars ($500.00);
Animal cruelty (§6-117): Three hundred dollars ($300.00);
Offensive noise (§6-118): Fifty dollars ($50.00);
Animal fighting (§6-119): Five hundred dollars ($500.00);
Public nuisance animal enclosure (§6-121): Fifty dollars ($50.00);
Destruction of ticket (§6-122): Fifty dollars ($50.00); and
Interference with officer, trap, or vehicle (§6-123): Four hundred dollars ($400.00).
All money collected by the Municipal Police under this section shall be transferred to the Municipal Treasurer.
Should any fine not be paid within ten (10) days from the date of offense or issuance of citation or if no fine is identified for a particular offense, the Municipal Police shall forward all necessary information to the Municipal Attorney. The Municipal Attorney may file a complaint in the appropriate Court.
Payment of any fine is an admission of guilt for said offense.

This fine schedule notwithstanding, the Court may assess and impose a fine up to and including five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any violation identified within this Article.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1938, § 3 (2015); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016); Ord. 2102, §§ 1 to 3 (2020))

6-102.07 Animal Control Authority; Municipal Animal Pound; Euthenasia Of Severely Injured Or Ill Impounded Animals
The Municipal Pound may immediately euthanize any impounded animal when the animal is deemed to be suffering due to severe injury or illness and the ownership of the animal is unknown. No action shall be maintained against any animal control officer, the Municipal Pound, or any employee of the Municipal Pound for such euthanasia.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-103 Animal Regulations; Terms; Defined
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them unless the context otherwise requires:

Abandon: To leave any animal or livestock in one's care, whether as owner or custodian, for any length of time without making effective provision for its food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal's health.
Alpaca: Any domesticated species of South American camel.
Animal: All vertebrate members of the animal kingdom except humans or wild animals at large.
Animal Control Authority: The Crete Police Department.
Animal Control Officer: Any police officer and community service officer employed by the City and assigned to the Animal Control Authority and any State, county or local law enforcement officer or other City employee whose temporary or full-time duties, in whole or in part, include the enforcement of any provisions within this Article.
Birds of Prey: Any buzzard, caracaras, eagle, falcon, harrier, kite, osprey, owl, secretary bird, or vulture.
Bovine: Any cow, ox, or bison.
Care: The act of providing medical examination and/or treatment for any impounded animal by any veterinarian.
Cervine: Any elk, deer, moose, caribou, or other member of the Family Cervidae.
Cruelly Mistreat: To knowingly and intentionally kill, maim, disfigure, torture, beat, mutilate, burn, scald, or otherwise inflict harm upon any animal.
Cruelly Neglect: To fail to provide any animal in one's care, whether as owner or custodian, with food, water, shelter or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal's health.
Dangerous Dog:
Dangerous dog shall mean any dog that:
has killed a human being;
has inflicted injury on a human being that required medical treatment;
has killed a domestic animal without provocation; or,
has been previously determined to be a potentially dangerous dog by the Animal Control Authority or by another animal control authority, and the dog inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require medical treatment, injures a domestic animal, or threatens the safety of a human being or domestic animal.
Exceptions:
If the dog was not running-at-large, a dog shall not be defined as a dangerous dog under subsection L,1,b of this section if the human being was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog at the time of the injury or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog.
If the dog was not running-at-large, a dog shall not be defined as a dangerous dog under subsection L,1,d of this section if the injury, damage, or threat was sustained by a human being who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. §20-203, 28-520, or 28-521; was committing any other tort upon the property of the owner of the dog; was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog; or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
A dog shall not be defined as a dangerous dog under subsection L,1 of this section if the dog is a police animal as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1008.
Destroy/Destruction: The humane killing of an animal.
Domestic Animal: Any animal, other than domestic dogs or cats, not defined as a dangerous dog or prohibited animal within this section, which is kept as a household pet for the purpose of companionship. Domestic animals include:
Aquarium Fish: Any nonlethal fish maintained in an indoor aquarium;
Domestic Amphibians: Any animal of the Lissamphibia subclass such as a: frog, toad, salamander or newt;
Domestic Bird: Any parrot, cockatoo, parakeet, canary, mynah, or lovebird;
Domestic Rabbit: Any rabbit or bunny from the family Leporidae living indoors or in an enclosed outside hutch;
Domestic Reptile: Any nonvenomous lizard or turtle, or any non-constricting or nonvenomous snake less than four 4 feet in length;
Domestic Rodent: Any animal belonging to the Rodentia Order such as a gerbil, guinea pig, hamster, mouse, or rat living indoors.
Domestic ferret.
Domestic Cat (Cat): Any animal which is wholly or in part of the Felis domesticus species which is harbored as a household pet for the purpose of companionship. This definition does not include feral cats or prohibited animals as defined within this section.
Domestic Dog (Dog): Any animal which is wholly or in part of the Canis familiaris sub-species which is harbored as a household pet for the purpose of companionship. This definition does not include dangerous dogs or prohibited animals as defined within this section.
Equine: Any horse, pony, donkey, mule, hinny, or llama.
Euthanasia: The destruction of any animal by commonly accepted veterinary practices.
Exotic Animal: Any animal which is not commonly sold through licensed livestock auction markets. Such animals shall include, but not be limited to, miniature cattle, miniature horses, miniature donkeys, Barbary sheep, Dall's sheep, alpacas, llamas, pot-bellied pigs, and small mammals not including domestic dogs or cats. The term also includes birds and poultry. The term does not include beef and dairy cattle, calves, swine, bison, sheep sold for wool or food, goats sold for dairy, food, or fiber, and domesticated cervine animals.
Feral Animal: Any dog or cat found at large within the Municipality without a collar, license tag, or identification tag.
Hybrid Animal: Any animal that is the product of the breeding of a domestic dog with a nondomestic canine species.
Humane Killing: The destruction of an animal by a method which causes the animal a minimum of pain and suffering.
Impound: The act of capturing and arranging the temporary confinement of any animal by any animal control officer.
Keep: The act of providing confinement and/or shelter and/or supplying water and/or nourishment to any animal.
Law Enforcement Officer: Any police officers employed by the Municipality and all deputy sheriffs, marshals, police officers, state highway patrol officers, members of the National Guard on active service by direction of the Governor during periods of emergency, and all other persons with similar authority to make arrests.
Livestock Animal: Any bovine, equine, porcine, sheep, goat, cervine, ratite bird, or poultry.
Medical Treatment: Treatment administered by a physician or other licensed health care professional resulting in the use of sutures or surgery or treatment for one or more broken bones.
Municipal Animal Pound: The licensed veterinarian and/or veterinary clinic which, through cooperative agreement with the City, provides proper care, treatment, and confinement of impounded animals.
Own: To possess, keep; harbor; or have control of, charge of, custody of any dangerous dog; or domestic or livestock animal. This term does not apply to domestic dogs or cats temporarily maintained on the premises of a veterinarian or kennel operator for a period of not more than thirty (30) days.
Owner: Any person, firm, corporation, organization, political subdivision possessing, harboring, keeping, or having control or custody of any domestic dog, domestic cat, dangerous dog, domestic animal, exotic animal, or livestock animal or permitting any domestic dog, domestic cat, dangerous dog, domestic animal, exotic animal, or livestock animal to habitually be or remain on or be lodged or fed within any structure, grounds, or premises of such person, firm, corporation, organization, or political subdivision. This term does not apply to veterinarians, kennel operators, or livestock market representatives temporarily maintaining on their premises animals owned by other persons.
Police Animal: Any horse or dog owned or controlled by the Municipality, Saline County, State of Nebraska, or agency of the federal government especially trained for the purpose of assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of his or her official enforcement duties.
Porcine: Any pig, swine, or hog.
Potentially Dangerous Dog:
Any dog that when unprovoked
inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require medical treatment,
injures a domestic animal,
or chases or approaches a person upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or
any specific dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack when unprovoked, to cause injury, or to threaten the safety of humans or domestic animals.
Prohibited animal: Any species or mix of any species prohibited by the State of Nebraska by statute or by the Municipality by ordinance to include but not limited to any:
Non-domesticated wild animal;
Coyote, wolf, or hybrid animal;
Venomous or constricting snake, alligator, crocodile, Gila monster, or Komodo dragon;
Nonvenomous snake four (4) feet in length;
Wild bird or bird of prey such as condors, falcons, hawks, eagles, and vultures;
Skunk;
Animal of the family Felidae other than a domestic cat such as tigers, lions, leopards, mountain lions, pumas, lynx, cheetahs, jaguars and ocelots;
Animal of the family Ursidae including American black bears, brown bears, panda bears and polar bears;
Marsupial such as kangaroos, wallabies, koalas, and possums;
Primate such as baboons, lemurs, chimpanzees, monkeys, orangutans, and gorillas;
Lethal or invasive fish such as snakehead or piranha;
Bees;
Livestock animal;
Exotic animal; or
Animal which reasonably poses or may pose a threat to the life or health of any human.
Prohibited animals do not include any domestic dog, domestic cat, domestic animal or dangerous dog.
Poultry: Any domesticated bird that serves as a source of eggs or meat and includes, but is not limited to, chickens, turkeys, ducks, and geese.
Rabies Control Authority: The Crete Police Department.
Ratite Bird: Any ostrich, emu, cassowary, rhea, or kiwi.
Run/Running-at-Large: Any animal not under the control of its owner by:
Confinement within an enclosed receptacle, vehicle, shelter, or other fenced enclosure; or
A leash, cord, or chain which is securely fastened or picketed in a manner sufficient to keep the animal on the premises where picketed; or
A leash, cord, or chain of six feet or less in length physically held by the owner or other responsible person who is capable of physically restraining the movement of such animal.
Service Animal: Dogs that are individually trained to do work or perform tasks for people with disabilities.
Slaughter: The purposeful killing of any animal in preparation for consumption and/or as part of a ceremonial ritual.
Torture: Intentionally subjecting an animal to extreme pain, suffering, or agony. Torture does not include conduct performed by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine and surgery in this state or conduct that conforms to accepted veterinary practices.
Transfer: The lawful disposition of any animal to a licensed humane society or individual from the Animal Control Authority.
Veterinarian: Any accredited veterinarian approved by the deputy administrator of the United States Department of Agriculture in accordance with 9 C.F.R. part 161, as such regulation existed on January 1, 2006.
Wild Animal: Any species of mammals native to, migrating to or through, or having established free-ranging populations in the State of Nebraska except the fallow deer, the house mouse, the Norway rat, the black rat, the feral domestic dog, and the feral domestic cat.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1915, §§ 1 to 2 (2014); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016); Ord. 2014, § 2 (2017); Ord. 2059, § 1 (2018); Ord. 2061, § 1 (2018))

6-104 Prohibited Animal; Posession Unlawful; Seizure; Disposition
It shall be unlawful for any owner to possess, harbor, keep, or maintain control or custody of any prohibited animal within the Municipality.
The Animal Control Authority may seize and impound any prohibited animal found in the Municipality. If such seizure or impound is deemed unsafe, an animal control officer may kill such animal. No action shall be maintained against any animal control officer for killing a prohibited animal.
The Animal Control Authority may sell or transfer an impounded prohibited animal to competent authority or order the euthanasia of such animal.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-105 Prohibited Animal; Running-At-Large Unlawful; Seizure; Disposition
It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit any prohibited animal to run-at-large within the Municipality.
The Animal Control Authority may seize and impound any prohibited animal found in the Municipality. If such seizure or impound is deemed unsafe, an animal control officer may kill such animal. No action shall be maintained against any animal control officer for killing a prohibited animal.
At the direction of the Chief of Police, the Animal Control Authority may sell or transfer an impounded prohibited animal to competent authority or order the euthanasia of such animal.
(Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-106 Livestock; Prohibited; Exceptions
It shall be unlawful for any owner to possess, harbor, keep, or maintain control or custody of livestock in the Municipality. Exceptions include:

The expedient transportation of such animals through the City or to destinations described within this section;
Livestock animals temporarily held for sale upon commercially zoned lots operated by a veterinarian;
Livestock animals temporarily held within the confines of Tuxedo Park associated with events approved by the City Council to include, but not limited to, the Saline County Fair, rodeos, circuses, demonstrations, and shows;
Horses participating in parades approved by the City Council;
Livestock animals participating in any activity of no more than eight (8) hours in duration through permit by the City Clerk and with the approval of the City Administrator; and
Birds of the family Anatidae owned by and harbored upon properties owned by Doane University.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016); Ord. 2086, § 1 (2019))

6-107 Exotic Animal; Prohibited; Exception
It shall be unlawful for any owner to possess, harbor, keep, or maintain control or custody of any exotic animal in the Municipality except for the expedient transportation of such animals through the City.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108 Dangerous Dogs; Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person, after being notified as provided herein, to keep, harbor or have control or custody of a dangerous dog within the Municipality without first having complied with the provisions of this Article.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.01 Dangerous Dogs; Declaration
The Court, Chief of Police, or the animal control authority of any state, county, city, or village may declare a dog to be dangerous as defined within this Article. Upon such declaration, such dog shall be considered a dangerous dog as defined within this Article.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.02 Dangerous Dogs; Possession; Relocation Into Municipality
It shall be unlawful for any owner to possess, harbor, keep, maintain control or custody of, or relocate any dangerous dog within the Municipality without having first licensed the dog with the Animal Control Authority.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.03 Dangerous Dogs; License; Application
The owner of any dangerous dog shall make application for a dangerous dog license at the Municipal police station and shall renew said license annually for the life of the animal, as described within this Article.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1938, § 5 (2015); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.04 Dangerous Dogs; License; Application Information; Photograph; Insurance; Microchip Implant; Rabies Vaccination; Enclosure; Inspection
The owner of a dangerous dog shall provide, at the time the application and upon printed forms provided by the City Police Department for such purpose, the following:
His or her name;
address;
telephone number;
the name (if any) of the dangerous dog;
breed;
color(s);
gender; and
the City lot upon which the dangerous dog shall be harbored.
The owner shall also provide
a color photograph of the dangerous dog (no smaller than 5”x7”);
verifiable written certification from an insurance carrier, licensed within the State, of liability insurance coverage, including the City of Crete as a co-insured, in an amount of no less than $100,000;
verifiable certification of the implant of a microchip by a licensed veterinarian;
verifiable certification that the dangerous dog has been spayed or neutered;
a veterinarian’s certificate verifying the dangerous dog has been vaccinated for rabies for the ensuing period of the license.
The owner shall also permit an animal control officer to inspect the enclosure required for the dangerous dog as described within this Article.
The Animal Control Authority shall not issue a dangerous dog license or metallic plates until such information and certifications are provided and a subsequent inspection demonstrates the owner maintains a proper enclosure for the animal.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.05 Dangerous Dogs; License; Tax
The Municipal tax for an individual dangerous dog license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. The Animal Control Authority will not accept, process, or approve the license application or issue tags for any dangerous dog license until such payment is received.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.06 Dangerous Dogs; License; Transfer; Refund Prohibited
The transfer of a dangerous dog license from one animal to another or from one owner to another is prohibited. No refund shall be made in case of death, sale, or other disposition of the permitted animal or if the license application is denied for any reason.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.07 Dangerous Dogs; License; Metallic Plate
Upon accepting the license application from the owner of a dangerous dog, the Animal Control Authority shall make record of the license and issue a metallic plate to the owner bearing the municipal license identification number and “CRETE NEBRASKA DANGEROUS DOG LICENSE”.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.08 Dangerous Dogs; License; Failure To Pay Tax; Immediate Confiscation; Permitted; Costs; Notice; Destruction
The Animal Control Authority may immediately confiscate any dangerous dog for which the owner shall refuse or neglect to make application for or pay the dangerous dog license tax.
The Animal Control Authority shall notify the owner in writing of such confiscation by personal service or certified mail.
The owner of any such dangerous dog shall be responsible for fees and costs and make appropriate application for a dangerous dog license prior to the release of the animal.
If, after ten (10) days from notification, the owner refuses or neglects to pay related fees and costs and/or make appropriate application for a dangerous dog license, the Animal Control Authority shall arrange for the humane destruction of the dangerous dog.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.09 Dangerous Dogs; Running-At-Large; Destruction Permitted
No owner may permit a dangerous dog to run at large. The Animal Control Authority may kill any dangerous dog when found running-at-large. Animal control officers need not attempt capture of a dangerous dog running-at-large.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.10 Dangerous Dogs; Collar; Metallic Plates Required
It shall be the duty of every owner of any dangerous dog to securely place upon the neck of such dangerous dog a good and sufficient collar affixed thereon:

a metallic plate issued by a veterinarian signifying current rabies vaccination;
a metallic plate issued by the Animal Control Authority signifying appropriate licensure; and
a separate metallic plate or the reverse of one of the aforementioned metallic plates plainly inscribed with the name of such owner.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.11 Dangerous Dogs; Actions Required; Confinement; Costs; Limitations On Transport; Permanent Relocation; Procedure
A dangerous dog that has been declared as such shall be spayed or neutered and implanted with a microchip identification number by a licensed veterinarian within thirty days after such declaration. The cost of both procedures is the responsibility of the owner of the dangerous dog. Written proof of both procedures and the microchip identification number shall be provided to the Animal Control Authority after the procedures are completed.
No owner of a dangerous dog shall permit the dangerous dog to go beyond the property of the owner unless the dog is restrained securely by a chain or leash and fitted with a muzzle.
Except as provided in subsection D of this section or for a reasonable veterinary purpose, no owner of a dangerous dog shall transport such dog or permit such dog to be transported to another county, city, or village in this state.
An owner of a dangerous dog may transport such dog or permit such dog to be transported to another county, city, or village in this state for the purpose of permanent relocation of the dangerous dog if the owner has obtained written permission prior to such relocation from the Municipal Animal Control and from the county, city, or village in which the owner will reside. Each animal control authority may grant such permission based upon a reasonable evaluation of both the owner and the dog, including if the owner has complied with the laws of this state and of the county, city, or village in which he or she resides.
The Animal Control Authority shall monitor the owner and such dog for a period of at least thirty days but not to exceed ninety days to ensure the owner's compliance with the laws of this state and of such county, city, or village with regard to dangerous dogs. Nothing in this subsection shall permit the Animal Control Authority to rescind any previous declaration of a dangerous dog.
While unattended on the owner's property, as identified on the dangerous dog license application, the dangerous dog shall be securely confined, in a humane manner, indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitably designed to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the dangerous dog from escaping.
Maintenance of a dangerous dog or other dangerous animal is not permitted in areas where such structures or pens are not authorized by zoning regulations.
If permitted by zoning regulations, such pen or structure shall be at least two (2) lengths of the dangerous dog wide, four (4) lengths of the dangerous dog long, and two (2) lengths of the dangerous dog high, and must be constructed with chain link fencing and securely fastened on all four (4) sides and top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be embedded into the ground at a depth of at least one foot.
The pen or structure shall also protect the dangerous dog from the elements.
The pen or structure shall be at least ten feet from any property line of the owner.
The owner of a dangerous dog shall post warning signs on the property where the dog is kept that are clearly visible from all areas of public access and that inform persons that a dangerous dog is on the property. Each warning sign shall be no less than ten inches by twelve inches and shall contain the words warning and dangerous animal in high-contrast lettering at least three inches high on a black background.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.12 Dangerous Dogs; Insurance; Responsibility
The owner of any dangerous dog shall secure and maintain liability insurance, including the City of Crete as a co-insured, in an amount of no less than $100,000 and display verifiable written certification of said insurance upon demand by any animal control officer.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.13 Dangerous Dogs; Attack Or Bite; Immediate Confiscation
It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit a dangerous dog to attack or bite a human, domestic dog, domestic cat, domestic animal, or livestock animal.
If a dangerous dog of an owner with a prior conviction or payment of fine(s) under Sections 6-108 to 6-108.13, attacks or bites a human or domestic dog, domestic cat, domestic animal; the Animal Control Authority shall immediately confiscate the dangerous dog, place in quarantine for the proper length of time, and thereafter, arrange for the expeditious and humane destruction of the dangerous dog.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.14 Dangerous Dogs; Violation; Confiscation; Costs
Any dangerous dog may be immediately confiscated by an animal control officer if the owner is in violation of Sections 6-108 to 6-108.13. The owner shall be responsible for the reasonable costs incurred by the Animal Control Authority for the care of a dangerous dog confiscated by any animal control officer or for the destruction of any dangerous dog if the action by the Animal Control Authority is pursuant to law and if the owner violated Sections 6-108 to 6-108.13.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.15 Dangerous Dogs; Disposal By Court Order
In addition to any other penalty, a court may order the Animal Control Authority to dispose of a dangerous dog in an expeditious and humane manner.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-108.16 Dangerous Dogs; Potentially Dangerous Dog; Declaration; Notification
The Chief of Police, or designee, may declare a dog to be potentially dangerous, as defined within this Article, by notifying the animal owner by certified mail or by conspicuous posting of the declaration on the property upon which the dog is harbored. Notification shall include the description of the incident(s) requiring such declaration.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-109 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License
Any owner of any domestic dog or cat shall, after the animal is four (4) months in age and within thirty (30) days after acquiring said animal, obtain a license from the Animal Control Authority and annually renew said license for the life of the animal.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-109.01 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License; Application Information And Rabies Vaccination
The owner of a domestic dog or cat shall provide, at the time of application and upon printed forms provided by the Animal Control Authority for such purpose, the following:

his or her name, address, telephone number;
the name (if any), breed, color, and sex of the domestic dog or cat to be licensed
a veterinarian’s certificate verifying that the domestic dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies for the ensuing period of the license.
The Animal Control Authority shall not issue a license or tag until such information is provided and certificate is shown.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-109.02 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License; Tax
Any person who shall own, keep, or harbor a domestic dog or cat over the age of four (4) months within the Municipality shall within thirty (30) days after acquisition of said dog or cat acquire a license for each dog or cat. The owner shall renew the license within thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the previous license period. The Animal Control Authority may issue licenses for a period of one (1), two (2) or three (3) years upon receipt of the applicable local license tax and State fee. Spayed female or neutered male; Ten dollars ($10.00) per year or unspayed female or unneutered male over twelve (12) months; Twenty dollars ($20.00) per year, and the annual fee identified by the State of Nebraska within NRS 54-603 for the collection, administration, and disposition of funds for the Commercial Dog and Cat Operator Inspection Program Cash Fund. No license period shall extend beyond the rabies vaccination certificate expiration date. The Animal Control Authority shall not accept the license application until such taxes and fees are received.

(Ord. 985, § 1 (1985); Ord. 1100, § 1 (1989); Ord. 1767, § 1 (2010); Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016); Ord. 2058, § 1 (2018))

6-109.03 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License; Metallic Plate
Upon accepting the license application from the owner of a domestic dog or cat, the Animal Control Authority shall make record of the license and issue a metallic plate to the owner bearing the municipal license identification number and “CRETE NEBRASKA PET LICENSE”.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-109.04 Domestic Dogs And Cats; Collar; Metallic Plates Required
It shall be the duty of every owner of any domestic dog or cat to securely place upon the neck of such domestic dog or cat a good and sufficient collar affixed thereon:

a metallic plate issued by a veterinarian signifying current rabies vaccination;
a metallic plate issued by the Animal Control Authority signifying appropriate licensure; and
a separate metallic plate or the reverse of one of the aforementioned metallic plates plainly inscribed with the name of such owner.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-109.05 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License; Transfer; Refund Prohibited
The transfer of a license from one domestic dog or cat to another is prohibited. No refund shall be made in case of death, sale, or other disposition of the licensed domestic dog or cat.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-109.06 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License; Failure To Pay Tax; Destruction; Permitted
The Animal Control Authority may cause the destruction of any domestic dog or cat for which the owner shall refuse or neglect to pay license tax.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-109.07 Domestic Dogs And Cats; License; Collarless; Owner
Every person who shall harbor about his or her premises a collarless domestic dog or cat for ten days or more shall be the owner, and shall be liable for all damages which such domestic dog or cat shall commit.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-110 Domestic Dogs And Cats; Running-At-Large
It shall be unlawful for any owner to cause or permit, through commission or omission, any domestic dog or cat to run at large within the Municipality.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-110.01 Domestic Dogs And Cats; Running-At-Large; Impound; Destruction; Permitted
The Animal Control Authority may

impound any domestic dog or cat found running at large within the Municipality to guard the public from injuries or annoyances and
arrange for the destruction or transfer of any such impounded domestic dog or cat after five (5) days of impoundment if the owner is unknown or has not claimed the animal, to include paying all associated fees, costs, and expenses.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-110.02 Domestic Dogs And Cats; Running-At-Large; Killing Permitted
The Animal Control Authority may kill any domestic dog or cat running at large if the animal

threatens the life or safety of any human; or
is in the act of killing, wounding, chasing or worrying any sheep or domestic dog, cat or other animal within the Municipality or if there is just and reasonable grounds to believe that it has been killing, wounding, chasing or worrying any domestic dog, cat or other such animal. No action shall be maintained against any animal control officer for such killing.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-110.03 Domestic Dogs And Cats; Running-At-Large; Penalty
The owner of any domestic dog or cat running-at-large shall be fined twenty-five dollars ($25.00).

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-111 Domestic Dogs; Inflict Injury
It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit a domestic dog, when unprovoked, to (a) inflict an injury on a human being that does or does not require medical treatment, or (b) injure or kill a domestic dog, domestic cat or domestic animal.

(Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-112 Service And Police Animals; License
Every service and police animal shall be licensed as required by Municipal ordinances but no license tax shall be charged. Upon the retirement or discontinuance of the animal as a service or police animal, the owner of the animal shall be responsible for the payment of the license tax as prescribed by Municipal ordinances.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-112.01 Service And Police Animals; Service Animal; Access
A totally or partially blind or visually impaired person, deaf or hearing-impaired person, or physically or mentally limited person has the right to be accompanied by a service animal, especially trained for the purpose, and a bona fide trainer of a service animal has the right to be accompanied by such animal in training upon the streets, highways, sidewalks, walkways, public buildings, public facilities, and other public places to include accommodations, advantages, facilities, and privileges of all common carriers, airplanes, motor vehicles, railroad trains, motor buses, street cars, boats, any other public conveyances or modes of transportation, hotels, lodging places, places of public accommodation, amusement, or resort, and other places to which the general public is invited, subject only to the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all persons, without being required to pay an extra charge for the service animal. Such person shall be liable for any damage done to the premises or facilities or to any person by such animal.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-112.02 Service And Police Animals; Interference With
It shall be unlawful for any person to

intentionally impede, interfere or attempt to intentionally impede, interfere, or threaten to impede or interfere with any animal that he or she knows or has reason to believe is a service or police animal; or
intentionally injure, harass, threaten to injure or harass or attempt to intentionally injure, harass, or threaten an animal that he or she knows or has reason to believe is a service or police animal.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-113 Rabies Control; Rabies Control Authority
The City Police Department shall be the Rabies Control Authority of the Municipality.

(Ord. 1755, 4/20/10; Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-113.01 Rabies Control Authority; Responsibilities
The Rabies Control Authority shall be responsible for enforcing this Article and sections 71-4401 to 71-4412 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. Officials of the Municipality and animal control officers are not responsible for any accident or disease of a domestic or hybrid animal resulting from the enforcement of such sections.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-113.02 Rabies Control; Rabies Vaccination
It shall be the responsibility of every owner of any domestic dog, domestic cat, or other domestic animal in the Municipality to have such animal vaccinated against rabies with a licensed vaccine and revaccinated at regular intervals. Young domestic dogs, domestic cats, or other domestic animals shall be initially vaccinated at the age of four (4) months. Unvaccinated domestic animals acquired or moved into the Municipality shall be vaccinated within thirty (30) days after purchase or arrival unless under the age of four (4) months for initial vaccination.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-113.03 Rabies Control; Rabies Vaccination; Cost
The cost of rabies vaccination shall be borne by the owner of the domestic animal.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-113.04 Rabies Control; Rabies Vaccination; Certificate And Metallic Plate
It shall be the duty of each veterinarian, at the time of vaccinating any domestic dog, domestic cat, or domestic animal to complete a certificate of rabies vaccination which shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
The owner's name and address;
An adequate description of the animal, including, but not limited to, such items as the animal's breed, sex, age, name, and distinctive markings;
The date of vaccination;
The rabies vaccination metallic plate number;
The type of rabies vaccine administered;
The manufacturer's serial number of the vaccine used; and
The site of vaccination.
Such veterinarian shall issue a metallic plate to the owner with the certificate of vaccination.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-113.05 Rabies Control; Rabies Vaccination; Exemption
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any domestic dog, domestic cat, or domestic animal
owned by a person temporarily remaining within the Municipality for less than thirty (30) days;
brought into the Municipality for field trial or show purposes
or brought into the Municipality for hunting purposes for a period of less than thirty (30) days.
Owners shall keep such animals under strict supervision.
It shall be unlawful to bring any domestic dog, domestic cat, or domestic animal into the Municipality which does not comply with the animal health laws and import rules and regulations of the State of Nebraska which are applicable such animals.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-113.06 Rabies Control; Suspected Rabid Animal; Owner; Impound; Observation; Release
The Animal Control Authority shall impound any animal owned by a person that has bitten any person or caused an abrasion of the skin of any person for a period of not less than ten (10) days if:
The animal is suspected of having rabies, regardless of the species and whether or not the animal has been vaccinated;
The animal is not vaccinated and is of a species determined by the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services to be a rabid species; or
The animal is of a species which has been determined by the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services to be a rabid species not amenable to rabies protection by immunization, whether or not such animal has been vaccinated.
If, after observation and examination by a veterinarian, at the end of the ten (10) day period the animal shows no clinical signs of rabies, the animal may be released to its owner.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-113.07 Rabies Control; Suspected Rabid Animal; Unknown Owner; Impound; Tests
Upon impoundment by the Animal Control Authority as described in within sub-section §6-114.04, any animal of a rabid species which has bitten a person or caused an abrasion of the skin of a person and which is not owned or the ownership of which cannot be determined within seventy two (72) hours of the time of the bite or abrasion shall be immediately subject to any tests which the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services believes are necessary to determine whether the animal is afflicted with rabies. The seventy two (72) hour period shall include holidays and weekends and shall not be extended for any reason. The tests may require the animal to be destroyed.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-113.08 Rabies Control; Impoundment Fees; Establishment; Owner Responsibility
Impoundment fees shall be paid by the owner. Fees for impoundment at the Municipal Animal Pound shall be established by the Rabies Control Authority.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-114 Rabies Control; Feral And Wild Animals; Destruction
Any animal control officer may immediately kill any animal believed to be wild or feral found at large within the Municipality when said animal poses a reasonable health or safety risk to the public and no action shall be maintained for such killing.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-115 Rabies Control; Public Notice Of Impoundment; Release Or Destruction
The Municipal Animal Pound shall make public notice of all impounded animals, including any significant marks of identification by posting at the pound for a period of no less than five (5) days.
The Municipal Animal Pound may release any animal during impoundment when
the owner of any unvaccinated domestic dog or cat reclaims the animal by payment of prescribed fees, to include the fee for the Municipal Pound to vaccinate the animal, and completing licensing requirements; or
the owner of any unlicensed domestic dog or cat reclaims the animal by payment of the prescribed fees and completing licensing requirements. Non-resident owners are not required to license the animal if it will remain in the Municipality for less than thirty (30) days.
If, after five (5) days, the domestic dog or cat is unclaimed, and fees not paid as described herein, the Municipal Animal Pound may:
Release the domestic dog or cat to the Rabies Control Authority for transport and transfer to a licensed Humane Society; or
With the consent of the Rabies Control Authority, release any domestic dog or cat to someone, other than the owner, who shall pay prescribed fees, to include the fee for the Municipal Pound arranging a rabies vaccination fee and complete licensing requirements; or
Euthanize the domestic dog or cat and dispose of its remains.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1915, § 3 (2014); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-116 Animals; Torture; Poison; Slaughter; Injure
It shall be unlawful for any person to
torture, poison, slaughter or permit the torture, poisoning, or slaughter of any animal within the Municipality; or
injure, maim, or destroy or attempt to injure, maim, or destroy any animal owned by another person contrary to law;
or to place any poison, or poisoned food where the same is accessible to any animal.
This Section shall not apply to animal control officers acting within their official power and duty.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-117 Animals; Cruelty
It shall be unlawful for any person to overwork or cruelly neglect any animal within the Municipality by failing to provide sufficient rest, food, water, shelter, or other care necessary to sustain the animal’s health.

(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-118 Animals; Noise; Offensive
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any animal that annoys or disturbs any neighborhood or person by loud and/or frequent noise to include, but not limited to: barking, howling, yelping, meowing, crowing, or clucking. In addition to citing violators, animal control officers shall notify the owner to silence and restrain such animal. The provisions of this Section shall not be construed to apply to the Municipal Animal Pound.

(Ord. 1755, § 1 (2010); Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-119 Animals; Fighting; Unlawful
It shall be unlawful for any person to

promote or engage in acts of animal fighting or pit an animal against another;
receive money for admission to a place kept for such purpose;
attend such an event;
own, use, train, or sell an animal for such purpose; or permit any act as described herein to occur on any premises owned or controlled by him or her.
(Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016))

6-120 Animals; Restrictions On Multi-Pet Households
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, or maintain property within the corporate limits of the City of Crete where more than three domestic dogs over four months of age are owned, kept, or harbored.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, or maintain property within the corporate limits of the City of Crete where more than five domestic cats over four months of age are owned, kept, or harbored.

(3) This section shall not apply to any commercial pet store, Humane Society, or reputable, non-profit animal shelter or rescue that has obtained a permit from the Animal Control Authority or to any animal hospital operated by a veterinarian duly licensed under the laws of the State of Nebraska.

(4) Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a Class IV misdemeanor.

(a) In addition to the usual judgment of conviction, the county judge may declare such violation a public nuisance, order the person to abate said nuisance forthwith, and, in the event the person shall fail to do so, order the Animal Control Authority to remove, impound, and dispose of the animals so owned, kept, or harbored in violation of this section. The cost of such removal, impoundment, and disposal shall be borne by the convicted person.

(b) Each day that a violation of this section continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. The penalties herein provided shall be cumulative and in addition to any other penalty or forfeiture provided by law.


Source: Ord. 2102, § 4 (2020)

6-121 Animals; Enclosures
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pen, cage, shed, yard, or any other area or enclosure for the lawful confinement of any animal that by sight or odor is a public nuisance. All enclosures shall be kept in a clean and orderly manner so as not to become a public nuisance.


Source: Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016); Ord. 2102, § 1 (2020)

6-122 Animals; Ticket; Destruction
It shall be unlawful for any person to tear or discard a ticket issued by any animal control officer enforcing provisions of this article.


Source: Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016); Ord. 2102, § 2 (2020)

6-123 Interference With Animal Control Officers; Traps; Vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to:

(1) hinder, delay, obstruct, or otherwise interfere with any animal control officer in the performance of his or her official duties; or

(2) open, or in any manner directly or indirectly aid, counsel, or advise the opening of

(a) the Municipal Animal Pound,

(b) any animal trap set by an animal control officer, or

(c) any vehicle used to collect or transport an animal to the Municipal Animal Pound or police station.


Source: Ord. 1827, § 1 (2012); Ord. 1971, § 1 (2016); Ord. 2102, § 3 (2020)

Article 2 [Reserved]

Article 3 Criminal Offenses
6-301 Offenses; Criminal Attempt
6-302 Offenses; Aiding And Abetting
6-303 Offenses; Assault In The Third Degree
6-304 Offenses; False Imprisonment In The Second Degree
6-305 Offenses; Arson In The Third Degree
6-306 Offenses; Theft
6-307 Offenses; Unauthorized Use Of A Propelled Vehicle
6-308 Offenses; Criminal Mischief
6-309 Offenses; Criminal Trespass
6-310 Offenses; Criminal Simulation
6-311 Offenses; Criminal Impersonation
6-312 Offenses; Impersonating A Peace Officer
6-313 Offenses; Prostitution
6-314 Offenses; Public Indecency
6-315 Offenses; Refusing To Aid A Peace Officer
6-316 Offenses; Resisting Arrest, Without The Use Of A Deadly Or Dangerous Weapon
6-317 Operation Of A Motor Vehicle To Avoid Arrest
6-318 Offenses; Obstructing A Peace Officer
6-319 Offenses; False Reporting
6-320 Offenses; Interfering With A Fireman
6-321 Offenses; Promoting Gambling
6-322 [Repealed]
6-323 [Repealed]
6-324 Offenses; Discharge Of Firearms
6-325 Offenses; Slingshots, Air Guns, BB Guns
6-326 Offenses; Littering
6-327 Offenses; Disturbing The Peace
6-328 Offenses; Street Games
6-329 Offenses; Obstruction Of Public Ways
6-330 Offenses; Curfew
6-331 Offenses; Tobacco, Sale To Minors
6-332 Offenses; Minors; Prohibited Acts Involving Alcoholic Liquor
6-332.1 Offenses; Drinking On Public Property; Possession Of Open Alcoholic Beverage Container
6-333 Offenses; Abandoned Automobiles
6-334 [Repealed]
6-335 Fireworks Definitions
6-336 Fireworks; Sale And Use Of Sky Lanterns Prohibited; Unlawful Acts
6-337 Fireworks; Hours Of Sale
6-338 Fireworks; Discharge
6-339 Prohibited Fences
6-340 Merchandise On Sidewalks
6-341 Obstructions On Sidewalks
6-342 Appliances In Yard
6-343 Obstruction Of Public Ways
6-344 Obstructing Water Flow
6-345 Water Flowing Upon Streets
6-346 Removing Dirt
6-347 [Repealed]
6-348 Radio Interference
6-349 Offenses; Tampering With Electronic Load Management Control Switches
6-350 Exemption For Authorized Work
6-351 Offenses; Obscene Conduct
6-352 Sexual Contact; Prohibited
6-353 Public Nudity; Unlawful
6-354 Spitting On Sidewalks And Other Places
6-355 Spitting On Another Person; Prohibited
6-356 Failure To Disperse
6-357 Disturbing The Peace
6-358 Suppression Of Nuisances; Disorderly Houses
6-359 Inmate Of Disorderly House
6-360 Disorderly House; Maintaining
6-361 General Offenses; Criminal Possession Of A Forged Instrument
6-362 General Offenses; Forgery In The Second Degree
6-363 General Offenses; Sexual Predator Residency Restrictions

6-301 Offenses; Criminal Attempt
It shall be unlawful for any person to: intentionally engage in conduct which would constitute a crime if the attendant circumstances were as he believes them to be; Or, intentionally engage in conduct which, under the circumstances as he believes them to be, constitutes a substantial step in the course of conduct intended to culminate in his commission of the crime. When causing a particular result is an element of the crime, a person shall be guilty of an attempt to commit the crime if, acting with the state of mind required to establish liability with respect to the attendant circumstances specified in the definition of the crime, he intentionally engages in conduct which is a substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known to cause such a result; Provided, that conduct shall not be considered a substantial step under this Section unless it is strongly corroborative of the defendant's criminal intent.

(Ref 28-201 RS Neb)

6-302 Offenses; Aiding And Abetting
Any person who aids, abets, procures, or causes another to commit any offense may be prosecuted and punished as if he were the principal offender.

(Ref 28-206 RS Neb.)

6-303 Offenses; Assault In The Third Degree
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly cause bodily injury to another person; or threaten another in a menacing manner. It shall further be unlawful for any person to commit the above act in a fight or scuffle entered into by mutual consent.

(Ref 28-310 RS Neb.)

6-304 Offenses; False Imprisonment In The Second Degree
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly restrain another person without legal authority.

(Ref 28-315(1) RS Neb)

6-305 Offenses; Arson In The Third Degree
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally set fire to, burn, cause to be burned, or by the use of any explosive, damage or destroy, or cause to be damaged or destroyed, any property of another without his consent, other than a building or occupied structure; Provided, that the damages do not exceed one hundred ($100.00) dollars.

(Ref 28-504(1) (3) RS Neb)

6-306 Offenses; Theft
The terms and definitions applied in this Section shall be in conformance with Section 28-509 RS Neb. It shall be unlawful for any person to:

Take or exercise control over movable property of another, with the intent to deprive him thereof; or
Transfer immovable property of another or any interest therein with the intent to benefit himself or another not entitled thereto; or
Fail to return leased or rented movable property to the lessor after the expiration of a written lease or written rental agreement, if done with intent to deprive, and is such lessee has been mailed notice by certified mail that such lease or rental agreement has expired and he has failed within ten (10) days after such notice to return such property; or
Obtain the property of another by deception, as defined by Section 28-512 RS Neb; or
Obtain the property of another by threatening to:
Inflict bodily injury on anyone or commit any other criminal offense; or
Accuse anyone of a criminal offense; or
Expose any secret tending to subject any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule, or to impair his credit or business repute; or
Take or withhold action as an official, or cause an official to take or withhold action; or
Bring about or continue a strike, boycott, or other collective unofficial action, if the property is not demanded or received for the benefit of the group in whose interest the actor purports to act; or
Testify or provide information or withhold testimony or information with respect to another's claim or defense. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution based on subdivision E,2, E,3, or E,4 of the above subsection, that the property obtained by threat of accusation, exposure, lawsuit or other invocation of official action was honestly claimed as restitution or indemnification for harm done in the circumstances to which such accusation, exposure, lawsuit or other official action relates, or as compensation for property or lawful services; or
Come into control of property of another that he knows to have been lost, mislaid, or delivered under a mistake as to the nature or amount of the property or the identity of the recipient if, with intent to deprive the owner thereof, he fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to a person entitled to have it: or
Obtain services which he knows are available only for compensation, by deception or threat, or by false token or other means to avoid payment for the service; or
Have control over the disposition of services of others, to which he is not entitled, and diverts such services to his own benefit or to the benefit of another not entitled thereto; or
Make, possess, sell, give, transfer, offer for sale or advertise for sale any device, instrument, apparatus or equipment designed or which can be used to obtain telecommunications service fraudulently or to conceal from any supplier or telecommunications service or from any lawful authority the existence or place of origin or of destination of any telecommunication; or
Receive, retain or dispose of movable property to another knowing that it has been stolen, or believing that it has been stolen, unless the property is received, retained or disposed with intention to restore it to the owner;

Provided that the value of the thing involved is under three hundred ($300.00) dollars.
(Ref 28-509 thru 28-515, 28-517 RS Neb)

6-307 Offenses; Unauthorized Use Of A Propelled Vehicle
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally exert unauthorized control over another's propelled vehicle by operating the same without the owner's consent. Propelled vehicle shall mean and include an automobile, airplane, motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle. It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this Section that the defendant reasonably believed that the owner would have authorized the use had he known of it.

(Ref 28-516 RS Neb.)

6-308 Offenses; Criminal Mischief
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage property of another intentionally or recklessly; or intentionally tamper with property of another so as to endanger person or property; or intentionally or maliciously cause another to suffer pecuniary loss by deception or threat; Provided, that the value of the property involved is under three hundred ($300.00) dollars.

(Ref 28-519 RS Neb.)

6-309 Offenses; Criminal Trespass
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing that he is not licensed or privileged to do so, to:

Enter or secretly remain in any building or occupied structure, or any separately secured or occupied portion thereof: or
Enter or remain in any place as to which notice against trespass is given by;
Actual communication to the actor; or
Posting in a manner prescribed by law or reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders; or
Fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to exclude intruders.
(Ref 28-520, 28-521 RS Neb.)

6-310 Offenses; Criminal Simulation
It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to deceive or harm, to make, alter or represent an object in such fashion that it appears to have an antiquity, rarity, source or authorship, ingredient or composition which it does not in fact have; or, with knowledge of its true character and with intent to use it to deceive or harm, to utter, misrepresent or possess any object so simulated.

(Ref 28-606 RS Neb.)

6-311 Offenses; Criminal Impersonation
It shall be unlawful for any person to:

Assume a false identity and do any act in his assumed character with intent to gain a pecuniary benefit for himself or another, or to deceive or harm another; or
Pretend to be a representative of some person or organization and to do any act in his pretended capacity with the intent to gain a pecuniary benefit for himself or another, and to deceive or harm another; or
Carry on any profession, business, or any other occupation without a license, certificate, or other authorization required by law.
(Ref 28-607 RS Neb.)

6-312 Offenses; Impersonating A Peace Officer
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely pretend to be a peace officer and perform any act in that pretended capacity.

(Ref 28-610 RS Neb.)

6-313 Offenses; Prostitution
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, offer or agree to perform any act of sexual penetration, as defined in Subdivision (5) of Section 28-318 RS Neb., with any person not his spouse in exchange for money or other thing of value.

(Ref 28-801 RS Neb.)

6-314 Offenses; Public Indecency
It shall be unlawful for any person, eighteen (18) years of age or over, to perform or procure or assist any other person to perform in a public place and where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public:

An act of sexual penetration as defined by Subdivision (5) of Section 28-318 RS Neb.; or
An exposure of the genitals of the body done with intent to affront or alarm any person; or
A lewd fondling or caressing of the body of another person of the same or opposite sex.
(Ref 28-806 RS Neb.)

6-315 Offenses; Refusing To Aid A Peace Officer
It shall be unlawful for any person, upon a request by a person known to him to be a peace officer, to unreasonably refuse or fail to aid such peace officer in:

Apprehending any person charged with or convicted of any offense against any of the laws of this state; or
Securing such offender when apprehended; or
Conveying such offender to the jail of the county.
(Ref 28-903 RS Neb.)

6-316 Offenses; Resisting Arrest, Without The Use Of A Deadly Or Dangerous Weapon
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally prevent or attempt to prevent a peace officer, acting under color of his official authority, from effecting an arrest on said person or on another, by:

Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the peace officer of another; or
Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing physical injury to the peace officer or another; or
Employing means which require substantial force to overcome resistance to effecting the arrest;

Provided, that this Section shall apply only to those actions taken to resist arrest without the use of a deadly or dangerous weapon.

It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Section if the peace officer involved was out of uniform and did not identify himself as a peace officer by showing his credentials to the person whose arrest is attempted.
(Ref 28-904 RS Neb.)

6-317 Operation Of A Motor Vehicle To Avoid Arrest
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle to flee in such vehicle in an effort to avoid arrest or citation for the violation of any law of the State of Nebraska constituting a misdemeanor, infraction, traffic infraction, or any Municipal ordinance, except nonmoving traffic violations.

(Ref 28-905(1)(3) RS Neb.)

6-318 Offenses; Obstructing A Peace Officer
It shall be unlawful for any person, to use or threaten to use violence, force, physical interference, or obstacle, to intentionally obstruct, impair, or hinder the enforcement of the penal law or the preservation of the peace by a peace officer or judge acting under color of his official authority.

(Ref 28-906 RS Neb.)

6-319 Offenses; False Reporting
It shall be unlawful for any person to:

Furnish information he or she knows to be false to any peace officer or other official with the intent to instigate an investigation or an alleged criminal matter or impede the investigation of an actual criminal matter; or
Furnish information he or she knows to be false alleging the existence of an emergency in which human life or property are in jeopardy to any hospital, ambulance company, or other person or governmental agency which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property; or
Furnish any information, or cause such information to be furnished or conveyed by electric, electronic, telephonic, or mechanical means, knowing the same to be false concerning the need for assistance of a Fire Department or any personnel or equipment of such Department; or
Furnish any information he or she knows to be false concerning the location of any explosive in any building or other property to any person.
(Ref 28-907 RS Neb.)

6-320 Offenses; Interfering With A Fireman
A person commits the offense of interfering with a fireman if at any time and place where any fireman is discharging or attempting to discharge any official duties, he willfully:

Resists or interferes with the lawful efforts of any fireman in the discharge or attempt to discharge an official duty; or
Disobey the lawful orders given by any fireman while per forming his duties; or
Engages in any disorderly conduct which delays or prevents a fire from being extinguished within a reasonable time; or
Forbids or prevents others from assisting or extinguishing a fire or exhorts another person, as to whom he has no legal right or obligation to protect or control, not to assist in extinguishing a fire.
(Ref 28-908 RS Neb.)

6-321 Offenses; Promoting Gambling
A person commits the offense of promoting gambling if he or she knowingly participates in unlawful gambling as defined by State law as a player by betting less than three hundred ($300.00) dollars in any one (1) day.

6-322 [Repealed]
Repealed. Ordinance 1969 (2016).



6-323 [Repealed]
Repealed. Ordinance 1466 (1999).



6-324 Offenses; Discharge Of Firearms
It shall be unlawful for any person, except an officer of the law in the discharge of his official duty, to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, or other fowling piece within the Municipality; provided, nothing herein shall be construed to apply to officially sanctioned public celebrations if the persons so discharging firearms have written permission from the Chief of Police.

(Ref. 17-556 RS Neb.)

6-325 Offenses; Slingshots, Air Guns, BB Guns
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a slingshot, air gun, BB gun, or the like loaded with rock or other dangerous missiles at any time or under any circumstances within the Municipality.

(Ref. 17-556 RS Neb.)

6-326 Offenses; Littering
Any person who deposits, throws, discards, or otherwise disposes of any litter on any public or private property or in any waters commits the offense of littering unless:
Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such material and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use such property; or
The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such property for such purpose.
The word litter as used in this section shall mean all waste material susceptible of being dropped, deposited, discarded or otherwise disposed of by any person upon any property in the state but does not include wastes of primary processes of farming or manufacturing. Waste material as used in this section shall mean any material appearing in a place or in a context not associated with that material's function or origin.
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle or watercraft in violation of this section, the operator of such motor vehicle or watercraft commits the offense of littering.
(Ref. 28-523 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 1275, 6/20/95)

6-327 Offenses; Disturbing The Peace
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally disturb the peace and quiet of any person, family or neighborhood.

(Ref. 28-1322 RS Neb.)

6-328 Offenses; Street Games
It shall be unlawful for any person to catch, bat a ball, kick or throw a football, or to engage in any sport upon the Municipal streets and sidewalks. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or prevent the Governing Body from ordering from time to time certain streets and public places blocked off for the purpose of providing a safe area to engage in such exercise and sport.

(Ref. 17-142, 17-557 RS Neb.)

6-329 Offenses; Obstruction Of Public Ways
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, or suffer to remain on any street or public sidewalk a stand, wagon, display, or other obstruction inconvenient to, or inconsistent with, the public use of the same.

6-330 Offenses; Curfew
It shall be unlawful for any person fifteen (15) years of age or under to be or remain in or upon any streets or alleys in the City at night, whether on foot or in a motor vehicle, after the hour of ten (10:00) o'clock P.M. on Sunday night through Thursday night and eleven (11:00) o'clock P.M. on Friday night and Saturday night, unless such person is accompanied by parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of such minor person or is going to or from some meeting or assemblage of lawful character, or is in the performance of an errand of duty, directed by parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of such minor person or whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or public places during the nighttime after said specified hours; provided, that these exceptions shall not apply when persons fifteen (15) years of age or under shall play or loiter unnecessarily in or upon such street or alley, whether alone or accompanied by parent, guardian or person whomsoever. No minor shall play or loiter in any street, alley or Public place in the City at anytime to the inconvenience of the ordinary traffic over and upon such streets, alleys or public places. The time when minors shall disperse from the streets may be indicated, if ordered by the Mayor and Council, by a siren, whistle or other appropriate signal.

6-331 Offenses; Tobacco, Sale To Minors
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish, in any way, any tobacco in any form whatever, or any cigarettes, or cigarette paper, to any minor under eighteen (18) years of age.

(Ref. 28-1419 RS Neb.)

6-332 Offenses; Minors; Prohibited Acts Involving Alcoholic Liquor
For purposes of this section, the definitions found in Neb. RS 53103 shall apply, including, but not limited to, the definitions of the terms alcoholic liquor, consume, minor, sale, and to sell.
Except as provided in Section 10-120 (Alcoholic Beverages; Manufacture, Sale, Delivery, and Possession; General Prohibitions; Exceptions), no minor may sell, dispense, consume, or have in his or her possession or physical control any alcoholic liquor in any tavern or in any other place, including public streets, alleys, roads, or highways, upon property owned by the State of Nebraska or any subdivision thereof, or inside any vehicle while in or on any other place, including, but not limited to, the public streets, alleys, roads, or highways, or upon property owned by the State of Nebraska or any subdivision thereof, except that a minor may consume, possess, or have physical control of alcoholic liquor in his or her permanent place of residence or on the premises of a place of religious worship on which premises alcoholic liquor is consumed as a part of a religious rite, ritual, or ceremony.
It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one years of age to transport, consume, or knowingly possess or have under his or her control beer or other alcoholic liquor in or transported by any motor vehicle.
(Neb. RS 53180.02) (Amended by Ord. No. 1160, 2/18/92; Ord. No. 1547, 2/04/03)

6-332.1 Offenses; Drinking On Public Property; Possession Of Open Alcoholic Beverage Container
Except when the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission has issued a license as provided in Neb. RS 53186(2), it is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon property owned or controlled by the state or any governmental subdivision thereof unless authorized by the governing bodies having jurisdiction over such property. (Neb. RS 53186)
It is unlawful for any person in the passenger area of a motor vehicle to possess an open alcoholic beverage container while the motor vehicle is located in a public parking area or on any highway in this municipality.
Except as provided in Neb. RS 53186, it is unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage
in a public parking area or on any highway in this municipality or
inside a motor vehicle while in a public parking area or on any highway in this municipality.
For purposes of this division:
Alcoholic beverage means
beer, ale porter, stout, and other similar fermented beverages, including sake or similar products, of any name or description containing onehalf of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, brewed or produced from malt, wholly or in part, or from arty substitute therefor,
wine of not less than onehalf of one percent of alcohol by volume, or
distilled spirits which is that substance known as ethyl alcohol, ethanol, or spirits of wine in any form, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced. Alcoholic beverage does not include trace amounts not readily consumable as a beverage;
Highway means a road or street including the entire area within the right-of-way;
Open alcoholic beverage container means any bottle, can, or other receptacle: That contains any amount of alcoholic beverage; and (ii) A. That is open or has a broken seal; or B. The contents of which are partially removed; and
Passenger area means the area designed to seat the driver and passengers while the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in their seating positions, including any compartments in such area. Passenger area does not include the area behind the last upright seat of such motor vehicle if the area is not normally occupied by the driver or a passenger and the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk.
(Neb. RS 606, 211. 08) (Ord. 1545; 02/04/03)

6-333 Offenses; Abandoned Automobiles
Abandoned vehicle, defined.
A motor vehicle is an abandoned vehicle:
If left unattended, with no licenses plates or valid In Transit stickers issued pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Registration Act affixed thereto, for more than six hours on any public property.
If left unattended for more than twenty-four hours on any public property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
If left unattended for more than forty-eight hours, after the parking of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public property, on which parking is legally permitted;
If left unattended for more than seven days on private property if left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission of the owner is terminated;
If left for more than thirty days in the custody of a law enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered owner under section 60-1903.01 Neb RRS; or
If removed from private property by a municipality pursuant to a municipal ordinance.
An all-terrain vehicle, a utility-type vehicle, or a minibike is an abandoned vehicle:
If left unattended for more than twenty-four hours on any public property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
If left unattended for more than forty-eight hours, after the parking of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public property on which parking is legally permitted;
If left unattended for more than seven days on private property if left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission of the owner is terminated;
If left for more than thirty days in the custody of a law enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered owner under section 60-1903.01 Neb RRS; or
If removed from private property by a municipality pursuant to a municipal ordinance.
For purpose of this section:
Public property means any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, or park or other state, county, or municipally owned property; and
Private property means any privately owned property which is not included within the definition of public property.
No motor vehicle subject to forfeiture under section 28-431 Neb RRS shall be an abandoned vehicle under this section.
Abandoned vehicle; title; vest in local authority or state agency when.

If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no license plates of current year or valid In Transit stickers issued pursuant to section 60-376 Neb RRS affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into consideration the condition of the vehicle, of two hundred fifty dollars or less, title shall immediately vest in the local authority or state agency having jurisdiction thereof as provided in section 60-1904 Neb RRS. Any certificate of title issued under this section to the local authority or state agency shall be issued at no cost to such authority or agency.
Local Authority; Powers and Duties.
Except for vehicles governed by section 60-1902 Neb RRS, having custody of an abandoned vehicle shall make an inquiry concerning the last-registered owner of such vehicle as follows:
Abandoned vehicle with license plates affixed, to the jurisdiction which issued such license plates; or
Abandoned vehicle with no license plates affixed, to the Department of Motor Vehicles.
The local authority or state agency shall notify the last-registered owner, if any, that the vehicle in question has been determined to be an abandoned vehicle and that if unclaimed, either
it will be sold or will be offered at public auction after five days from the date such notice was mailed; or
title will vest in the local authority or state agency thirty days after the date such notice was mailed. If the agency described in subdivision C,1,a or C,1,b of this section also notifies the local authority or state agency that a lien or mortgage exists, such notice shall also be sent to the lienholder or mortgagee. Any person claiming such vehicle shall be required to pay the cost of removal and storage of such vehicle.
Title to an abandoned vehicle, if unclaimed shall vest in the local authority or state agency (a) five days after the date the notice is mailed if the vehicle will be sold or offered at public auction under subdivision C,2,a of this section (b) thirty days after the date the notice mailed if the local authority or state agency will retain the vehicle, or (c) if the last-registered owner cannot be ascertained, when notice of such fact is received.
After title to the abandoned vehicle vests pursuant to subsection C,3, of this section, the local authority or state agency may retain for use, sell, or auction the abandoned vehicle. If the local authority or state agency has determined that the vehicle should be retained for use, the local authority or state agency shall, at the same time that the notice, if any, is mailed, publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction an announcement that the local authority or state agency intends to retain the abandoned vehicle for its use and that title will vest in the local authority or state agency thirty days after the publication.
Law enforcement agency; powers and duties.

A state or local law enforcement agency which has custody of a motor vehicle for investigatory purposes and has no further need to keep it in custody shall send a certified letter to each of the last-registered owners stating that the vehicle is in the custody of the law enforcement agency, that the vehicle is no longer needed for law enforcement purposes, and that after thirty days the agency will dispose of the vehicle. This section shall not apply to motor vehicles subject to forfeiture under section 28-431 Neb RRS. No storage fees shall be assessed against the registered owner of a motor vehicle held in custody for investigatory purpose under this section unless the registered owner or the person in possession of the vehicle when it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor related to the offense for which the law enforcement agency took the vehicle into custody. If a registered owner or the person in possession of the vehicle when it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor but is not convinced, the registered owner shall be entitled to a refund of the storage fees.
Custody; who entitled.

If a state agency caused an abandoned vehicle described in subdivision (1) (e) or (2) (d) of section 60-1901 Neb RRS to be removed from public property, the state agency shall be entitled to custody of the vehicle. If a state agency caused an abandoned vehicle described in subdivision (1)(a), (b), (c),or (d) or (2)(a), (b), or (c)of section 60-1901 Neb RRS to be removed from public property, the state agency shall deliver the vehicle to the local authority which shall be the county in which the vehicle was abandoned or, if abandoned in a city or village, the city or village in which the vehicle was abandoned.
Proceeds of sale; disposition.

Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle less any expenses incurred by the local authority or state agency shall be held by the local authority or state agency without interest, for the benefit of the owner or lien holders of such vehicle for a period of two years. If not claimed within such two-year period, the proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of the local authority entitled to custody under section 60-1904 Neb RRS or the state general fund if a state agency is entitled to custody under section 60-1904 Neb RRS.
Liability for removal.

Neither the owner, lessee, nor occupant of the premises from which any abandoned vehicle is removed, nor the state, city, village, or country, shall be liable for any loss or damage to such vehicle which occurs during its removal or while in the possession of the state, city, village, or country or its contractual agent or as a result of any subsequent disposition.
Person cannot abandon a vehicle.

No person shall cause any vehicle to be an abandoned vehicle as described in subdivision (1)(a), (b), (c), or (d) or (2)(a), (b), or (c) of section 60-1901 Neb RRS.
Destroy, deface, or remove parts; unlawful; exception; violation; penalty.

No person other than one authorized by the appropriate local authority or state agency shall destroy, deface, or remove any part of a vehicle which is left unattended on a highway or other public place without license plates affixed or which is abandoned. Anyone violating this section shall be guilty of a Class V misdemeanor.
Cost of removal and storage; last-registered owner; liable.

The last-registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be liable to the local authority or state agency for the costs of removal and storage of such vehicle.
Additional regulations, Neb RS 60-1901 through 60-1911 (Ord. 1495; 07/01/00)(Ord. No. 1809, 09/20/11)

6-334 [Repealed]
Repealed. Ordinance 1407 (1998).



6-335 Fireworks Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter the following words shall have the following meanings:

Fireworks shall mean any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation and which meets the definition of common or special fireworks set forth by the United States Department of Transportation in Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations.

Permissible fireworks shall mean any permissible or consumer firework authorized by the laws of the State of Nebraska as safe for general use.

Retailer shall mean any person engaged in the business of making sales of fireworks at retail.

Sale shall include barter, exchange, or gift, or offer therefor, and each such transaction made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent servant, or employee.

Sky Lanterns shall mean devices that require a flame which produces heated air trapped in a balloon-type covering allowing the device to float in the air. Sky lanterns shall not include hot-air balloons used for transporting persons.

The provisions of this section shall not apply to any fireworks to be used for the purpose of public exhibitions or display under authorization of the Governing Body or to fireworks furnished for agricultural purposes pursuant to written authorization from the State Fire Marshal.

(Ref. 28-1241, 28-1244, 28-1245, 28-1247, RS Neb. 1943) (Ord. 1407, 6/23/98; 1948, 10/20/15)

6-336 Fireworks; Sale And Use Of Sky Lanterns Prohibited; Unlawful Acts
Fireworks commonly known as sky lanterns shall not be permissible fireworks within the City of Crete, notwithstanding any action by the State Fire Marshal to the contrary, and it shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail, offer for sale at retail, discharge, explode, or use any of said fireworks within the city.

(Ord. 1407, 6/23/98; 1948, 10/20/15)

6-337 Fireworks; Hours Of Sale
Conditioned upon payment of the Occupation Tax required to be paid by Section 10-901 of the City Code, fireworks permitted within the Municipality may be sold at retail from June 28 through July 4 of each year, during the following times:

June 28 through July 2 - 8:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M.
July 3 - 8:00 A.M. to Midnight.
July 4 - 8:00 A.M. to 11:00 P.M.

Any person or business operating as a retailer of permissible fireworks shall prominently post a sign at or near each cash register at the retailer’s location displaying the fireworks sale and discharge periods specified in this section and in Section 6-338 of the City Code.

(Ord. 1471, 10/19/99; Ord. 1548, 04/01/03)

6-338 Fireworks; Discharge
The discharge, exploding, or use of fireworks within the Municipality on any dates or times other than set out in this Section shall be unlawful.

The discharge, exploding, or use of fireworks within the Municipality shall be permitted only on the following dates and during the following hours:
June 28 through July 2 - 8:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M.
July 3 - 8:00 A.M. to Midnight.
July 4 - 8:00 A.M. to 11:00 P.M.
It shall be unlawful, regardless of the date or time, for any person to discharge, fire, launch, or throw any fireworks or any object that is lighted to explode or that explodes upon contact with another object:
From or onto any motor vehicle;
Onto any street, highway, or sidewalk;
At or near any person;
Into or upon any building;
Into or at any group of persons; or,
At the location of and during the time of any pyrotechnics display authorized at a designated location by special permit under the ordinances of the Municipality, except by personnel authorized by said special permit.
6-339 Prohibited Fences
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, or cause to be erected, and maintain any barbed wire or electric fence within the corporate limits, where such fence abuts a public sidewalk, street or alley.

6-340 Merchandise On Sidewalks
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed for display or sale purposes, or for storage, any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles upon any sidewalk or in any street; provided, this shall not be construed as preventing the sale from vehicles outside of the Business District of farm or garden produce by the producer or grower thereof or his employee by going from house to house.

6-341 Obstructions On Sidewalks
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Corporate Limits to erect, maintain or suffer to remain on any street or public sidewalk or on any portion of the area between the lot line and the curb line of any street any stand, wagon, display, or merchandise, or any other obstruction injurious to, inconvenient, or inconsistent with the public use of the same; provided, seats and benches may be allowed in front of stores and buildings in the fire limits and shall not be construed as an obstruction in the sidewalk space until such time as the Mayor and Council shall order their removal by resolution.

6-342 Appliances In Yard
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a refrigerator, icebox, freezer, or any other dangerous appliance to be in the open and accessible to children whether on private or public property unless he shall first remove all doors and make the same reasonably safe.

(Ref. 18-1720 RS Neb.)

6-343 Obstruction Of Public Ways
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, or suffer to remain on any street or public sidewalk a stand, wagon, display, or other obstruction inconvenient to, or inconsistent with, the public use of the same.

6-344 Obstructing Water Flow
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or obstruct the passage of water in a street gutter, culvert, water pipe, or hydrant.

6-345 Water Flowing Upon Streets
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon any public thoroughfare.

6-346 Removing Dirt
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to remove, disturb, or take away from any street, alley, or public grounds any dirt, earth, stones, or other materials forming a part of such street, alley, or public grounds without first having obtained written permission to do so from the Governing Body.

6-347 [Repealed]
Repealed. Ordinance 1969 (2016).



6-348 Radio Interference
Any person operating or causing to be operated, any motor, sign, or other electrical apparatus that is connected with the light and power system shall equip the apparatus with proper filtering attachments to eliminate interference; provided, that the provisions herein shall not apply to the use of necessary medical equipment or apparatus where electrical interference cannot be reasonably and safely eliminated. Any person who so operates or causes to be operated, any such electrical apparatus that interferes habitually with radio and television reception shall be deemed to be guilty of a violation of this section.

(Ref. 18-1720 RS Neb.)

6-349 Offenses; Tampering With Electronic Load Management Control Switches
No person shall tamper with any electronic load management control-switch placed on any electrical device by the City of Crete or its agents (with the consent of the private owner). As used in this section the word "tamper" shall include the following:

disconnecting or altering the wiring of any electronic load management switch so as to permanently impair its operation,
permanently removing said electronic load management control switch,
otherwise tampering, with the intent of disabling the load management switch, so as to make it permanently inoperable,
installing any device, with the intent of making the load management control switch inoperable, which creates electronic interference or shields the device so that the load management control switch does not receive the necessary radio control signals.
6-350 Exemption For Authorized Work
Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted to prohibit any action by a person authorized by the City of Crete to remove and/or repair any electronic load Management control switch.

(Ord. No. 1089, 7/18/89)

6-351 Offenses; Obscene Conduct
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or stool in any place open to the public view or to indecently exhibit any animal.

(Ord. No. 1520, 6/05/01)

6-352 Sexual Contact; Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any employee or performer (including amateur performers) in any business or commercial establishment to have any sexual contact with any other employee, performer or patron for gratuity, pay or other remuneration, direct or indirect, or in conjunction with or as part of any performance or entertainment in any business or commercial establishment.
It shall be unlawful for any patron to have sexual contact with any employee or performer in any business or commercial establishment.
For the purposes of this section, sexual contact shall mean the intentional touching between a patron, a performer, or employee involving contact by or with a patron's, performer's, or employee's sexual organ, buttock(s), or breast(s), whether covered or not, or kissing, when such contact can reasonably be construed as being for the purpose of sexual arousal or sexual gratification of either party or any observer.
It shall be unlawful for any person purposely or knowingly to solicit, induce, or attempt to induce another person to engage in an act or acts prohibited hereunder.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, proprietor, or manager of any business or commercial establishment to knowingly allow any person on the premises of such business or commercial establishment to engage in an act or acts prohibits hereunder.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to a theater, concert hall, art center, museum, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to the arts or theatrical performances and in which any of the circumstances obtained in this section were permitted or allowed as part of such art exhibits or performances.
(Ord. No. 1521, 6/19/01)

6-353 Public Nudity; Unlawful
It shall be unlawful for a person to, knowingly or intentionally, in a public place or in any place open to the public, appear in a state of nudity.
"Nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering on any part of the areola and nipple, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
This section shall not apply to:
Any theater, concert hall, art center, museum, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to the arts or theatrical performances and in which any of the circumstances contained in this section were permitted or allowed as part of such art exhibit or performance;
Any dressing/changing room or restroom facility open to the public;
Any person under twelve years of age or
Mothers who are breast feeding.
(Ord. No. 1522, 6/19/01)

6-354 Spitting On Sidewalks And Other Places
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate on any sidewalk, crosswalk, or in any cellarway, window, door, grating, or entrance to any basement, excavation, area, in under, or leading from public sidewalk space in the city; or to spit or expectorate on the floor, wall, stairway, in any hall or in the elevator of any public building within the City.

(Ord. No. 1580, 07/01/03)

6-355 Spitting On Another Person; Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly spit or expectorate upon any person within the City.

(Ord. No. 1581, 07/01/03)

6-356 Failure To Disperse
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a person or persons are creating a disturbance of the peace and quiet of any person or neighborhood, such police officer may order said person or persons not residing on the premises to disperse for the purpose of abating the said disturbance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to comply with the lawful order to disperse given by a police officer in the performance of the officer's duties under this section.
(Ord. No. 1582, 07/01/03)

6-357 Disturbing The Peace
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly disturb the peace and quiet of any person, family or neighborhood or any public assembly; or assembly of persons for religious worship. The offense of disturbing the peace shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following:

Engaging in fighting;
Exhibiting threatening or violent conduct directed toward another person;
Using abusive, threatening or other fighting language or gestures directed towards another person or persons;
Operating any radios, tape player, compact disc player, stereophonic sound system or similar device which reproduces or amplifies radio broadcasts, or musical recordings, in or upon any street, alley, or other public place in such a manner as to be audible to other persons in such public place more than fifty feet from the source; or
Picketing or demonstrating on a public way within 150 feet of any primary or secondary school building while the school is in session and during the onehalf hour before the school is in session and during the onehalf hour after the school session has been concluded.
(Ord. No. 1583, 07/01/03)

6-358 Suppression Of Nuisances; Disorderly Houses
Any room, house, building structure, or place and any property kept and used in maintaining the same, where, in violation of the ordinances of the city, unlawful or illegal acts are committed, is hereby declared to be an unreasonable interference with the health, safety, welfare, and property of the citizens of the city, a disorderly house, and a public and common nuisance. Such nuisances may be restrained or suppressed by the city in any manner provide by law, and the City Attorney is hereby authorized and empowered to take such legal action as may be necessary to restrain or suppress such nuisances.

(Ord. No. 1584, 07/01/03)

6-359 Inmate Of Disorderly House
It shall be unlawful for any person to be an inmate of or visit or frequent any disorderly house as declared in 6-360 with knowledge of, and participation in, the illegal activities occurring therein.

(Ord. No. 1585, 07/01/03)

6-360 Disorderly House; Maintaining
The term "disorderly house" as used in this chapter shall be deemed to be any room, house, building, structure, or premises, where unlawful or illegal acts are being committed. It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, or proprietor of any room, house, building, structure, or premises to knowingly collect or permit to be collected therein persons who are engaging in any unlawful act, or to knowingly make, cause, permit or suffer to be made therein any loud or improper noise to the annoyances or disturbance of any person or neighborhood.

(Ord. No. 1586, 07/01/03)

6-361 General Offenses; Criminal Possession Of A Forged Instrument
A person commits the offense of criminal possession a forged instrument if he or she, with knowledge that it is forged and with intent to deceive or harm, possesses any forged instrument covered by section 6-355, (Forgery in Second Degree), the amount or value of which is less than $1000.

(Neb. RS 28-604) (Ord. No. 1619, 09/21/04)

6-362 General Offenses; Forgery In The Second Degree
A person commits the offense of forgery in the second degree if he or she, with intent to deceive or harm, falsely makes, completes, endorses, alters, or utters any written instrument which is or purports to be, or which is calculated to become or to represent if completed, a written instrument which does or may evidence, create, transfer, terminate, or otherwise affect a legal right, interest, obligation, or status when the face value, or purported face value, or the amount of any proceeds wrongfully procured or intended to be procured by the use of such instrument is $300 or less.

(Neb. RS 28-603) (Ord. No. 1619, 09/21/04)

6-363 General Offenses; Sexual Predator Residency Restrictions
Findings and Intent.
The Nebraska legislature has found that certain sex offenders present a high risk to commit repeat offenses and has enabled municipalities to restrict such persons’ place of residency as provided in the Sexual Predator Residency Restriction Act.
Sex offenders who prey on children and who are high risks to repeat such acts present an extreme threat to public safety. The cost of sex offender victimization to these children and to society at large, while incalculable, is exorbitant.
It is the intent of this ordinance to serve the City’s compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City by creating certain areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers where certain sexual predators cannot reside.
Definitions. For purpose of this ordinance:
Child care facility means a facility licensed pursuant to the Child Care Licensing Act;
Political subdivision means a village, a city, a county, a school district, a public power district, or any other unit of local government;
School means a public, private, denominational, or parochial school which meets the requirements for accreditation or approval prescribed in Chapter 79 Neb RRS;
Sex offender means an individual who has been convicted of a crime listed in section 29-4003 Neb RRS and who is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to the Sex Offender Registration Act; and
Sexual predator means an individual who is required to register under the Sex Offender Registration Act, who has committed an aggravated offense as defined in section 29-4001.01 Neb RRS, and who has victimized a person eighteen years of age or younger.
Sexual Predator Residency Restrictions; Penalties; Exceptions.
PROHIBITED LOCATION OF RESIDENCE. It is unlawful for any sexual predator to reside within five hundred feet from a school or child care facility.
MEASURE OF DISTANCE. For purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the residence to the nearest outer boundary line of the school or child care facility.
PENALTIES. A person who violates this section shall be punished as provided generally in the code.
EXCEPTIONS. This ordinance shall not apply to a sexual predator who;
Resides within a prison or correctional or treatment facility operated by the state or a political subdivision;
Established a residence before July 1, 2006, and has not moved from that residence; or
Established a residence after July 1, 2006, and the school or child care facility triggering the restriction was established after the initial date of the sexual predator’s residence at that location.
[Statutory Reference: The Sexual Predator Residency Restriction Act, Laws 2006, LB 1199, §27 to 29; Neb. Rev. Stat. Sec. 29-4003 and Sec. 29-4013] (Ord. 1652; 06/06/06) (Ord. No. 1809, 09/20/11)

Article 4 Penal Provision
6-401 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision

6-401 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provision of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a violation of a Municipal Ordinance. Unless otherwise specified in the particular Article or Section for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such violation shall be in any amount not to exceed $500.00 for any one (1) offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said payment, the offender shall stand committed to the County jail until such fine and costs be paid.

(Ref. 16-246 RS Neb.)

Chapter 7 Fire Regulations
Article 1 General Fire Provisions
Article 2 Fire Prevention
Article 3 Fires Regulated
Article 4 Poisonous And Flammable Gases
Article 5 Explosives
Article 6 Penalty Provision

Article 1 General Fire Provisions
7-101 Fires; Preservation Of Property
7-102 Fires; Disorderly Spectator
7-103 Fires; Equipment
7-104 Fires; Interference
7-105 Fires; Obstruction
7-106 Fires; Assistance
7-107 Fires; Driving Over Hose
7-108 Fires; Traffic
7-109 Fires; False Alarm
7-110 Fires; Pedestrians

7-101 Fires; Preservation Of Property
The fire chief, or designee in lieu of fire chief/assistant fire chief, shall have the authority and power to cause the removal of property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of more valuable property, the protection of human life, or to prevent the spreading of fire to adjoining property. The fire chief, or designee in lieu of fire chief/assistant fire chief, may direct the Municipal Fireman to remove any building, structure, or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire. The fire chief, or designee in lieu of fire chief/assistant fire chief, shall have the authority to blow up, with explosives any building or structure during the progress of a fire for the purpose of checking the progress of the same.

7-102 Fires; Disorderly Spectator
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully:

Resist or interfere with the lawful efforts of any fireman in the discharge or attempt to discharge an official duty;
Disobey the lawful orders given by any fireman while performing his duties;
Engage in any disorderly conduct which delays or prevents a fire from being extinguished within a reasonable time; or
Forbid or prevent others from assisting or extinguishing a fire or exhort another person, as to whom he has no legal right or obligation to protect or control, not to assist in extinguishing a fire.
7-103 Fires; Equipment
It shall be unlawful for any person except the fire chief, or designee in lieu of fire chief/assistant fire chief, and the members of the Municipal Fire Department to molest, destroy, handle in any other way to interfere with the use and storage of any of the fire trucks and other apparatus belonging to the Municipality.

(Ref. 28-519 RS Neb.)

7-104 Fires; Interference
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hinder or obstruct the Municipal Or designee in lieu of fire chief/assistant fire chief or the members of the Fire Department in the Performance of their duty.

(Ref. 28-908 RS Neb.)

7-105 Fires; Obstruction
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the use of a fire hydrant, or have or place any material within fifteen (15') feet of the said hydrant. Any vehicle or material found as an obstruction may be immediately removed by the fire chief or any member of the fire department Department, at the risk, cost, and expense of the owner or claimant.

(Ref. 39-672 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. 1444, 02/16/99)

7-106 Fires; Assistance
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, after the command of the fire chief, or designee in lieu of fire chief/assistant fire chief, to aid in extinguishing a fire to assist in the removal and protection of property.

7-107 Fires; Driving Over Hose
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the Fire chief, or designee in lieu of fire chief/assistant fire chief, to drive any vehicle over unprotected hose of the Fire Department.

(Ref. 39-682 RS Neb.)

7-108 Fires; Traffic
Every vehicle already stationary when the fire alarm shall have been sounded must remain so for a period of five (5) minutes after the sounding of the fire alarm. No vehicle, except by the specific direction of the fire chief, or designee in lieu of fire chief/assistant fire chief, shall follow, approach or park closer than five hundred (500') feet to any fire vehicle, or to any fire hydrant to which a hose is connected. Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to vehicles carrying doctors, members of the Fire Department, or emergency vehicles.

(Ref. 39-681 RS Neb.)

7-109 Fires; False Alarm
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without good and reasonable cause raise any false alarm of fire.

It shall be unlawful for the owner or lessee of an alarm system to accumulate more than four (4) alarms per location in any twelve month period.

(Amended by Ord. No. 1076, 3/7/89)

7-110 Fires; Pedestrians
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to enter or remain in any street after a fire alarm shall have sounded until the fire trucks shall have completely passed.

(Ref. 28-908 RS Neb.)

Article 2 Fire Prevention
7-201 Fire Prevention; Fire Prevention Code
7-202 Fire Prevention; Fire Code Enforcement
7-203 Fire Prevention; Lawful Entry
7-204 Fire Prevention; Violation Notice
7-205 Fire Prevention; Fire Limits

7-201 Fire Prevention; Fire Prevention Code
The rules and regulations promulgated by the office of the State Fire Marshal of the State of Nebraska relating to the fire prevention are incorporated by reference into this Code and made a part of this Article as though spread at large herein together with all subsequent amendments thereto. One (1) copy of the Fire Prevention Code shall be on file with the Municipal Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable time.

7-202 Fire Prevention; Fire Code Enforcement
It shall be the duty of all Municipal officials to enforce the incorporated fire code provisions and all infractions shall be immediately brought to the attention of the fire chief, or designee in lieu of fire chief/assistant fire chief.

7-203 Fire Prevention; Lawful Entry
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any building or structure, except the interiors of private dwellings, to allow the fire chief, or designee in lieu of fire chief/assistant fire chief, to inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as necessary the said structure for the purpose of ascertaining and enumerating all conditions therein that are likely to cause fire, or any other violations of the provisions of the Municipal ordinances affecting the hazard of fire.

7-204 Fire Prevention; Violation Notice
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any building or structure that as lawfully inspected as herein before prescribed, and who receives written or verbal notice of a violation of any of the provisions of the Municipal ordinances to correct the condition that violates the said ordinance or ordinances within five (5) days from the date of receipt of such notice.

7-205 Fire Prevention; Fire Limits
The Fire Limits for the City of Crete are as provided on the Fire Limits Map that is on file with the City Clerk.

Article 3 Fires Regulated
7-301 Fire Prevention; Burning Regulations

7-301 Fire Prevention; Burning Regulations
For purposes of this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply:
“Bonfire” means a large outdoor fire utilized for ceremonial purposes.
“Chimney” means a primarily vertical structure containing one or more flues for the purpose of carrying gaseous products of combustion and air from a fuel-burning appliance to the outdoor atmosphere.
“Fire ring” means a construction or device made of metal, stone, bricks, or concrete used to surround and contain campfires or recreational fires.
“Open burning” means the burning of materials wherein products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a chimney or stack from an enclosed chamber. Open burning does not include outdoor cooking devices, the use of outdoor fireplaces, or recreational fires.
“Outdoor cooking device” means a grill, smoker, charcoal burner, or other similar outdoor cooking device designed to burn charcoal briquettes, regulated natural gas or propane, natural and seasoned firewood, or similar fuels for the purposes of cooking food.
“Outdoor fireplace” means a portable or permanent, outdoor, fuel-burning fireplace that may be constructed of steel, concrete, brick, clay, or other noncombustible material. An outdoor fireplace may be open in design or may be equipped with a small hearth opening and a short chimney or chimney opening in the top.
“Recreational fire” means an outdoor fire burning natural and seasoned firewood where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor cooking device, or outdoor fireplace and has a total fuel area of three feet (3’) or less in diameter and two feet (2’) or less in height for pleasure, cooking, warmth, or similar purposes.
The burning of rubbish, trash, or waste materials by incinerator, oven, or stove is prohibited unless the chimney or stack emissions from such incinerator, oven, or stove conform with all laws and regulations promulgated by the State of Nebraska and its agencies.
A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any bonfire or open burning except in the following instances:
Any open burning done pursuant to a state- or city-issued burn permit.
Any open burning done by the Crete Volunteer Fire Department in connection with training activities or courses.
Any bonfire or open burning authorized by the City Council for events, ceremonies, or to relieve an emergency condition in order to protect public health and safety.
Outdoor cooking devices shall not be operated within any building or structure, under any overhanging portion of a building or structure, or on any balcony and shall not be used for the disposal of rubbish, trash, or combustible waste material.
Outdoor fireplaces shall be used in a safe, controlled manner and in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, if any, and shall not be operated within ten feet (10’) of a structure or combustible material. Only regulated natural gas or propane or natural and seasoned firewood shall be burned within outdoor fireplaces.
Recreational fires are prohibited within city limits except in authorized locations within city parks, campgrounds, or recreational areas and shall not be conducted within twenty-five feet (25’) of a structure or combustible material unless the fire is contained within a fire ring. Conditions that could cause a recreational fire to spread within twenty-five feet (25’) of a structure or combustible material shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
Bonfires, open burning, outdoor cooking devices, outdoor fireplaces, and recreational fires shall be constantly monitored or attended until the fire is extinguished and a portable fire extinguisher or other on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel or bucket, or garden hose, shall be available for immediate utilization.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, or maintain any burning authorized by this section that allows smoke, ashes, fumes, or other odors to travel onto nearby property and affect the health, safety, or welfare of the public, be unreasonably offensive or objectionable to the public, cause unreasonable injury or damage to property, or unreasonably interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of property or the normal conduct of business.
The Mayor or City Administrator may temporarily prohibit any or all burning otherwise allowed by this section for a reasonable period of time when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous to the public health, welfare, or safety.
Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a Class IV misdemeanor for a first offense and a Class III misdemeanor for a second or subsequent offense.
Source: Ord. 2098, § 8 (2020); Ord. 1603, § 1 (2004); Ord. 1288, § 1 (1995).

Article 4 Poisonous And Flammable Gases
7-401 Poisonous And Flammable Gases

7-401 Poisonous And Flammable Gases
Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to store or keep in the Municipality for any period of time any form of poisonous flammable or anhydrous ammonia gas or liquefied petroleum gas in excess of five (5) gallons or add to, enlarge, or replace any facility used for the storage of such gases, must first get permission from the Governing Body. The Governing Body, shall require the name of the gas, the place of storage, and the amount of gas stored. If permission is granted, the Governing Body shall prescribe such rules, regulations, and precautionary, actions as they may deem necessary. Any such present use that is discontinued for a period of sixty (60) days shall not be revived without a permit.

(Ref. 16-222 RS Neb.)

Article 5 Explosives
7-501 Explosives; Storage Permit Required
7-502 Explosives; Blasting Permit Required
7-503 Explosives; Transportation

7-501 Explosives; Storage Permit Required
In addition to notifying the Municipal Fire Department pursuant to section 28-1233(3) RS Neb., any person desiring to store or keep for any period of time explosive materials defined in Section 28-1213 RS Neb., shall file with the Municipal Clerk an application for an explosive material storage permit twenty-four hours prior to such storage. Application for said permit shall contain all the necessary information and documents required for the protection of the residents of the Municipality. The Municipal Clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant upon approval of the application by the Police Chief and Fire Chief, or his/her designee, and the payment of the permit fee set by resolution of the Governing Body. The transfer of explosive materials to another person within the Municipality shall require the person receiving the explosive materials to obtain a new permit. The transfer of explosive materials to a new location by the owner shall require a new permit for the new location.

(Ref. 16-222, 16-227, 28-1229, 28-1233 RS Neb.)

7-502 Explosives; Blasting Permit Required
In addition to notifying the Municipal Fire Department pursuant to Section 28-1233(3) RS Neb., any person desiring explosive materials as defined in Section 28-1213 RS Neb., within the Municipality shall apply for and secure a permit therefor from the Municipal Clerk twenty-four (24) hours prior to such discharge. The application for said permit shall contain all necessary information and documents required for the protection of the residents of the Municipality. The Municipal Clerk shall issue a permit upon approval of the application by the Police Chief and Fire Chief, or his/her designee, and payment of the permit fee as set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. Any person securing said permit shall discharge such explosives in conformance with the conditions specified in the permit. In no case shall any person perform blasting operations unless in compliance with all state and local laws and regulations and unless operating under the direct supervision of a person in possession of a valid user's permit issued by the Nebraska State Patrol.

(Ref. 16-227, 28-1229, 28-1233 RS Neb.)

7-503 Explosives; Transportation
Any person wishing to transport high explosives in the Municipality shall first acquire a permit from the Municipal Police and shall take such precautions and use such route as he may prescribe. Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to the Municipal Police, or any of the Armed Services of the United States. No vehicle transporting explosives shall make an unscheduled stop for longer than five (5) minutes within the Municipality and in the event of mechanical failure. Immediate notice of such breakdown shall be given to the Police Chief who shall then prescribe such precautions as may be necessary to protect the residents of the Municipality and a reasonable time for removal of the vehicle from the Municipality.

(Ref. 16-227, 28-1235 RS Neb.)

Article 6 Penalty Provision
7-601 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision

7-601 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provision of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a violation of a Municipal Ordinance. Unless otherwise specified in the particular Article or Section for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such violation shall be in any amount not to exceed $500.00 for any one (1) offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said payment, the offender shall stand committed to the County jail until such fine and costs be paid.

(Ref. 16-246 RS Neb.)

Chapter 8 Public Ways And Property
Article 1 Municipal Property
Article 2 Sidewalks
Article 3 Streets
Article 4 Curb And Gutter
Article 5 Penal Provision

Article 1 Municipal Property
8-101 Definitions
8-102 Municipal Property; Control
8-102.01 Municipal Property, Sale Of Real Property; Procedure
8-102.02 Municipal Property; Sale And Disposal Of Personal Property
8-103 Municipal Property; Obstructions
8-104 Municipal Property; Permitted Obstructions
8-105 Municipal Property; Weeds
8-106 Municipal Property; Awnings In Sidewalk Space
8-107 Municipal Property; Curb Pumps, Filling Stations
8-108 Municipal Property; Special Improvement District; Assessment And Creation Procedure
8-109 Municipal Property; Acquisition Of Real Property
8-109.01 Municipal Property; Topping Of Trees
8-110 Municipal Property; Acquisition Of Property; Appraisal
8-111 Municipal Property; Street And Alley Right-Of-Way; Permitted Obstructions; Permits For Construction; Removal Upon Request

8-101 Definitions
The following definitions shall be applied throughout this Chapter. When no definition is specified, the normal dictionary usage of the word shall apply.

(1) “Public right-of-way” means all land between property lines that is dedicated to use by the general public.

(2) “Sidewalk café” means that portion of the public right-of-way kept, used, maintained, and held out to the public as a place where food or drink is served for consumption on the premises or which is used directly in conjunction with a pedestrian pick-up window.

(3) “Sidewalk right-of-way” or “sidewalk space” means that portion of the public right-of-way between the curb line and the adjacent property line.

(4) “Street right-of-way” or “street space” means that portion of the public right-of-way between curb lines.


Source: Ord. 2110 (2020)



8-102 Municipal Property; Control
The Municipality shall have the power to sell and convey, exchange, or lease any real or personal property owned by the Municipality, including park land, in such manner and upon such terms and conditions as may be deemed in the best interests of the Municipality; provided, that real estate owned by the Municipality may be conveyed without consideration to the State of Nebraska or to the Nebraska Armory Board for State Armory sites; to make all contracts and do all other acts in relation to the property and concerns of the Municipality as may be necessary in the exercise of its corporate powers.



8-102.01 Municipal Property, Sale Of Real Property; Procedure
(1) The power to sell and convey any real estate owned by the city, including park land, except real estate used in the operation of public utilities and except real estate for state armory sites for the use of the State of Nebraska as expressly provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-201, shall be exercised by ordinance directing the conveyance of such sale and the terms thereof shall be published for three consecutive weeks in a legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in such city immediately after the passage and publication of such ordinance. If within thirty days after the passage and publication of such ordinance a remonstrance against such sale is signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to thirty percent of the registered voters of the city voting at the last regular municipal election held therein and is filed with the governing body of such city, the property shall not then, nor within one year thereafter, be sold. If the date for filing the remonstrance falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the signatures shall be collected within the thirty-day period, but the filing shall be considered timely if filed or post marked on or before the next business day. Upon the receipt of the remonstrance, the governing body of such city, with the aid and assistance of the election commission or county clerk, shall determine the validity and sufficiency of signatures on the remonstrance. The governing body of such city shall deliver the remonstrance to the election commissioner or county clerk by had carrier, by use of law enforcement official, or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Upon receipt of the remonstrance, the election commissioner or county clerk shall issue to the governing body a written receipt that the remonstrance is in the custody of the election commissioner or county clerk.

(2) The election commissioner or county clerk shall compare the signature of each person signing the remonstrance with the voter registration records to determine if each signer was a registered voter on or before the date on which the remonstrance was filed with the governing body. The election commissioner or county clerk shall also compare the signer’s printed name, street and number or voting precinct, and city, village, or post office address with the voter registration records to determine whether the signer was a registered voter. The signature and address shall be presumed to be valid only if the election commissioner or county clerk determines that the printed name, street and number or voting precinct, and city, or post office address matches the registration records and the registration was received on or before the date on which the remonstrance was filed with the voter registration records, in addition to helping to determine the validity of the remonstrance, the sufficiency of the remonstrance, and the qualifications of the signer, shall be to prevent fraud, deception, and misrepresentation in the remonstrance process. Upon completion of the comparison of names and address with the voter registration records, the election commissioner or county clerk shall prepare in writing a certification under seal setting forth the name and address of each signer found not to be a registered voter and the signature page number and line number where the name is found, and if the reason for the invalidity of the signature or address is other than the non-registration of the signer, the election commissioner or county clerk shall set forth the reason for the invalidity of the signature. If the election commissioner or county clerk determines that a signer has affixed his or her signature more than once to the remonstrance and that only one person is registered by that name, the election commissioner or county clerk shall prepare in writing a certification under seal setting forth the name of the duplicate signature and shall count only the earliest date signature. The election commissioner or county clerk shall certify to the governing body the number of valid signatures necessary to constitute a valid remonstrance. The election commissioner or county clerk shall deliver the remonstrance and the certifications to the governing body within forty days after the receipt of the remonstrance from the governing body. The delivery shall be by hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials, or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Not more than twenty signatures on one signature page shall be counted.

(3) The governing body shall, within thirty days after the receipt of the remonstrance and certifications from the election commissioner or county clerk, hold a public hearing to review the remonstrance and certifications and receive testimony regarding them. The governing body shall, following the hearing, vote on whether or not the remonstrance is valid and shall uphold the remonstrance if sufficient valid signatures have been received.


Source: Ord. 1809 (2011)



8-102.02 Municipal Property; Sale And Disposal Of Personal Property
(1) The City may sell and convey, exchange, or lease any personal property owned by the City in such manner and upon such terms and conditions as may be deemed in the best interests of the City.

(2) All agencies, boards, commissions, and departments of the City shall submit to the City Administrator or their designee, at such time and in such form as the City Administrator shall prescribe, reports describing the current inventory of all personal property under its custody and control, the status and anticipated remaining life of the personal property, and all surplus personal property that is no longer used or that has become obsolete, deteriorated, or worn out.

(3) The City Administrator shall have the authority to sell or otherwise dispose of all personal property that has a perceived value of less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000). The City Administrator shall sell or otherwise dispose of such property by any method that is deemed most advantageous to the City, including, but not limited to, auction, sealed bid, public or private sale, trade-in for other property, or disposal at a recycling center or landfill. All sales of personal property that has a perceived value of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) or more shall require the prior approval of the City Council.

(4) All proceeds from the sale or disposal of personal property shall be placed in the general fund or held in such accounts or in such manner as otherwise provided for by law.


Source: Ord. 1809 (2011); Ord. 2111 (2020)



8-103 Municipal Property; Obstructions
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, or corporation to obstruct or encumber, by fences, gates, buildings, structures, or otherwise, any of the streets, alleys, or sidewalks, except as expressly provided for by this code.

(2) Trees and shrubs growing upon or near the property line or upon the public right-of-way and interfering with the use or construction of any public right-of-way or improvements shall be deemed an obstruction under this Article. Such trees and shrubs and their roots may be removed by the City at the expense of the owner of the property upon which the tree or shrub is located should the owner, after proper notice, fail or neglect to do so.


Source: Ord. 2110 (2020)



8-104 Municipal Property; Permitted Obstructions
Persons engaged in the erection, construction, reconstruction, wrecking, or repairing of any building, or the construction or repair of a sidewalk along any street, may occupy the public street space with such building material and equipment as long as is necessary if such persons shall make application to and receive a permit in writing from the Public Works Director to do so; provided, no permit for the occupancy of the sidewalk space, and more than one-third (1/3) of the roadway of the public space adjacent to the real estate on which said building is to be constructed, erected, reconstructed, wrecked, or repaired shall be granted; and provided further, a suitable passageway for pedestrians shall be maintained within the public space included in the permit which shall be protected and lighted in the manner required by the Public Works Director.



8-105 Municipal Property; Weeds
(1) It is hereby the duty of the Public Works Director or his duly authorized agent to view and inspect the sidewalk space within the corporate limits for growing weeds during the growing season, and if rank and noxious weeds are found growing thereon, he shall notify the owner or occupant thereof to cut down such weeds as close to the ground as can be practicably done and keep the weeds cut thereon in like manner during the growing season for weeds.

(2) In the event that the owner of any lot or parcel of land within the Municipality is a non-resident of the Municipality or cannot be found therein the notice may be given to any person having the care, custody, or control of such lot or parcel of land. In the event that there can be found no one within the Municipality to whom notice can be given, it shall be the duty of the Public Works Director or his agent to post a copy of the notice on the premises and then to cut or cause the weeds thereon to be cut as therein provided and report the cost thereof in writing to the Governing Body. The cost shall then be audited and paid by the Municipality and the amount thereof shall be assessed against the lot or parcel of land as a special tax thereon and shall be collected as are other taxes of the Municipality or may be recovered by civil suit brought by the Municipality against the owner of the parcel of land. In the event the property owner is a non-resident of the county in which the property lies, the Municipality shall, before levying any special assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the non-resident property owner. The last known address shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first published.



8-106 Municipal Property; Awnings In Sidewalk Space
All awnings hereafter erected or suffered to remain in the sidewalk space shall be elevated at least seven feet at the lowest part from the top of the public sidewalk and shall not project over said sidewalk to exceed three-fourths (3/4) of the width thereof. Except as allowed by permit from the City, all awnings shall be supported without posts by iron brackets or by any iron framework attached firmly to the building so as to leave the sidewalk wholly unobstructed.


Source: Ord. 2110 (2020)



8-107 Municipal Property; Curb Pumps, Filling Stations
(1) No curb pump or filling station used for the storage and sale of petroleum products shall be constructed or suffered to remain within the limits of any street between lot line and lot line. All such curb pumps or filling stations now erected or hereafter constructed in the streets of the City are hereby declared to be a nuisance and, regardless of any permit heretofore granted by the Mayor and Council, the Mayor and Council are hereby empowered, at any time the public good demands, to order the removal of such curb pump or filling station.

(2) Before any curb pump or filling station now located within the limits of any street shall be removed, the Chief of Police shall serve a notice on the owner and tenant or user of such pump or station, if there be any, to remove said pump or filling station beyond the limits of the street. The Chief of Police shall not serve such order of removal until the Council by resolution shall direct the same upon a vote of a majority of the members of the Council. If the owner or lessee of said curb pump or filling station shall refuse or neglect to comply with the notice of removal, then the Chief of Police shall remove said obstruction from the street in which it is situated, shall restore the street to a condition safe for public travel thereon, shall notify the owner or lessee that the salvage from said curb pump or filling station is located at a definite place within the corporate limits at the expense or risk of said owner or lessee, shall report the expense of such removal to the Mayor and Council, and, if the expense incident to the removal thereof be approved by the Council, then a warrant shall be drawn on the General Fund to reimburse the Chief of Police for the money expended by him in abating said nuisance. The City shall thereupon recover the sum so expended by civil suit brought against the owner or lessee of the pump or filling station in any court of competent jurisdiction.



8-108 Municipal Property; Special Improvement District; Assessment And Creation Procedure
(1) The Municipality Governing Body may, by ordinance, create a special improvement district for the purpose of replacing, reconstructing, or repairing an existing street, alley, water line, sewer line, or any other such improvement.

(2) Except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-2428 to 19-2431, the Governing Body shall have power to assess, to the extent of such benefits, the costs of such improvements upon the properties found especially benefited thereby, whether or not such properties were previously assessed for the same general purpose. In creating such special improvement district, the Governing Body shall follow procedures applicable to the creation and assessment of the same type of improvement district as otherwise provided by law.



8-109 Municipal Property; Acquisition Of Real Property
When acquiring an interest in real property by purchase or eminent domain, the Municipality shall do so only after the Governing Body has authorized the acquisition by action taken in a public meeting after notice and public hearing.



8-109.01 Municipal Property; Topping Of Trees
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempt from this ordinance at the determination of the City Arborist or Public Works Director.


Source: Ord. 1596 (2003)



8-110 Municipal Property; Acquisition Of Property; Appraisal
The Municipality shall not purchase, lease-purchase, or acquire for consideration real property having an estimated value of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more unless an appraisal of such property has been performed by a certified real estate appraiser.



8-111 Municipal Property; Street And Alley Right-Of-Way; Permitted Obstructions; Permits For Construction; Removal Upon Request
(1) Persons desiring to place any above ground or below ground structures are permitted to occupy the public right-of-way provided a permit is applied for and granted by the Public Works Director and the following requirements, at a minimum, are met, to-wit:

(a) Such structures shall not pose a hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.

(b) Such structures shall not hinder the view of pedestrians or vehicular traffic.

(c) Below ground structures shall not interfere with or hinder operation of any utilities or right of way functions for any present or future public use.

(2) Any person who places a structure in the right-of-way shall be required to remove or repair such structure, at that their expense, should it be required to be removed or repair by the City for construction or improvements of any public use in the right-of-way. The City of Crete or its agents are not responsible for removal, relocation, or repair of any obstruction placed in the right-of-way.


Source: Ord. 1476 (2000)



Article 2 Sidewalks
8-201 Sidewalks; Maintenance
8-202 Sidewalks; Kept Clean; Notice
8-203 Sidewalks; Maintenance
8-204 Sidewalks; Repair
8-205 Sidewalks; Construction By Owner
8-206 Sidewalks; Construction; Materials To Be Used
8-207 Sidewalks; Width And Distance From Lot Line
8-208 Sidewalks; Manner Of Construction
8-209 Sidewalks And Driveways; Expansion Joints
8-210 Sidewalks; Construction Not In Accordance With Regulations
8-211 Sidewalks; Municipal Construction
8-212 Sidewalks; Municipal Construction; Cost Of Intersections
8-213 Sidewalks; Permitted Encroachments And Obstructions; Requirements; Renewal
8-214 Sidewalks; Sidewalk Cafes

8-201 Sidewalks; Maintenance
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot or lots or the owner of any vacant lot or lots within the corporate limits to allow snow, sleet, mud, ice, or other substance to accumulate on the sidewalks or to permit any snow, sleet, ice, mud, or other substance to remain upon said sidewalk.

(2) All sidewalks within the business district shall be cleaned within five hours after the cessation of a storm, unless the storm or fall of snow takes place during the night, in which case the sidewalk shall be cleaned before eight-thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. the following day. All sidewalks within the residential district shall be cleaned within twenty-four hours after the cessation of a storm or fall of snow.



8-202 Sidewalks; Kept Clean; Notice
If the requirements of section 8-201 are not complied with, notice to remove snow, sleet, mud, ice, or other substance from any lots or vacant lots within the corporate limits shall be made to the occupant or owner. The notice shall be made by the Public Works Director or his/her agent either verbally, by telephone, posting, or mail service, and complete documentation on the notice given shall be maintained. The notice shall contain the location of the violation, and the occupant or owner shall be allowed twenty-four hours in which to comply. If the notice is not complied with, the Public Works Director or his/her agent shall order the substance removed from the sidewalks, and the cost, as adopted as City policy, will be assessed to the property. If the costs are not paid and are deemed delinquent, the Municipality may file a lien against the property and they shall be collected in the manner as provided by law.



8-203 Sidewalks; Maintenance
Every owner of any lot, lots, or piece of land within the corporate limits shall at all times keep and maintain the sidewalk along and contiguous to said lot, lots, or pieces of land, as the case may be, in good and proper repair and in a condition reasonably safe for travel for all travelers thereon. In the event that the owner or owners of any lot, lots, or lands, abutting on any street, avenue, or part thereof shall fail to construct or repair any sidewalk in front of his, her, or their lot, lots, or lands within the time and in the manner as directed and required herein after having received due notice to do so, they shall be liable for all damages or injury occasioned by reason of the defective or dangerous condition of any sidewalk, and the Governing Body shall have power to cause any such sidewalks to be constructed or repaired and assess the costs thereof against such property.



8-204 Sidewalks; Repair
The Public Works Director may require sidewalks of the Municipality to be repaired. Notice to the owners of property upon which such sidewalks in disrepair are located shall require within five days from issuance notice said owners to make arrangements to have the sidewalk repaired. Said repairs shall be completed within thirty days after issuance of said notice. No special assessment shall be levied against the property unless said owner shall neglect or refuse to repair within the time prescribed, and in the event that such owner fails to repair, the Municipality shall cause the repairs to be made and assess the property owner the expense of such repairs. In the event the property owner is a nonresident of the county in which the property lies, the Municipality shall, before levying any special assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the nonresident property owner. The last known address shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first published.



8-205 Sidewalks; Construction By Owner
Any person desiring to construct or cause to be constructed any sidewalk shall do so only as herein provided. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit. Said owner shall make application in writing for a permit and file such application in the office of the Public Works Director. The permit shall give a description of the lot or piece of land along which the sidewalk is to be constructed. The Public Works Director shall issue the desired permit unless good cause shall appear why said permit should be denied; provided, if it is desired to construct the sidewalk at any other than the regularly prescribed location, grade, or elevation, the Public Works Director shall submit the application to the Governing Body who shall determine whether the permit should be granted or denied. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be constructed said sidewalk at any other location, grade, or elevation than so designated by the Municipality. All sidewalks shall be built and constructed on the established grade or elevation, and if there is no established grade, then on the grade or elevation indicated by the Public Works Director.



8-206 Sidewalks; Construction; Materials To Be Used
(1) All sidewalks, on either side of the streets and avenues of the City, in front of or along any lot, lots, or lands abutting upon the same, which shall be hereinafter constructed, reconstructed, or replaced, shall be of concrete. 

(2) No person shall construct, reconstruct, or replace any sidewalk of any other material within the limits of the City without the written permission of the Mayor and Council.



8-207 Sidewalks; Width And Distance From Lot Line
All sidewalks shall be of such width as the Mayor and Council in each case by resolution fix. Sidewalks shall be located at a distance of eighteen inches from the lot line unless otherwise authorized by the Mayor and Council. Whenever possible, they shall correspond in width to sidewalks already built to which they are adjacent or adjoin.



8-208 Sidewalks; Manner Of Construction
(1) All concrete sidewalks shall be constructed according to the following specifications:

(a) Cement. The cement shall be a standard Portland cement.

(b) Water. The water shall be clean, free from oil, acid, strong alkalis, or vegetable matter.

(c) Sand. The sand shall be clean, coarse, hard, durable, free from loam, vegetable, or other deleterious matter.

(d) Sub-base. The sub-base shall consist of a layer of sand one inch thick, well tamped.

(e) Sub-grade. All soft or spongy places shall be removed, and all depressions filled with suitable material, which shall be thoroughly compacted by flooding and tamping in layers not exceeding six inches in thickness.

(f) Deep Fills. When a fill exceeding one foot in thickness is required to bring the walk to grade, it shall be made in a manner satisfactory to the Commissioner. The top of all fills shall extend beyond the walk on each side at least one foot, and the sides shall have a slope of not less than one to one and one-half  (1 : 1.5).

(g) Proportions of Materials. The proportions shall not exceed one part cement and four parts of gravel and sand. All sidewalks shall be float-finished.

(h) Measuring. The method of measuring the materials for the concrete, including water, shall be one which will insure separate uniform proportions at all times.

(i) Mixing. The ingredients of the concrete shall be thoroughly mixed dry, sufficient water added to obtain the desired consistency, and mixing continued until the materials are uniformly distributed and the mass is uniform in color and homogeneous.

(j) Slabs. The slabs shall be four feet square, except in the business districts where the size of the slabs shall be determined by the Street Commissioner before the construction of the walk.

(k) Thickness. The thickness of the slabs for the residential districts shall not be less than four inches and for the business districts not less than five inches.

(2) Sidewalks shall be laid upon a grade of one-fourth (1/4) of an inch to the foot above the curb grade, unless otherwise authorized by the Mayor and Council. All sidewalks shall conform to the specifications adopted by the City as to the quality of work and materials. The whole work of grading and laying of said sidewalk, whether done by the City or by the owner of the respective lot, lots, or parcels of land abutting upon the same, shall be under the supervision of the Public Works Director and subject to his approval. All sidewalks shall conform to the grade where established and, on streets where no grade is yet established, on a grade established by the Engineer or Public Works Director with relation to the particular points between which said sidewalk is to be built. The Public Works Director shall assist the Engineer in establishing grades on streets where the same have not yet been run.

(3) Sidewalks shall be built on a grade or level with the surface of the ground as near as can be. When ordered by the Council, any property owner shall rebuild or reconstruct his sidewalk to conform to the grade thus established. It shall be the duty of the Engineer to furnish sidewalk grade when requested by the Public Works Director.



8-209 Sidewalks And Driveways; Expansion Joints
All concrete sidewalks and driveways hereafter constructed, reconstructed, or repaired within the limits of the City that shall abut on city streets with concrete curbing or pavement shall be constructed with, of one inch between sidewalk and concrete a minimum expansion joint, of approved design and materials curbing or pavement, and a minimum expansion joint of approved design and materials of one inch between driveway and curb or apron, which shall be located a minimum distance of four feet from the edge of pavement or street and a maximum distance from edge of pavement or street of ten feet or at the edge of existing sidewalk, where such exists at a lesser distance from the edge of pavement or street.



8-210 Sidewalks; Construction Not In Accordance With Regulations
In case any lot owner or the owners of a piece of land within the corporate limits of the City, under notice given or otherwise, shall construct a sidewalk in violation of this Article, the Public Works Director may stop the work of such construction and order the same to be constructed in accordance with said Article and the work already done to be changed, and on the failure of such owner to change any such work, the Public Works Director or other officer shall forthwith change said work, and the expense of the same shall be assessed and taxed to said lot and collected as if taxed, as provided by law.



8-211 Sidewalks; Municipal Construction
(1) The Governing Body may, by resolution, order the construction of a sidewalk on any lot or piece of ground within the Municipality. Notice of the Governing Body's intention to construct said sidewalk shall be given by the Municipal Clerk by publication of notice one time in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality.

(2) A copy of said notice shall be personally served upon the occupant in possession of such property, or when personal service is not possible, said notice shall be posted upon such premises ten days prior to the commencement of construction. The notice required in this section shall be prepared by the Municipal Attorney in accordance with the provisions of this section. Such service shall include a form of return evidencing personal service or posting as herein required.

(3) Said notice shall notify the owner of the premises of the passage of the resolution ordering him to construct or cause to be constructed a sidewalk within thirty days after the date of publication and, further, that if he fails to construct the sidewalk or cause the same to be done within the time allowed, the Municipality will cause the sidewalk to be constructed and the cost thereof shall be levied and assessed as a special tax against the premise; provided, the notice shall contain the official estimate of the cost of said construction and no special assessment in excess of this estimate shall be assessed against the property. In the event the property owner is a non-resident of the county in which the property lies, the Municipality shall, before levying any special assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the non-resident property owner. The last known address shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first published.



8-212 Sidewalks; Municipal Construction; Cost Of Intersections
(1) In case of corner lots, such lots shall not be charged with the costs of so much additional walk between the outer edge of the sidewalk line and the curb line as was required to be laid for the intersections of the walks abutting the frontage of such lots, but such work of construction shall be done by the City, unless otherwise ordered by the Mayor and Council. The City shall construct all crossings and crosswalks from curb line to curb line in all streets.

(2) The cost of the construction, widening, or rebuilding of any sidewalks shall be levied upon the lot or lots or parcel of ground fronting and adjoining which such sidewalks are laid, widened, or rebuilt by resolution, which resolution shall specify the street upon which such walk has been so constructed, widened, or rebuilt and the length and width of each walk constructed, widened, or rebuilt fronting on any lot or piece of ground. Such assessment shall be made by the Council at a special meeting by resolution, fixing the valuation of the lots assessed, taking into account the benefits derived or injuries sustained in consequence of such improvements, and the amount charged against the same, which, with the vote thereon by "yeas" and "nays", shall be spread upon the minutes. Notice of the time and place of holding such meeting and the purpose for which it is to be held shall be published in a legal newspaper published and in general circulation in the City, at least four weeks before the same shall be held, or in lieu thereof, personal service may be made upon the person owning the property to be assessed. All such assessments shall be known as "Special Assessments for Improvement" and shall be levied and collected as a separate tax in addition to the tax for general purposes to be placed upon the tax roll for collection, subject to the same penalties and collected in like manner as other City taxes. Whenever any such special tax is levied, the Clerk shall forthwith deliver a certified copy of such resolution to the County Clerk who shall place the same on the tax list to be collected by law as in such cases made and provided.



8-213 Sidewalks; Permitted Encroachments And Obstructions; Requirements; Renewal
(1) No encroachment or obstruction of any kind, except those of a temporary nature due to loading or unloading, are allowed upon any sidewalk located on any public right-of-way unless a permit for the encroachment or obstruction is applied for and granted by the City. Permits issued pursuant to this section are a unique, personal privilege and may not be transferred to another legal entity or location. Permit holders do not acquire any right, title, or interest in the space permitted to be used.

(2) Except for sidewalk café permits, no sidewalk right-of-way permit shall be issued unless the following requirements are met:

(a) Such encroachment or obstruction shall not pose a hazard to pedestrians or others using the sidewalk.

(b) Such encroachment or obstruction shall not hinder or interfere with the normal use of the sidewalk by pedestrians or others.

(c) No more than thirty percent (30%) of the sidewalk is obstructed at any one time and the unobstructed area of the sidewalk is, in any Commercial or Industrial District, at least six feet wide or, in any Residential District, at least four feet wide.

(d) Proof of liability insurance naming the City of Crete as an additional insured is provided under such terms and in such amounts as reasonably determined by the City.

(e) Any other special requirements as determined by the City that are reasonably related to special conditions of the property or to the specific use or design of the building, structure, or property.

(3) All sidewalk right-of-way permits shall expire on the thirtieth day of September following issuance. Annual renewals of such permits may be made for one year by application to the City, and all permit fees shall be due and payable on the first day of October of each year.


Source: Ord. 1609 (2004); Ord. 2110 (2020)



8-214 Sidewalks; Sidewalk Cafes
(1) The record owners of commercial or mixed use property abutting sidewalk right-of-way in areas zoned C-1 Central Commercial District may apply for and obtain a permit to use so much of the sidewalk right-of-way abutting their property as the City determines is not needed for the use of the general public for sidewalk cafés. Any record owner that desires to authorize another to occupy the sidewalk right-of-way shall file with the City a copy of the lease or other agreement covering the abutting property prior to the issuance of the permit. Permits issued pursuant to this section are a unique, personal privilege and may not be transferred to another legal entity or location. Permit holders do not acquire any right, title, or interest in the space permitted to be used.

(2) Application for a sidewalk café permit shall be made to the City upon a form to be furnished by the City, which application shall include all of the information and any plans or drawings required by the City. Incomplete applications shall not be considered until all deficiencies are remedied to the satisfaction of the City.

(3) The use of sidewalk right-of-way for a sidewalk café shall continually conform with the requirements of this section and any applicable standards imposed by ordinance, resolution, or order of the City Council, including, but not limited to:

(a) A clear, unobstructed passageway not less than five feet in width shall be maintained between the sidewalk café area and the curb line, unless the City shall find special circumstances involving site characteristics or the flow of pedestrian traffic that requires a passageway greater than five feet.

(b) Except for permit areas that are not intended for exclusive use, the permit area shall be separated from the pedestrian passageway with a fence or other rigid barrier that meets the specifications required by the City.

(c) All umbrellas, canopies, or similar devices and all furnishings, including the number and type of tables and chairs to be provided, are subject to approval by the City and may not be modified or substituted.

(d) The permit area shall be kept clean and free of any litter deposited on or in the vicinity of it and any fixtures or furniture contained therein shall be kept and maintained in good condition.

(e) The permit holder shall conduct all activities within the permit area in an orderly fashion and in such a manner as to protect the public health and safety and shall comply with all health, sanitation, and building safety regulations.

(4) All permit holders shall be required to obtain and maintain public liability insurance in the form of a commercial or comprehensive general liability policy naming the City as an additional insured under such terms and in such amounts as reasonably determined by the City.

(5) Any person issued a sidewalk café permit shall pay to the City an annual permit fee in an amount determined by the City Council. All sidewalk café permits shall expire on the thirtieth day of September following issuance. Annual renewals of such permits may be made for one year by application to the City, and all permit fees shall be due and payable on the first day of October of each year.

(6) Any sidewalk café permit may be suspended or revoked by the City after due notice for any of the following causes:

(a) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements contained in the permit application. 

(b) Violation of any of the provisions of this section, the requirements imposed by the City, or any other local, state, or federal law.

(c) Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such a way as to constitute a menace to the health or safety of the public.

(d) Upon demand of the City Council.


Source: Ord. 2110 (2020)



Article 3 Streets
8-301 Streets; Names And Numbers
8-302 Streets; Widening Or Opening
8-303 Streets; Excavation
8-304 Streets; Heavy Equipment
8-305 Streets; Construction Notice
8-306 Streets; Protection Of Paving
8-307 Streets; Improvement District; Land Adjacent
8-308 Streets; Deferral From Special Assessments
8-309 Streets; Petition For Improvements
8-310 Streets; Driveway Approaches

8-301 Streets; Names And Numbers
The City Council may at any time, by ordinance, rename any street or provide a name for any new street. Buildings used for residence or business purposes and located along such streets shall retain such numbers as the City Council may require. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector, upon the approval of a permit for the construction of any new building or buildings, to assign the proper numbers set by the Director of Public Works to said building or buildings and give notice to the owner or owners and occupant or occupants of the same.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-609, 16-614

8-302 Streets; Widening Or Opening
The Governing Body shall have the power to open or widen any street, alley, or lane within the limits of the Municipality; to create, open, and improve any new street, alley, or lane; provided, all damages sustained shall be ascertained in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-609, 16-645



8-303 Streets; Excavation
It shall be unlawful for any person to make an excavation in any street or streets for any purpose whatsoever unless a written permit is issued by the Public Works Director.



8-304 Streets; Heavy Equipment
(1) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or persons to move or operate heavy equipment across any curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, or crossing on any unpaved street without first having protected such curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalks, crosswalk, or crossing with heavy planks sufficient in strength to warrant the breaking or damaging of such curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, or crossing. Hereafter, it shall be unlawful to run, drive, move, operate, or convey over or across any paved street a vehicle, machine, or implement with sharp discs or sharp wheels that bear upon said pavement; with wheels having cutting edges; with wheels having lugs, any protruding parts, or bolts thereon that extend beyond a plain tire so as to cut, mark, mar, indent, or otherwise injure or damage any pavement, gutter, or curb; provided, where heavy vehicles, structures, and machines move along paved or unpaved streets the Municipal Police are hereby authorized and empowered to choose the route over which the moving of such vehicles, structures, or machines will be permitted and allowed.

(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to pneumatic tires with metal or metal-type studs not exceeding five-sixteenths (5/16) of an inch in diameter inclusive of the stud-casting with an average protrusion beyond the tread surface of not more than seven sixty-fourths (7/64) of an inch between October 1 and April 15; provided, that school buses and emergency vehicles shall be permitted to use metal or metal-type studs all year. 

(4) It shall be permissible to use farm machinery with tires having protuberances which will not injure the streets.

(3) It shall be permissible to use a rubber tired crane with a fixed load when (i) such vehicle will be transported on a state highway or on any road within the corporate limits of the Municipality, (ii) the Municipality in which the crane is intended to be transported has authorized a one-day permit for the transportation of the crane and specified the route to be used and the hours during which the crane can be transported, (iii) such vehicle is escorted by another vehicle or vehicles assigned by the Municipality, and (iv) such vehicle's gross weight does not exceed the limits set out in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,294.

(4) It shall be permissible to use tire chains of reasonable proportions upon any vehicle when required for safety because of snow, ice, or other condition tending to cause a vehicle to slide or skid.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,250



8-305 Streets; Construction Notice
The Mayor and Council shall notify the owners in fee simple of real estate abutting a street, alley, or a part thereof which is to be put under contract for paving or repaving. Notice shall also be given to all gas, electric service, and telephone companies. Notice shall also be given to all consumers of gas, water, and sewer services which will be discontinued during such construction. Said notice shall be published one time in a legal newspaper at least twenty days prior to the beginning of such construction by the party undertaking such construction, and said notice shall state at what date connections must be made and excavation completed. All gas, water, sewer, and underground connections must be made prior to the paving or repaving of the street under construction. After expiration of such time, permits for excavation will not be issued, nor will excavation be allowed, until after the completion of the pavement in said street or alley, and the formal final acceptance thereof by the proper officials of the Municipality.



8-306 Streets; Protection Of Paving
No person shall remove, destroy, or tear down any barricade, fence, railing, or other device erected or constructed for the purpose of protecting paving or any other work while in course of construction or after it has been constructed on any of the streets, alleys, or public grounds of the City. No person shall drive over or upon or go upon any paving or other public work in any of the streets, alleys, or public grounds of the City while the same is protected by any barrier, fence, or railing or until such barrier, fence, or railing has been removed by the contractors in charge of such work or by the duly authorized officials of the City.



8-307 Streets; Improvement District; Land Adjacent
Supplemental to any existing law on the subject, a Municipality may include land adjacent to such Municipality when creating an improvement district, such as a sewer, paving, water, water extension, or sanitary sewer extension district. The Governing Body shall have power to assess, to the extent of special benefits, the costs of such improvements upon the properties found especially benefitted thereby, except as provided in section 8-308.



8-308 Streets; Deferral From Special Assessments
(1) Whenever the Governing Body of a Municipality creates an improvement district as specified in section 8-307 which includes land adjacent to the Municipality which is within an agricultural use zone and is used exclusively for agricultural use, the owners of record title of such adjacent land may apply for a deferral from special assessments. For purposes of this section, the terms agricultural use and agricultural use zone shall have the meaning specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-2428.

(2) Any owner of record title eligible for the deferral granted by this section shall, to secure such assessment, make application to the Governing Body of the Municipality within ninety days after creation of an improvement district as specified in section 8-307. Any owner of record title who makes application for the deferral provided by this section shall notify the County Register of Deeds of such application in writing prior to approval by the Governing Body. The Governing Body shall approve the application of any owner of record title upon determination that the property is within an agricultural use zone, is used exclusively for agricultural use, and the owner has met the requirements of this section.

(3) The deferral provided for in this section shall be terminated upon any of the following events:

(a) Notification by the owner of record title to the Governing Body to remove such deferral;

(b) Sale or transfer to a new owner who does not make a new application within sixty days of the sale or transfer, except as provided in subdivision (c) of this subsection;

(c) Transfer by reason of death of a former owner to a new owner who does not make application within one hundred twenty-five days of the transfer;

(d) The land is no longer being used as agricultural land; or

(e) Change of zoning to other than an agricultural zone.

(4) Whenever property which has received a deferral pursuant to this section becomes disqualified for such deferral, the owner of record title of such property shall pay to the Municipality an amount equal to:

(a) The total amount of special assessments which would have been assessed against such property, to the extent of special benefits, had such deferral not been granted; and

(b) Interest upon the special assessments not paid each year at the rate of six percent (6%) from the dates at which such assessments would have been payable if no deferral had been granted.

(5) In cases where the deferral provided by this section is terminated as a result of a sale or transfer described in subdivision (b) or (c) of subsection (3), the lien for assessments and interest shall attach as of the day preceding such sale or transfer.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-2428 to 19-2431



8-309 Streets; Petition For Improvements
(1) Owners of lots or lands abutting upon any street, avenue, or alley within the Municipality representing three-fourths (3/4) of the front footage thereon may petition the Governing Body to create an improvement district, so that such district, when created, will make up one continuous or extended thoroughfare or more without cost to the Municipality.

(2) The Governing Body shall assess the entire cost of any such improvements in any such street, avenue, or alley, including intersections of streets or avenues and spaces opposite alleys, against the private property within such improvement district or districts. It shall be the duty of the Governing Body to create the proper improvement district or districts, which shall be consecutively numbered, and to improve the same and to proceed in the same manner and form as hereinbefore provided for in other paving and improvement districts. Provided, the Governing Body shall have power to levy the entire cost of such improvements of any such street, avenue, or alley, including intersections of streets or avenues and spaces opposite alleys, against the private property within such district, and to issue street improvement bonds to pay for such improvements. Such bonds shall be issued to cover the entire cost of so improving such streets or avenues, intersections of the same, and spaces opposite alleys.

(3) If the assessments herein provided for, or any part thereof, shall fail or for any reason shall be invalid, the Governing Body make other and further assessments upon such lots or lands as may be required to collect from the same the cost of any improvements properly chargeable thereto, as herein provided. The Governing Body shall have the discretion to deny the formation of the proposed district when the area to be improved has not previously been improved with a water system, sewer system, and grading of streets. If the Governing Body should deny a requested improvement district formation, it shall state its grounds for such denial in a written letter to interested parties.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-624



8-310 Streets; Driveway Approaches
(1) The Public Works Director may require the owner of property served by a driveway approach constructed or maintained upon the street right-of-way to repair or replace any such driveway approach, which is cracked, broken, or otherwise deteriorated, to the extent that it is causing or is likely to cause damage to or interfere with any street structure, including pavement or sidewalks.

(2) The Municipal Clerk shall give the property owner notice by registered letter or certified mail directed to the last-known address of such owner, or the agent of such owner, directing the repair or replacement of such driveway approach. If, within thirty days of mailing such notice, the property owner fails or neglects to cause such repairs or replacements to be made, the Street Commissioner may cause such work to be done and assess the cost upon the property served by such approach.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-1748



Article 4 Curb And Gutter
8-401 Paving And Curb Cuts; Street And Alley Excavations

8-401 Paving And Curb Cuts; Street And Alley Excavations
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to cut into any paving, curb, street, alley, sidewalk, or any city property for the purpose of removing same, or for the constructing of a driveway, sidewalk, or for any other purpose, or to make any excavations on city property whatsoever without first having obtained a written permit issued by the City Building Inspector Office.

(2) Any person or persons to whom a permit is granted under this section shall maintain good and sufficient barricades, guards, lights, and signals so as to fully protect the public from injury or damage by reason of any cutting or excavation made and shall, before commencing any such work, file with the City Building Inspector Office a performance bond with sureties to be approved by the City Council in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000), which bond shall be conditioned as follows:

(a) To cover and provide the cost of any unfinished, unskilled, and inadequate work;

(b) That said applicant, if requested by the City, properly replace and repair each and every place cut into any pavement, curb, or sidewalk under the rules as prescribed by the Public Works Director in as good a condition as before the same was cut;

(c) That said applicant will promptly compensate the City for all work done by the City in replacing or repairing any places cut in pavement, curb, or sidewalk or for any excavation made into any city property in order to place the same in as good a condition as it was before the same was cut;

(d) That applicant will obey the ordinances and regulations of the City;

(e) That applicant will defend, save harmless, and indemnify the City of Crete from any and all liability, claims, damages, judgments, costs, and expenses of every nature and description caused by or growing out of the cutting or removal of any paving, curb, or sidewalks or any excavation made on city property not covered by or provided for by liability or property damage insurance.

(3) The applicant shall also provide a certificate of liability insurance coverage with bodily injury coverage in a sum of at least three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) for the injury or death of any number of persons in any one accident and with a coverage in the sum of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for property damage in any one accident.

(4) Permits for curb cuts, street cuts, driveway access and excavation shall be issued by the City Building Inspector Office in accordance with the ordinances and the rules and regulations and specifications which are adopted by the Governing Body. A copy of such rules, regulations, and specifications and any amendments thereto shall be filed with the City Clerk, Public Works Director, and the City Building Inspector Office.



Article 5 Penal Provision
8-501 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision

8-501 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a violation of a municipal ordinance. Unless otherwise specified in the particular Article or section for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such violation shall be in any amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500) for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said payment, the offender shall stand committed to the County jail until such fine and costs be paid.



Chapter 9 Building Regulations
Article 1 Building Inspector
Article 2 Building Permits
Article 3 Building Moving
Article 4 Barricades And Lights
Article 5 Unsafe Buildings
Article 6 Building Code
Article 7 Plumbing
Article 8 Residential Code
Article 9 Mechanical Code
Article 10 Water Line Interconnection
Article 11 Property Maintenance Code
Article 12 Supplementary Building Codes
Article 13 [Reserved]
Article 14 Fair Housing
Article 15 Electrical Code
Article 16 Penal Provision

Article 1 Building Inspector
9-101 Building Inspector; Power And Authority
9-102 Building Inspector; Lawful Entry
9-103 Building Inspector; Appeal From Decision
9-104 Building Inspector; Investigations; Order To Correct

9-101 Building Inspector; Power And Authority
(1) The Building Inspector shall be under the direction and supervision of the Director of Public Works. Any issues relating to the interpretation of any building or zoning regulation or public policy considerations shall be presented to the Director of Public Works for guidance.

(2) The Building Inspector shall have the duty of enforcing all building, electrical, plumbing, housing, and land development regulations, codes, or ordinances within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction and shall inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built, or moved and any land being developed as often as necessary to insure compliance with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations.

(3) The Building Inspector shall have the power and authority to order all work stopped on any construction, alteration, relocation, or land development or deny occupancy of any building or structure which violates any building, housing, or land development regulation, code, or ordinance. The Building Inspector shall issue permission to resume any construction, alteration, relocation, or land development or reallow occupancy of any building or structure when they are satisfied that no regulation, code, or ordinance will be violated or continue to be violated. If an oral stop or vacation order has been issued, it shall be followed by a written stop or vacation order within twenty-four (24) hours. Such written order may be served by the Building Inspector or any peace officer.

(4) The Building Inspector and their agents or assistants shall have the power and authority to issue criminal citations for a violation of the City Code or any building or zoning regulation in the same manner as if said citations were issued by a member of the Crete Police Department.


Source: Ord. 1483, § 1 (2000); Ord. 1749, § 1 (2010); Ord. 2099, § 2 (2019)



9-102 Building Inspector; Lawful Entry
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to inspect, as often as necessary, any building which is being constructed, altered, repaired, or relocated to determine if the work being done therein is in conformity with all Municipal building and housing regulations.



9-103 Building Inspector; Appeal From Decision
(1) In the event it is claimed that any provisions of the building or zoning regulations have been wrongly applied or enforced by the Building Inspector, that the time allowed for compliance with any order of the Building Inspector is too short, or that conditions unique to a particular building make it unreasonably difficult to meet the requirements prescribed by the building and zoning regulations, the property owner, their agent, or the occupant may file a notice of appeal with the Director of Public Works within a reasonable time after the decision or order of the Building Inspector has been made.

(2) The Director of Public Works shall hear all appeals from the enforcement of any building or zoning regulation and shall have the power and authority to modify the decision or order of the Building Inspector. Applications for review shall be in writing and shall state the reasons why a variance should be granted. A copy of any variance so granted shall be sent to the Building Inspector and the appellant. Unless appealed to the City Council within thirty (30) days, any decision by the Director of Public Works shall be final, subject only to any remedy which the aggrieved party may have at law or equity.

(3) The City Council shall hear all appeals from a decision by the Director of Public Works relating to the enforcement of any building or zoning regulation. Applications for review shall be in writing and shall state the reasons why a variance should be granted. A copy of any variance so granted shall be sent to the Director of Public Works, the Building Inspector, and the appellant. Any decision by the City Council shall be final, subject only to any remedy which the aggrieved party may have at law or equity.


Source: Ord. 2099, § 3 (2019)



9-104 Building Inspector; Investigations; Order To Correct
(1) The Building Inspector shall investigate all reports of violations or potential violations of the building regulations found in Chapter 9 and the zoning regulations found in Chapter 11 and shall create and maintain records and reports on each investigation.

(2) The Building Inspector shall issue and serve a written order to correct the violations on the property owner or the person responsible for the construction, alteration, repair, or other work to the property on which the violations exist. Such order shall fully describe the violations, provide information on the proper way to correct each violation, and direct the discontinuance and correction of said violations within thirty days.

(3) Any order issued pursuant to this section shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is delivered personally, sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the recipient’s last known address with return receipt requested, or delivered in any other manner as prescribed by law for service of process.

(4) If the person who received the order fails to correct the violations as ordered, the Building Inspector shall issue a citation or forward the records and reports on the investigation to the City Attorney for further action. The City Attorney may institute any appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to prosecute the violations; to restrain, correct, or abate such violations; or, to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure that contains the violations.

(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to comply with a lawful order issued pursuant to this section. Any person convicted of refusing to comply shall be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor.


Source: Ord. 2107, § 1 (2020)



Article 2 Building Permits
9-201 Building Permits; Fees
9-202 Building Permits; Limitation
9-203 Building Permits; Fees Application To Zoning Jurisdiction
9-204 Building Permits; Sidewalk Construction
9-205 Building Permits; Duplicate To County Assessor
9-206 Building Permits; Mobile Homes; Information And Fees; Notification Requirement
9-207 Building Permits; Electrical Installations; Permits; State Of Nebraska Inspections

9-201 Building Permits; Fees
(1) Any person desiring to commence or proceed to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or dwelling, or cause the same to be done, shall file with the Building Official an application for a building permit. The application shall be in writing on a form to be furnished by the Building Official for that purpose. Every such application shall set forth the legal description of the land upon which the construction, relocation, or demolition is to take place, the nature of the use or occupancy, the principal dimensions, the estimated cost, the names of the owner, architect, and contractor, and such other information as may be requested thereon. Application shall be accompanied with three sets of building plans. The Building Official shall use his best efforts (within the limitations of the building permit program) in the issuing of permits, collecting of permit fees, and making the periodic inspections to determine that the owner is making the repairing, remodeling, or new construction in compliance with zoning district regulations and all adopted city building and housing codes.

(2) Fees payable upon application for permit for the work listed and above set forth shall be based on the estimated costs as follows:

(a) Residential, Commercial, Remodel, and Repair (+ plan review fee for commercial projects)

$1.00 to $2,000
$27.00
$2,001 to $5,000
$48.00
$5,001 to $100,000
$48.00 for the first $5,000 + $4.28 per $1,000 thereafter
$100,000 to $500,000
$455.00 for the first $100,000 + $2.14 per $1,000 thereafter
$500,000 to $1,000,000
$1,311.00 for the first $500,000 + $1.60 per $1,000 thereafter
$1,000,000 and over
$2,113.00 for the first $1,000,000 + $1.07 per $1,000 thereafter

(b) Residential Plumbing Permits

Residential Plumbing Package
(New construction only)
$37.50 per dwelling unit
Plumbing Permit Issuance Fee
$18.25 +
Water service line
$18.25
Sewer service line
$18.25
Lawn irrigation system
$16.00
Water heater
$8.50
Water conditioner
$8.00
Water closet
$6.50
Lavatory
$6.50
Bathtub
$6.50
Sink	$6.50
Shower	$6.50
Garbage disposal	$6.50
Laundry tub	$6.50
Floor drain	$4.25
Clothes washer	$4.25
Dish washer	$3.25

(c) Commercial Plumbing Permits

Based on the dollar amount of the plumbing contract.

Plumbing Permit Issuance Fee
$18.25 +
$1.00 to $500.00
$21.50
$500.01 to $1,500.00
$43.00
$1,500.01 to $5,000.00
$150.00
$5,000.01 to $10,000.00
$321.00
$10,000.01 to $25,000.00
$428.00
$25,000.01 to $50,000.00
$535.00
$50,000.01 to $100,000.00
$642.00
$100,000.01 and over
$642.00 for the first $100,000 + $1.07 per $1,000 thereafter

(d) Residential Mechanical Permits

Mechanical permit issuance fee, new construction only
$37.50 per dwelling unit
Furnace replacement only
$21.50
Central air replacement only
$21.50

(e) Commercial Mechanical Permits

Based on dollar amount of mechanical contract.

Mechanical Permit Issuance Fee
$37.50 +
$1.00 to $500.00
$21.50
$500.01 to $1,500.00
$43.00
$1,500.01 to $5,000.00
$150.00
$5,000.01 to $10,000.00
$321.00
$10,000.01 to $25,000.00
$428.00
$25,000.01 to $50,000.00
$535.00
$50,000.01 to $100,000.00
$642.00
$100,000.01 and over
$642.00 for the first $100,000 + $1.07 per $1,000 thereafter

(f) Miscellaneous Permit Fees

Additional Inspection
$40.00
Non-permitted work
$80.00
Sign permit
$27.00 minimum or $1.00 per sq. ft.
Awning Sign permit
$40.00 minimum or $4.00 per sq. ft.
Fence permit
$16.00/$21.50 easement encroachment
Moving permit
$70.00
Zoning change
$110.00
Subdivision review
$160.00
Variance request
$135.00
Mobile home placement
$27.00
Demolition Permit
$11.00
Curb cut permit
$8.50 per LF/$50 minimum
Water well permit
$50.00
Onsite waste water
$50.00
Plan review fee
$50.00
(3) Value for determination of estimated costs of projects for purposes of building permits. The following square footage valuations will be used in calculating permit fees for new residential construction, additions, remodels and residential accessory buildings:

Dwelling
$81.52
Finished Basement
$24.56
Unfinished Basement
$16.40
Garage
$19.14
Deck
$14.41
Driveway
$3.45


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1608 (2004); Ord. 1729 (2009); Ord. 1861 (2013); Ord. 2038 (2018)



9-202 Building Permits; Limitation
If the work for which a permit has been issued shall not have begun within six months of the date thereof, or if the construction shall be discontinued for a period of six months, the permit shall be void. Before work can be resumed, a new permit shall be obtained in the same manner and form as an original permit.



9-203 Building Permits; Fees Application To Zoning Jurisdiction
The building permit fees provided by resolution shall apply and be controlling throughout the municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.



9-204 Building Permits; Sidewalk Construction
On each building permit application on the plot plan, sidewalks will be drawn in before a permit is issued. Sidewalks will be required to be constructed in all zoned districts within the city limits. The person signing the building permit application will be the individual responsible for the construction of the sidewalk, whether he be the property owner, contractor, or the subdivider. All sidewalks will be constructed as outlined by Chapter 8, Article 2 of Crete Municipal Code.



9-205 Building Permits; Duplicate To County Assessor
Whenever a building permit issued for the erection, alteration, or repair of any building within the Municipality's jurisdiction and the improvement is two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500)  or more, a duplicate of such permit shall be issued to the County Assessor.


Source: Ord. 1619 (2004)

State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-1743



9-206 Building Permits; Mobile Homes; Information And Fees; Notification Requirement
(1) Building Permits and Flood Plain Development Permits shall be required for all Mobile/Manufactured homes placed either on individual lots or in Mobile Home Parks.

(2) The Mobile Home Building Permit shall contain such information as shall be required by the Building Inspector and there shall be a charge of $27.00 for Mobile/Manufactured homes placed in Mobile Home Parks. All Mobile/Manufactured homes placed outside of Mobile Home Parks shall pay such fees as are established for other Building Permits by this code.

(3) The owner or operator of each Mobile Home Park is required to notify the Building Inspector within twenty-four (24) hours each time a Mobile/Manufactured home is moved into a Mobile Home Park.


Source: Ord. 1446 (1999); Ord. 1861 (2013)



9-207 Building Permits; Electrical Installations; Permits; State Of Nebraska Inspections
During any period that the City of Crete does not have an Electrical Inspector, all electrical permits shall be referred to the State of Nebraska permit application and inspection. In addition to any State of Nebraska Inspection requirements, the City shall also require State Inspections for all residential electrical installations, modifications, and replacements.


Source: Ord. 1524 (2001)




Article 3 Building Moving
9-301 Building Moving; Definitions
9-302 Building Moving; Regulation
9-303 Building Moving; Permit Fee
9-304 Building Moving; Bond
9-305 Building Moving; Administrative Official

9-301 Building Moving; Definitions
For the purpose of this Article the word "building" shall be construed to mean a house for business, residence, or public use or for the shelter of man or beast or for the storage or display of goods, wares, and merchandise for sale; any erection connected with the temporary or permanent use of man; or, any fixture or article of a chattel nature which can be severed from the land after having been attached to it. The word "structure" shall be construed to mean any production or piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in the some definite manner and not necessarily affixed to the land although resting upon it and capable of being moved from one place to another. The word "building" shall be construed to include in its meaning parts of buildings.


Source: Ord. 1836 (2012)




9-302 Building Moving; Regulation
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to move any building or structure within the Municipality or its zoning jurisdiction without a written permit to do so.

(2) Applications for moving permits, shall be filed in writing with the Administrative Official, and shall disclose thereon the following information:

(a) Name of the applicant; 

(b) Present location of the building or structure to be moved; 

(c) Legal description of the site to which it is proposed to move said building or structure;

(d) Name of owner of said building or structure;

(e) Name of the owner of the site to which it is proposed to move said building or structure;

(f) Name and address of the person the applicant intends to hire or has employed to move said building or structure;

(g) The date or dates on which it is proposed to move said building or structure;

(h) The route and streets upon which it is proposed to move said building or structure;

(i) A list of alterations, changes, improvements, or repairs said applicant intends to make upon said building or structure; and,

(j) Such other information as the Administrative Official may require.

(3) Moving permits issued under this article shall be in writing signed by the Administrative Official and shall state the duration of validity and the route over which such building or structure may be moved.


Source: Ord. 1788 (2011); Ord. 1836 (2012)




9-303 Building Moving; Permit Fee
Upon the approval of an application to move a building or structure, the applicant shall at the time the moving permit is issued, pay a license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) payable to the City and collected by the Administrative Official, and no other charge shall be made or assessed against said applicant by the City; provided, however, in the event it is necessary to disconnect, remove, lift, or shift any electrical lines or appurtenances or any other utilities or instrumentalities of said city to permit said building or structure to be moved, the applicant shall, in addition to said license fee, pay the actual cost of repairs or replacement, or in the event of any other damage to the city, the applicant will pay the actual amount thereof.


Source: Ord. 1789 (2011)




9-304 Building Moving; Bond
Before any building or structure may be moved on a moving permit issued under this Article, the holder thereof shall file with the Administrative Official a good and sufficient bond in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), with two or more personal sureties or one corporate surety, conditioned for the payment of any damages sustained by any person and also any damages sustained by the City resulting from the moving of any house, building, or structure within the city. Any bond as specified in this section may be sued upon for the recovery of any and all damages sustained by any individual or corporation and also any damages sustained by the City, including amounts due the City under section 9-303 hereof, by reason of the moving of any such building or structure.



9-305 Building Moving; Administrative Official
The Director of Public Works is hereby designated as the Administrative Official who shall be responsible for the administration of any application for building moving permits.


Source: Ord. 1525 (2001)



Article 4 Barricades And Lights
9-401 Barricades And Lights

9-401 Barricades And Lights
It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant, or lessee causing the construction, demolition, or moving of any building or improvement within the Municipality to have during such work all excavations, open basements, building materials, and debris protected by suitable guards or barricades by day, and by warning lights at night. The failure, neglect, or refusal of said persons to erect such guards shall constitute a violation of this Section and the Municipal Police or the Building Inspector shall stop all work until guards are erected and maintained as required.



Article 5 Unsafe Buildings
9-501 Unsafe Buildings; Definition
9-502 Unsafe Buildings; Prohibition
9-503 Unsafe Buildings; Determination And Notice
9-504 Unsafe Buildings; Hearing And Appeal
9-505 Unsafe Buildings; Emergency
9-506 Unsafe Buildings; Special Assessments

9-501 Unsafe Buildings; Definition
The term “unsafe building” as used in this article is hereby defined to mean and include any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure (a) which is dangerous to the public health because of its condition and which may cause or aid in the spread of disease or injury to the health of the occupants of it or neighboring structures; (b) which because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair, or any other cause is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard; or (c) which by reason of faulty construction or any other cause is liable to cause injury or damage by the collapse or fall of all or any part of such structure. Any such unsafe building in the municipality is hereby declared to be a nuisance.


Source: Ord. 1791 (2011)



9-502 Unsafe Buildings; Prohibition
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any unsafe building in the Municipality, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in an unsafe condition or to occupy such building or permit to be occupied while it is in an unsafe condition.


Source: Ord. 1791 (2011)



9-503 Unsafe Buildings; Determination And Notice
(1) Whenever the Building Inspector, fire official, the health official, or the Governing Body shall be of the opinion that any building or structure in the Municipality is an unsafe building, he/she/it shall file a written statement to this effect with the City Clerk. The clerk shall thereupon cause the property to be posted accordingly; shall file a copy of such determination in the office of the County Register of Deeds; and, shall serve written notice upon the owner thereof and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by certified mail or by personal services.

(2) Such notice shall state the building has been declared to be in an unsafe condition; that such dangerous condition must be removed or remedied by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing it; and, that the condition must be remedied within sixty days from the date of receipt. Such notice may be in the following terms:

“To __________________________ (owner-occupant of premises) of the premise known and described as______________________________. “You are hereby notified that __________________ (described building) on the premises above mentioned has been determined to be unsafe building and a nuisance after inspection by _____________________. The causes for this decision are ________________ (here insert the facts as to the dangerous condition).

“You must remedy this condition or demolish the building within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of such notice, or the Municipality will proceed to do so. Appeal of this determination may be made to the Governing Body, acting as the Board of Appeals, by filing with the City Clerk within (10) days from the date of receipt of this notice a request for a hearing.”

(3) If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of such notice or taken appeal from the determination of the officer or employee finding that a dangerous building exists within ten days from the time when this notice is served upon such person by personal service or certified mail, the Building Inspector may, upon orders of the Governing Body, proceed to the remedy the condition or demolish the unsafe building.


Source: Ord. 1791 (2011)



9-504 Unsafe Buildings; Hearing And Appeal
Upon receiving the notice to repair or demolish the building, the owner of the building, within the time stipulated, may in writing to the City Clerk request a hearing before the Governing Body, sitting as the Board of Appeals, to present reasons why the building should not be repaired or demolished. The Governing Body shall grant such hearing within ten days from the date of receiving the request. A written notice of the Governing Body’s decision following the hearing shall be sent to the property owner by certified mail. If the Governing Body rejects the appeal, the owner shall have sixty days from the sending of the decision to begin repair or demolition and removal. If after the sixty day period the owner has not begun work, Governing Body shall proceed to cause such work to be done; provided, the property owner may appeal such decision to the appropriate court for adjudication during which proceedings the decision of the Governing Body shall be stayed.


Source: Ord. 1791 (2011)



9-505 Unsafe Buildings; Emergency
Where any unsafe building or structure poses an immediate danger to the health, safety, or general welfare of any person or persons, and owner fails to remedy the situation in a reasonable time after notice by the Building Inspector to do so, the Municipality may summarily repair or demolish and remove such building or structure.


Source: Ord. 1791 (2011)



9-506 Unsafe Buildings; Special Assessments
If any owner of any building or structure fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with notice by or on behalf of the Municipality to repair, rehabilitate, or demolish and remove a building or structure which is unsafe and a public nuisance, the Municipality may proceed with the work specified in the notice to the property owner. A statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Governing Body. The Governing Body may levy the cost as a special assessment against the lot or real estate and shall be collected in the manner provided for special assessments or collect the cost from the owner of the building or structure and enforce the collection by civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.


Source: Ord. 1791 (2011)



Article 6 Building Code
9-601 International Building Code; Adoption And Incorporation By Reference; Jurisdiction; Amendments And Conflicting Provisions.
9-602 Definitions
9-603 Accessory Buildings; Restrictions

9-601 International Building Code; Adoption And Incorporation By Reference; Jurisdiction; Amendments And Conflicting Provisions.
(1) The 2018 edition of the International Building Code, including Appendix Chapter J, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Crete, Nebraska. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms found therein are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the Crete City Code as though printed in full therein and insofar as such regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms do not conflict with any laws of the State of Nebraska.

(2) The provisions of the Building Code shall be controlling throughout the City and its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction, and at least one physical copy of the Building Code shall be on file in City Hall and available for public inspection at any reasonable time.

(3) The City Council may amend, modify, supplement, or delete any portion of the International Building Code or impose additional restrictions not contained therein in order to increase building safety, durability, or efficiency, establish best building or construction practices, or address special local conditions or concerns. In the event of a direct conflict between any provision of the International Building Code, as incorporated by reference, and any other provision of the Crete City Code, the Crete City Code shall overrule and supersede the International Building Code.

(4) Any other code listed in the International Building Code and adopted by reference therein shall be considered part of the requirements of the Building Code unless the City has specifically adopted a different uniform or standard code that substantially encompasses the same subject or subjects.


Source: Ord. 2097, § 1 (2019)

Cross References: 2018 International Building Code, see International Code Council, Inc., 2018 International Building Code (2017).



9-602 Definitions
For purposes of the Building Code and this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions found in the incorporated International Building Code shall apply.


Source: Ord. 2097, § 2 (2019)



9-603 Accessory Buildings; Restrictions
(1) Buildings and structures accessory to a primary building or structure shall not contain sleeping areas, bathroom plumbing (except for hand or utility sinks), or kitchen facilities and shall not be used for habitation.


Source: Ord. 2097, § 3 (2019)



Article 7 Plumbing
9-701 Plumbing Code; Adopted By Reference
9-702 Plumbing; Water Wells; Permit Required
9-703 Plumbing; Water Wells; Location
9-704 Plumbing; Water Wells; Cross Connections Prohibited
9-705 Plumbing; Water Wells; Registration; Inspection
9-706 Plumbing; Water Wells; Building Inspector Authority
9-707 Plumbing; Water Wells; Investigations; Violations; Penalty
9-708 Plumbing Code; Plumbing Permits
9-709 Registration Of Plumbers; Application; Classifications; Unregistered Plumbers
9-710 Registration Of Plumbers; Examination For Registration; Fees; Exemptions
9-711.01 Water Conditioners; License Required
9-711.02 Water Conditioners; Application
9-711.03 Water Conditioners; Examination
9-711.04 Water Conditioners; Examination; Fee
9-711.05 Water Conditioners; License Fee
9-711.06 Water Conditioners; Certificate Of Insurance Required
9-711.07 Water Conditioners; Issuance; Term
9-711.08 Water Conditioners; Renewal; Fee
9-711.09 Water Conditioners; Examination To Be Basis For Issuance
9-711.10 Water Conditioners; Permits
9-711.11 Water Conditioners; Work Done By Owner In Own Residence
9-711.12 Water Conditioners; Fees
9-711.13 Water Conditioners; Installation And Inspection

9-701 Plumbing Code; Adopted By Reference
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for plumbing or drainage construction and maintenance, including permits and penalties, that certain plumbing code known as the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2009 Edition, with all of the City of Lincoln, Lancaster County, Nebraska, Uniform Plumbing Code Amendments and all other amendments thereto, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling in regard to the installation, alteration, or repair of all plumbing or drainage systems including the practice, materials, and fixtures used in the installation and appurtenances thereto within the corporate limits of the City of Crete and within two miles thereof and outside the limits of any other incorporated city or village. That portion of the Lincoln Plumbing Code referred to therein as Administration and appearing as sections 24.10.030 through 24.10.050 are specifically not incorporated by reference herein except as provided for above for the schedule of fees to be paid for each plumbing permit. No less than one copy is to be on file at all times in the office of the City Clerk for the information of and reference to same by interested parties.


Source: Ord. 1108 (1990); Ord. 1599 (2003); Ord. 1845 (2013)



9-702 Plumbing; Water Wells; Permit Required
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person construct, maintain, or use a water well or test well within the corporate limits or extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the City of Crete without having first obtained a water well permit from the Building Inspector.

(2) All applications for water well permits shall be submitted in a form and manner prescribed by the Building Inspector and shall contain all of the information required by the City and by any applicable laws, rules, or regulations promulgated by the State of Nebraska or its agencies. All applications shall include the full permit fee or shall be denied. Such fees shall be established by the City Council, and no fees or portion of fees shall be refundable.

(3) Water well permits shall be valid for one year, and all persons maintaining or using water wells or test wells shall be required to have such wells inspected yearly by the Building Inspector and to obtain an annual permit to continue the maintenance or use of such water well or test well.


Source: Ord. 1053 (1988); Ord. 2104, § 1 (2020)



9-703 Plumbing; Water Wells; Location
All water wells or test wells shall comply with the minimum separation distances specified in the rules and regulations of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services, except that the minimum separation distance between a water well or test well and any septic tank must be at least one hundred feet (100’).


Source: Ord. 1053 (1988); Ord. 2104, § 2 (2020)



9-704 Plumbing; Water Wells; Cross Connections Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any water well or test well to be plumbed or connected in such a manner that water from the water well or test well and the city’s public water system are or could be connected, at the same time or each separately at different times, to the same piping system or appliance. If any cross connection exists, the water well or test well shall be permanently discontinued and decommissioned or the piping system shall be permanently disconnected from the city’s public water system.


Source: Ord. 1053 (1988); Ord. 2104, § 3 (2020)



9-705 Plumbing; Water Wells; Registration; Inspection
(1) All owners or operators of water wells or test wells shall register their wells with the City of Crete by filing a well drilling log upon the completion of each well. The log shall contain all of the information required by the rules and regulations of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services for well logs.

(2) All owners or operators of water wells or test wells shall be required to have the well inspected by the Building Inspector within sixty days following the construction or repair of any well. In the event the water well or test well is not in substantial compliance with any applicable laws, rules, or regulations, the well shall be repaired and reinspected within thirty days or the use of the well shall be immediately discontinued.


Source: Ord. 1053 (1988); Ord. 2104, § 4 (2020)



9-706 Plumbing; Water Wells; Building Inspector Authority
(1) The Building Inspector shall have the power and authority to refuse to issue a water well permit if it appears that the water well or test well violates or will violate any laws, rules, or regulations promulgated by the City of Crete, the State of Nebraska, or its agencies or if it appears that the water well or test well may endanger, impair, or in any way interfere with the city’s public water system.

(2) Whenever a water well or test well is determined to have an unsafe water sample, pose a significant health or safety hazard, or pose a risk of groundwater contamination, the Building Inspector shall have the power and authority to issue stop use orders, order the repair of the well, order the water of the well to be treated to reduce health or safety risks, or order the well to be decommissioned.

(3) When necessary, the Building Inspector shall have the power and authority to enter property containing a water well or test well at any reasonable time to inspect the well and the premises to determine if a violation of any laws, rules, or regulations relating to water wells or test wells exists.


Source: Ord. 1053 (1988); Ord. 2104, § 5 (2020)



9-707 Plumbing; Water Wells; Investigations; Violations; Penalty
(1) The Building Inspector shall investigate suspected violations of any laws, rules, or regulations relating to water wells and test wells. Whenever the Building Inspector finds a violation, a notice of violation shall be issued specifying the corrective action to be taken. The Building Inspector shall issue a citation to any owner or operator of a water well or test well if the violations are not corrected within thirty days.

(2) Any person who violates any laws, rules, or regulations promulgated by the City of Crete, the State of Nebraska, or its agencies relating to water wells or test wells or who fails to comply with a lawful order of the Building Inspector shall be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. The penalties herein provided shall be cumulative and in addition to any other penalty, forfeiture, or action provided by law.


Source: Ord. 1053 (1988); Ord. 2104, § 6 (2020)



9-708 Plumbing Code; Plumbing Permits
(1) No person licensed under the Crete City Code shall cause any plumbing work to be done within the city’s zoning jurisdiction without having in his/her possession, on site, a plumbing permit issued by the City of Crete and pursuant to this code containing the name of the master plumber contractor authorized to perform the work at that site.

(2) Permits shall be applied for by the duly registered master plumber or water conditioner contractor. When such permit has been approved, it shall be signed and paid for by the duly registered master plumber or water conditioner contractor associated with the business, firm, or corporation which has been previously approved by the City.

(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or any subdivision thereof.


Source: Ord. 1743 (2010); Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-709 Registration Of Plumbers; Application; Classifications; Unregistered Plumbers
(1) Application for registration as a master plumber contractor, journeyman plumber, or plumber’s apprentice shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector’s Office on a form furnished for such purpose. Such form shall require the name and address of the applicant and such other relevant information as may be required by the Inspector’s Office.

(2) There shall be three classes of registrations as follows:

(a) Master plumber contractor is hereby defined as any person skilled in material installation, excavation, planning, and superintending plumbing, drainage, and gas piping and who is familiar with the ordinances and codes governing the same and who is competent to install, repair, alter, or remove plumbing or drainage or gas piping with the full responsibility of supervision, in doing such work by himself/herself or employing journeyman plumbers and plumbers apprentices to assist him. A master plumber contractor must have a minimum of three years of practical work experience as an apprentice or the equivalent in formal education approved by the Building Inspector and a minimum of three years practical work experience as a licensed journeyman plumber and pass the written exam with a minimum grade of seventy percent.

(b) Journeyman plumber is hereby defined as any person employed by a master plumber contractor, other than a plumber’s apprentice, whose principal occupation involves the installation, repair, alteration, or removal of plumbing, drainage, or gas piping. A journeyman plumber must have a minimum of three years practical work experience as a plumber’s apprentice and pass the written exam with a minimum grade of seventy percent.

(c) Plumber’s apprentice is hereby defined as a person, other than a master plumber contractor or journeyman plumber, whose principal occupation is learning and assisting in the installation, repair, alteration, or removal of plumbing, drainage, or gas piping as an employee under the direct supervision and on the same job as the master plumber contractor or journeyman plumber.

(3) No person shall engage in or lend themselves out as engaging in the plumbing business in the city, or within two miles thereof, or install any piping, fixtures, or other apparatus for supplying water or install any plumbing fixtures, drainage, vents, water distribution systems, or gas piping system, unless:

(a) He/she shall have been authorized to do so by registration in one of the classifications listed above.

(b) Gas piping systems may be installed by any person holding an appropriate registration with a local gas utility company, within the bounds of their employment for said company.

(c) Any person or company who holds a valid mechanical permit issued by the City of Crete may install gas piping within the relative scope of the aforementioned permit. Please note that fuel gas appliance installations or replacements may be subject to local utility company policies or codes which may not be reflected herein.

(d) Any duly registered water conditioner contractor.

(e) Any homeowner whom permanently and exclusively resides in a primary residence shall not be required to hold or maintain a city plumbing license certificate, in order to install or repair plumbing systems wholly contained within said residence; provided, that such person is required to apply for, and obtain, a plumbing permit and all workmanship and installation which he or she performs shall be performed in conformity with this Code and City Ordinances. In all cases, the rules and regulations of this article shall be complied with and such individual shall notify the Inspector’s Office of such work proposed, request inspection thereof, and pay the appropriate permit fee.

(f) However, no individual shall be allowed to perform any plumbing work on new construction without first having passed the required examination and have provided the necessary insurance, bonding, and license certificate required by this article.

(4) Any corporation, firm, or partnership may be registered hereunder as a master plumber contractor in the name of such corporation, firm, or partnership provided that such corporation, firm, or partnership must have a master plumber contractor as a bona fide employee or partner who has submitted to the examination given by the Building Inspector and has thereby shown him/herself fit, competent, and qualified to engage in the business, trade, or calling of a master plumber contractor, and who shall at all times be in actual charge of and responsible for all installation, removal, or repair of plumbing, drainage, or gas piping systems performed by such corporation, firm, or partnership. The registration certificate shall also be issued in the name of the employee or partner registered as a master plumber contractor. In the event the master plumber contractor employee or partner of a corporation, firm, or partnership possessing a certificate of registration shall withdraw therefrom and cease to be connected therewith, then in such an event he/she shall immediately notify the Inspector’s Office, which shall forthwith revoke the certificate of registration of such corporation, firm, or partnership.

(5) A master plumber contractor certificate issued to an individual shall authorize a company or corporation to engage in such business or occupation during the time that the certificate holder maintains his connection with such company or corporation. A Certificate applied for under the requirements of this article shall be valid and in effect for one company, firm, or corporation as an active registration certificate, and shall not be assignable to any other company, firm, or corporation.


Source: Ord. 1744 (2010); Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-710 Registration Of Plumbers; Examination For Registration; Fees; Exemptions
(1) Before any applicant shall be registered as a master plumber contractor or journeyman plumber, he or she shall pay an examination fee and shall be required to submit to and pass a written examination to determine his or her qualifications and fitness for executing the class of work. Such examination shall be administered by the Building Inspector as a three hour exam within three days of the initial request and at a time which is of the Inspector’s choosing. Any applicant who fails to pass the required examination shall not be eligible to take another examination until at least one month has elapsed from the date of last examination.

(2) Each applicant for master plumber contractor or journeyman plumber registration shall pay to the Administrative Authority an examination fee as follows:

Master plumber contractor examination fee: $50.00
Journeyman plumber examination fee: $50.00
(3) Upon initial issuance or subsequent renewal of a registration certificate, a registration fee shall be paid annually to the Administrative Authority as follows:

Master plumber contractor registration fee: $50.00
Journeyman plumber registration fee: $20.00
Plumber’s apprentice registration fee: $10.00
(4) Any person duly registered at the time of the adoption of this code shall be automatically registered under his appropriate classification of registration without submitting to an examination.

(5) Registrations shall expire on the thirty-first day of December following the date of issuance. Registration shall not be assignable. No registered master plumber contractor or journeyman plumber shall employ any person as a plumber’s apprentice who is not registered as a plumber’s apprentice within the City of Crete. No plumber’s apprentice shall be permitted to work at the installation, alteration, repair, or removal of any plumbing, drainage, or gas piping except under the direct supervision and on the same job site of a duly registered master plumber contractor or journeyman plumber.

(6) The Inspector’s Office shall have the power to suspend or revoke any master plumber contractor or journeyman plumber certificate of registration if the same was obtained by error or fraud, or if the holder thereof is shown to be no longer qualified, or such holder fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the provisions of this code. It shall be unlawful for any registered plumber to allow his name to be used by any other person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit for the installation, alteration, or repair of any plumbing, drainage, or gas piping system. Violation of this section shall be sufficient grounds for suspension or revocation of said certificates of registration as provided herein.

(7) Before any master plumber contractor as herein defined may be issued a permit under the provisions of this code, such master plumber contractor shall be required to:

(a) At all times maintain public liability insurance coverage for all claims arising out of all work in the City of Crete and within two miles of the corporate limits thereof done by or under the supervision of the master plumber under the provisions of this code. Such insurance shall be in the form of a commercial or comprehensive general liability policy, or an acceptable substitute policy form as permitted by the City Attorney, with a minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 aggregate for any one occurrence on any job for which a permit is required under this code, provided the City of Crete shall be named an additional insured thereunder. The coverages required herein shall be subject to review and approval by the City Attorney for conformance with the provisions of this section.

(b) At all times keep on file with the Inspector’s Office a current certificate of insurance signed by a qualified agent of an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Nebraska and approved by the City Attorney for conformance with the provisions of this section evidencing the existence of valid and effective policies of insurance naming the city as additional insured for the coverage required by part F,1 of this subsection, the limits of each policy, the policy number, the name of the insurer, the effective date and expiration date of each policy, the deductibles or self-insurance retainers of each policy, and a copy of an endorsement placed on each policy requiring thirty days notice by mail to the Inspector’s Office before the insurer may cancel the policy for any reason, and, upon request of the Inspector’s Office or the City Attorney, a copy of any endorsements placed on such policies or the declarations page of such policies.

(c) Any termination, reduction, or lapse of such insurance shall automatically terminate the master plumber contractor’s privilege to be issued permits under the provisions of this code unless other insurance meeting the requirements of this subsection is provided and in full force and effect at the time of such expiration or cancellation.

(8) Before any master plumber contractor, as defined herein, may be issued a plumbing permit, such master plumber contractor shall deposit with the Inspector’s Office a three thousand dollar ($3000.00) payment bond. Said bond shall provide that the master plumber contractor shall reimburse the City of Crete the cost of any unfinished or improper workmanship in or under the City’s right-of-way. All excavation, backfills, and resurfacing shall be in accordance with the Department of Public Works policies. Failure to keep payments current for excavation backfills and resurfacing in accordance with the Department of Public Works policy shall be grounds for withholding further permits of any kind until such backlog of charges are paid in full.


Source: Ord. 1745 (2010)



9-711.01 Water Conditioners; License Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing water conditioning apparatus without first having secured a license to do so from the Building Inspector.


Source: Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-711.02 Water Conditioners; Application
The application for a license required by this article shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector on blank forms prepared and furnished by such Office and shall give the full name under which such business is to be conducted.


Source: Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-711.03 Water Conditioners; Examination
(1) Water conditioning contractors or installers examinations shall be composed and given by the permits and inspections department, and the applicant must provide proof of the following:

(a) Minimum of three years practical work experience as an installer under a licensed contractor.

(b) Passed the written test with a minimum grade of seventy percent (70%).

(2) Formal education accrued from an approved educational institution may be submitted for consideration by the building official towards the practical work experience requirement.


Source: Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-711.04 Water Conditioners; Examination; Fee
Each applicant for a water conditioning contractor or installer's license shall appear before the Building Inspector upon notice and submit to such examination and test of his or her ability and qualifications as may be required by the City and shall pay to the city department an examination fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).


Source: Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-711.05 Water Conditioners; License Fee
When an applicant for a water conditioning contractor or installer's license passes the examination and tests required to the satisfaction of the city he or she shall pay a license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00).


Source: Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-711.06 Water Conditioners; Certificate Of Insurance Required
Prior to receiving a license under the preceding section, an applicant who has successfully passed the water conditioning contractor or installer’s examination shall provide a certificate of insurance which provides combined coverage for bodily injury and property damage in a minimum amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) and shall strictly comply with this code and any other ordinances of the City relating to the installation, alteration, or repair of any water conditioning apparatus within the zoning jurisdiction of the City.


Source: Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-711.07 Water Conditioners; Issuance; Term
At the time of approval by the City Council and the payment of a license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00), the building official shall issue a license to do water conditioning contracting work in the city which shall be effective and valid through December 31 of each calendar year.


Source: Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-711.08 Water Conditioners; Renewal; Fee
Before the expiration of any license issued from or by the Building Inspector, the holder may, upon payment of a renewal fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00), make application to the Building Inspector for renewal of his or her license. Failure to make application and pay the renewal fee for renewal of a license before the expiration date thereof subjects the applicant to pay the renewal fee plus an additional late fee in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each month or partial month since the expiration date of the license up to and including three months from such expiration date. If the application is filed and the fees are paid in accordance with the above, the building official shall issue a renewal of such license without examination unless there are revocation or suspension proceedings in progress against such individual. If the holder of a license fails to make application for renewal of his or her license within ninety days from the expiration date, he or she shall lose all rights of his or her license and proceed in the same manner as if he or she had never held a license. If the building official has reason to believe that the licensee has violated the provisions of section 9-819, he or she shall have the power to impose any revocation or suspension clause contained within the context of this article.


Source: Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-711.09 Water Conditioners; Examination To Be Basis For Issuance
When the applicant for a license required by department passes the required examination to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector, the building official shall notify the applicant of his or her score within fifteen days of the examination. The building official shall provide the City Council with the names of all successful applicants for licensing under this article with recommendations for issuance of such license. At the time of approval by the city council and the payment of a license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00), the building official shall issue a license to do water conditioning work in the city which shall be effective and valid through December 31 of each calendar year.


Source: Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-711.10 Water Conditioners; Permits
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to install, alter, remove, or repair any water conditioning appliance, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the permits and inspection department. No permit shall be required for minor repair work. Minor repair work is defined as repairing leaks in pipes, cleaning out supply or waste lines, or repairing a water conditioning appliance.

(2) A permit to install a water conditioning appliance may be issued only to a duly registered water conditioning contractor or registered master plumber. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to cause or permit any water conditioning installation to be done on any property owned, managed, or controlled by such person, firm, or corporation unless such work is done by said duly registered water conditioning contractor or installer or registered plumber. Application for a permit may be made in writing to the Building Inspector on a form furnished by the department for that purpose.


Source: Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-711.11 Water Conditioners; Work Done By Owner In Own Residence
No license required under this article shall be required of any individual doing installation or repair of the water conditioning appliance in the residence in which he or she lives, provided that such installation is done in conformity with this code and any other ordinances of the City. In all cases, the rules and regulations of this article shall be complied with and such individual shall notify the City of such work proposed, request inspection thereof, and pay a permit fee to cover the cost of the inspection. Furthermore, this section shall only apply to those installations required for remodeling, additions, and repairs. No individual shall be allowed to perform any plumbing work on new construction without first having passed the required examination and have provided the necessary insurance required by this article and been issued a license to do such work.


Source: Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-711.12 Water Conditioners; Fees
A fee shall be paid to the City of Crete as follows:

Base permit: $ 18.25.
For each water conditioning apparatus: $ 8.00.

Source: Ord. 1998 (2017)



9-711.13 Water Conditioners; Installation And Inspection
(1) The water piping to any water conditioning appliance shall be of materials and methods of installation approved for water distribution in this Code. Piping from any water conditioning appliance to the city sewer system shall be of any material approved by the permits and inspection department.

(2) All water conditioning installations shall be inspected by the permits and inspections department to insure compliance with all the requirements of this Code. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by the permit to notify the building inspection department orally or in writing that said work is ready for inspection and for said person doing the work to provide access and means for proper inspection. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work to call for inspection of the water conditioning installation and arrange to meet the Building Inspector on-site for the inspection not later than three days after completion of the installation.


Source: Ord. 1998 (2017)



Article 8 Residential Code
9-801 International Residential Code; Adoption And Incorporation By Reference; Jurisdiction; Amendments And Conflicting Provisions
9-802 Definitions

9-801 International Residential Code; Adoption And Incorporation By Reference; Jurisdiction; Amendments And Conflicting Provisions
(1) The 2018 edition of the International Residential Code, including Appendices A-K, M-Q, and T, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the City of Crete, Nebraska. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms found therein are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the Crete City Code as though printed in full therein and insofar as such regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms do not conflict with any laws of the State of Nebraska.

(2) The provisions of the Residential Code shall be controlling throughout the City and its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction, and at least one physical copy of the Residential Code shall be on file in City Hall and available for public inspection at any reasonable time.

(3) The City Council may amend, modify, supplement, or delete any portion of the International Residential Code or impose additional restrictions not contained therein in order to increase building safety, durability, or efficiency, establish best building or construction practices, or address special local conditions or concerns. In the event of a direct conflict between any provision of the International Residential Code, as incorporated by reference, and any other provision of the Crete City Code, the Crete City Code shall overrule and supersede the International Residential Code.

(4) Any other code listed in the International Residential Code and adopted by reference therein shall be considered part of the requirements of the Residential Code unless the City has specifically adopted a different uniform or standard code that substantially encompasses the same subject or subjects.


Source: Ord. 2097, § 5 (2019)

Cross References: 2018 International Residential Code, see International Code Council, Inc., 2018 International Residential Code (2017)



9-802 Definitions
For purposes of the Residential Code and this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions found in the incorporated International Residential Code shall apply.


Source: Ord. 2097, § 6 (2019)



Article 9 Mechanical Code
9-901 International Mechanical Code; Adoption And Incorporation By Reference; Jurisdiction; Amendments And Conflicting Provisions
9-902 Definitions

9-901 International Mechanical Code; Adoption And Incorporation By Reference; Jurisdiction; Amendments And Conflicting Provisions
(1) The 2018 edition of the International Mechanical Code, including Appendix A, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City of Crete, Nebraska. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms found therein are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the Crete City Code as though printed in full therein and insofar as such regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms do not conflict with any laws of the State of Nebraska.

(2) The provisions of the Mechanical Code shall be controlling throughout the City and its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction, and at least one physical copy of the Mechanical Code shall be on file in City Hall and available for public inspection at any reasonable time.

(3) The City Council may amend, modify, supplement, or delete any portion of the International Mechanical Code or impose additional restrictions not contained therein in order to increase building safety, durability, or efficiency, establish best building or construction practices, or address special local conditions or concerns. In the event of a direct conflict between any provision of the International Mechanical Code, as incorporated by reference, and any other provision of the Crete City Code, the Crete City Code shall overrule and supersede the International Mechanical Code.

(4) Any other code listed in the International Mechanical Code and adopted by reference therein shall be considered part of the requirements of the Mechanical Code unless the City has specifically adopted a different uniform or standard code that substantially encompasses the same subject or subjects.


Source: Ord. 2097, § 8 (2019)

Cross References: 2018 International Mechanical Code, see International Code Council, Inc., 2018 International Mechanical Code (2017)



9-902 Definitions
For purposes of the Mechanical Code and this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions found in the incorporated International Mechanical Code shall apply.


Source: Ord. 2097, § 9 (2019)



Article 10 Water Line Interconnection
9-1001 Interconnection Of Water Lines; General
9-1002 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Lawn Sprinkler Contractor; License
9-1003 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Revocation Of License
9-1004 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Bond Required
9-1005 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Cross Connection Control
9-1006 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Definitions
9-1007 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Cross Connection; Prohibited
9-1008 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Survey And Investigations
9-1009 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Type Of Protection Required
9-1010 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Where Protection Is Required
9-1011 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Back Flow Prevention Devices
9-1012 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Installation
9-1013 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Inspection And Maintenance
9-1014 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Violations

9-1001 Interconnection Of Water Lines; General
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, or make a major revision of any lawn sprinkling system without first having obtained from the Building Inspector a permit for said construction or installation within the City limits or the two mile zone surrounding the City. Any person who shall construct, install or make a major revision of a lawn sprinkling system without first having obtained the required permits shall pay permit fees which are twice the amount of the applicable fees hereinafter prescribed and such person shall not in any way be relieved from complying with all of the provisions of the law applicable to the construction and installation of sprinkling systems. An exemption from the permit requirement is made for sprinkler systems which are not served or supplied by the public potable water system of the City of Crete.

(2) Application for a permit shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector on a form approved by said inspector. All such applications shall be accompanied by plans and specifications in sufficient detail to show clearly the supply piping, pipe sizes, depth of pipes below ground surface, location of valves, vacuum breakers, adjacent curbs, sidewalks, property lines and such other pertinent information required or deemed necessary by the Building Inspector. A fee of fifteen dollars  ($15.00) per permit shall be paid to the City Clerk.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006); Ord. 1729 (2009)



9-1002 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Lawn Sprinkler Contractor; License
(1) Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaging in the business of installing, constructing, altering, or repairing any lawn sprinkling system within the corporate limits or within the two mile zone adjacent to the corporate limits of the City of Crete, shall be licensed as law sprinkler contractors.

(2) Application for a license as a lawn sprinkler contractor shall be made to the Building Inspector. This application shall include the name and address of applicant, the business location of the applicant, a statement of the practical experience of the applicant, and such other relevant information as may be required by the said Building Inspector.

(3) A lawn sprinkler contractor license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid with the application to the Building Inspector. A license issued pursuant to this section shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued.

(4) Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaging in the business of installing, constructing, altering or repairing any lawn sprinkler system, without first having obtained the required license, shall pay license fees twice the amount of the applicable fees herein prescribed and such person shall not in any way be relieved from complying with all of the provisions of the law applicable to the construction and installation of water sprinkler systems.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006)



9-1003 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Revocation Of License
The City Council, by a majority vote, shall have the power to revoke the license of any holder of a water sprinkler contractor license pursuant to this Article, upon recommendation of the Building Inspector, if such license were obtained through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is shown to be grossly incompetent or has for a second time willfully violated any of the provisions of this Article. This penalty shall be cumulative and, in addition to, the penalties prescribed for the violation of the provisions of this Article. Before a license issued pursuant to this Article can be revoked, a licensee shall have notice in writing enumerating the charges against him, and he shall be entitled to a hearing before the City Council no later than thirty days from the date of receipt of the notice. The licensee shall be given an opportunity to present testimony, oral or written, and shall have the right of cross-examination. All such testimony before the City Council shall be given under oath. The City Council shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas and compel the attendance of witnesses in such cases.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006)



9-1004 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Bond Required
(1) To guarantee the faithful performance and carrying out of the provisions of this Article and all other ordinances pertaining to water sprinkler systems, the licensee shall furnish a surety bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) signed by one or more sufficient sureties or a bond in the like amount of some approved corporate surety doing business through a writing agent in said City.

(2) All bonds furnished by a license holder in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be conditioned:

(a) that the licensee shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of and from all accidents, damages, liabilities, claims, judgments, costs or expenses caused by any negligence arising from a failure to protect work done by the licensee,

(b) that the licensee shall be governed by the ordinances of the City pertaining to water sprinkler systems,

(c) that the licensee shall pay any fine imposed upon him for violation thereof, and

(d) the licensee will bring the water sprinkler systems to a state of perfection which will comply with this Article and other applicable ordinances.

(3) The obligee of said bond shall be the City of Crete, Nebraska, and action may be maintained thereon by anyone injured by it by breach of its condition for a period of one year after completion of any work.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006)



9-1005 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Cross Connection Control
(1) The purpose of this Article is to protect the public potable water supply of the City of Crete water system from contamination or pollution by containing within the consumer's internal distribution system or private water system contaminates or pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public potable water supply system; to promote the elimination, containment, isolation, or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water systems and non-potable water system, plumbing fixtures and industrial-process systems; and, to provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.

(2) This Article shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water system of the City of Crete.

(3) This Article will be reasonably interpreted. It is the City's intent to recognize the varying degrees of hazard and to apply the principle that the degree of protection shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard.

(4) The Municipal Water Department and Health Department shall be primarily responsible for protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to backflow or contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. The cooperation of all consumers is required to implement and maintain the program to control cross connections. The consumer is responsible for preventing contamination of the water system within consumer's own premises.

(5) If, in their judgment or their authorized representative, cross connection protection is required through either piping modification or installation of an approved backflow prevention device, thirty days' notice shall be given to the consumer. The failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to provide requested protection within thirty days shall make the consumer subject to discontinuance of water service at the discretion of the Municipal Water Department, according to the degree of hazard, without further notice.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006)



9-1006 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article:

(1) "Air gap separation" means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the overflow level rim of the receptacle.

(2) "Auxiliary water supply" means any water source or system, other than the public water supply, that may be available in the building or premises.

(3) "Backflow" means the flow other than the intended direction of flow, of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the distribution system of a public water supply.

(4) "Backflow prevention device" means any device, method, or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system provided backflow preventers have been tested and approved by a reputable testing laboratory.

(5) "Consumer" means the owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.

(6) "Containment" means protection of the public water supply by installing a cross connection control device or air gap separation on the main service line to a facility, or as an installation within equipment handling potentially hazardous materials.

(7) "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the water by sewage, process fluids, or other wastes to a degree which could create an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through spread of disease by exposure.

(8) "Cross connection" means any physical link, between a potable water supply and any other substance, fluid, or source, which makes possible contamination of the potable water supply due to the reversal of flow of the water in the piping or distribution system.

(9) "Degree of hazard" means an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.

(a) "Hazard-Health" means any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create or may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer.

(b) "Hazard-Plumbing" means a plumbing type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker, air-gap separation or backflow prevention device.

(c) "Hazard-Pollutional" means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.

(d) "Hazard-System" means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system, or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.

(10) "Industrial process system" means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional, or plumbing hazard if introduced into a potable water supply.

(11) "Isolation" means protection of a facility service line by installing a cross connection control device or air gap separation on an individual fixture, appurtenance, or system.

(12) "Pollution" means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.

(13) "Public potable water system" means any publicly or privately owned water system supplying water to the general public which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Health.

(14) "Service connection" means the terminal end of a service line from the public water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the service connection means the down stream end of the meter.

(15) "Water Department" means the owner, operator, or individual in responsible charge of a public water system.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006)



9-1007 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Cross Connection; Prohibited
(1) No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any premises where actual or potential cross connections to the public potable or consumer's water system may exist, unless such actual or potential cross connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the Municipal Water Department, and as required by laws and regulations of the Nebraska Department of Health.

(2) No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby an auxiliary water supply may enter a public potable or consumer's water system, unless such auxiliary water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the Municipal Water Department and the Nebraska Department of Health.

(3) No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any premises in which the plumbing system, facilities and fixtures have not been constructed and installed using acceptable plumbing practices considered by the Municipal Water Department as necessary for the protection of health and safety.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006)



9-1008 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Survey And Investigations
(1) The consumer shall provide access to the premises at reasonable times to the Municipal Water Department, or its authorized representative, for the conduction of surveys and investigations of water use practices within the consumer's premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross connections to the consumer's water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the public potable water system.

(2) On request by the Municipal Water Department, or its authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish information on water use practices within his premises.

(3) It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to con duct periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross connections to his water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable water system.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006)



9-1009 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Type Of Protection Required
The type of protection required by this Article shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists, as follows:

(1) An approved air gap separation shall be installed where the public potable water system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a severe health hazard.

(2) An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public potable water system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a health hazard.

(3) An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device or an approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where the public potable water system may be polluted with substances what could cause a pollutional hazard not dangerous to health.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006)



9-1010 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Where Protection Is Required
(1) An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed in the service connection line to a consumer's water system or within any premises where, in the judgment of the Municipal Water Department or the Nebraska Department of Health, actual or potential hazards to the public potable water system exists. The type and degree of protection required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard.

(2) An approved air gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed at the service connection or within any premises where, in the judgment of the Municipal Water Department or the Nebraska Department of Health, the nature and extent of activities on the premises or the materials used in connection with the activities or materials stored on the premises would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health should a cross connection occur, even though such cross connection may not exist at the time the backflow prevention device is required to be installed. This includes, but is not limited to, the following situations:

(a) Premises having auxiliary water supply, unless the quality of the auxiliary supply is acceptable to the Municipal Water Department and the Nebraska Department of Health.

(b) Premises having internal cross connections that are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to ascertain whether or not cross connections exist.

(c) Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure the cross connections do not exist.

(d) Premises that although not covered by Code are subject to frequent modification which would change their status, or premises that have had backflow code violations.

(e) Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to permit entry into the public water supply or where a cross connection could reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process waters and cooling waters.

(f) Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled such that, if back-siphonage or backpressure should occur, a serious health hazard may occur.

(3) The following types of facilities must install or have in operation an approved air gap separation, atmospheric vacuum breaker, or reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device as required by the Municipal Water Department and the Nebraska Department of Health to protect the public water supply, and such must be installed at these facilities unless all hazardous or potentially hazardous conditions have been eliminated or corrected by other methods to the satisfaction of the Municipal Water Department and the Nebraska Department of Health:

(a) Auxiliary Water Systems

(b) Beverage Bottling Plants

(c) Canneries, Packing Houses, Reduction Plants

(d) Car Washing Facilities

(e) Chemical Manufacturing, Processing, Compounding or Treatment Plants

(f) Chemically Contaminated Water Systems

(g) Dairies and Cold Storage Plants

(h) Film Laboratories

(i) Fire Protection Systems

(j) Hazardous Waste Storage and Disposal

(k) Hospital, Mortuaries, Clinics

(l) Sprinkler Systems and Hose Connections Injecting Directly Materials of a Toxic or Hazardous Nature

(m) Laundries and Dye Works

(n) Metal Manufacturing, Cleaning, Processing and Fabricating Plants

(o) Oil and Gas Production, Storage or Transmission Properties

(p) Plating Plants

(q) Printing and Publishing Facilities

(r) Research and Analytical Laboratories

(s) Sewage and Storm Drainage Facilities Pumping Stations

(t) Zoological and Horticultural Gardens

(u) All Cemetery Sprinkler Systems

(v) Pet Grooming and Veterinarian Hospitals

(w) Class A, B & C Swimming Pools

(x) Cooling Coil Service Lines (Refrigeration, Air conditioning, Etc.)

(y) All Hot Water and Steam Boiler Heating Systems.

(4) These facilities falling into one or more of the above categories will be given twelve months after passage of this Article to comply with said Article and regulations, except those facilities or systems which are determined by the Municipal Water Department to be an immediate or severe health hazard, in which case that system or facility shall be required to comply immediately with this Article and regulations.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006)



9-1011 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Back Flow Prevention Devices
(1) Any backflow prevention device required by this Article shall be a model or construction approved by the Municipal Water Department and the Nebraska Department of Health.

(a) Air gap separation to be approved shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the flood level rim of the vessel, but in no case less than one inch.

(b) A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device shall be approved by the Municipal Water Department and shall appear on the current list of approved backflow prevention devices established by the Water Department.

(2) Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the Utilities Manager at the time of installation and properly maintained shall, except for inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirements of this Article, so long as the Municipal Water Department is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the water system. Whenever the existing device is moved from its present location, or requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the Water Department finds that their maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this Article.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006)



9-1012 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Installation
(1) Backflow prevention devices required by this Article shall be installed at a location and in a manner approved by the Municipal Water Department and shall be installed at the expense of the water consumer.

(2) Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to the consumer's water system shall be located on the consumer's side of the water meter, as close to the meter as is reasonably practical, and prior to any other connection.

(3) Backflow prevention devices shall be located so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and testing, protected from freezing, and where no part of the device will be submerged or subject to flooding by any fluid.

(4) Backflow prevention devices for underground sprinklers that have an opening to the atmosphere shall be located at least six inches above the highest ground served by the sprinkler system.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006)



9-1013 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Inspection And Maintenance
(1) It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow prevention devices required by this Article are installed to have inspections, tests, and overhauls made in accordance with the following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need:

(a) Air gap separations shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least every twelve months thereafter.

(b) Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at least every twelve months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned, and repaired whenever needed and at least every three years.

(c) Reduced pressure principal backflow prevention devices shall be inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at least every twelve months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned, and repaired whenever needed and at least every five years.

(2) Overhauls of backflow prevention devices shall be made at the expense of the water consumer and shall be performed by the Municipal Water Department or a State of Nebraska Certified Backflow Prevention Device Tester.

(3) Backflow prevention devices designed with testing cocks shall be inspected and tested each year and those tests performed by the Municipal Water Department will be at the expense of the Water Department. The tests performed by others shall be at the expense of the consumer.

(4) Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this Article are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the consumer without delay.

(5) The water consumer must maintain a complete record of each backflow prevention device that has test cocks from purchase to retirement. Records of inspections, tests, repairs and over-hauls performed by others shall be submitted to the Municipal Water Department annually.

(6) Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the Municipal Water Department.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006)



9-1014 Interconnection Of Water Lines; Violations
(1) The Municipal Water Department or Public Works Director shall have the right to deny or discontinue, after thirty days' notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by this Article is not installed, tested, and maintained in a manner acceptable to the Municipal Water Department or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or by-passed or if an unprotected cross connection exists on said premises.

(2) Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with this Article to the satisfaction of the Municipal Water Department.

(3) The City Health Department shall be advised of inspection findings and the violation abatement action pursued by the Municipal Water Department and consulted prior to violation abatement action on items having to do with public health significance.


Source: Ord. 1660 (2006)



Article 11 Property Maintenance Code
9-1101 International Property Maintenance Code; Adoption By Reference
9-1102 Property Maintenance Code: Crete Amendments

9-1101 International Property Maintenance Code; Adoption By Reference
(1) That a certain document, a copy of which is on file an the office of the City Clerk of the City of Crete, Saline County, Nebraska, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Crete, Saline County, Nebraska for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance.

(2) That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance, is for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.

(3) That nothing in this ordinance or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed: nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance.


Source: Ord. 1682 (2007); Ord. 1708 (2008); Ord. 1796 (2011)



9-1102 Property Maintenance Code: Crete Amendments
(1) Section 104.6 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: The code official shall keep official records of all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained for ten years.

(2) Section 112.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $500.00.

(3) Section 201.3 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Building Code, International Residential Code, National Fire Codes, Uniform Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code, National Electric Code, or the International Fuel Gas Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes, as adopted by the City of Crete, Nebraska.

(4) Section 202 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows:

SECTION 202 – GENERAL DEFINITIONS

ANCHORED. Secured in a manner that provides a positive connection.

APPROVED. Approved by the code official.

BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.

BATHROOM. Any room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.

BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes.

BLIGHT OR BLIGHTED. Any unsightly condition including the accumulation of debris, litter, rubbish or rubble; fences characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, crackling, peeling or rusting; landscaping that is dead, characterized by uncontrolled growth or lack of maintenance, or is damaged and any other similar conditions of disrepair and deterioration regardless of the condition of other properties in the neighborhood.

CODE OFFICIAL. The Building Inspector who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.

CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.

DEBRIS. Any substance of little or no apparent economic value including, but not limited to, deteriorated lumber, old newspapers, furniture parts, stoves, sinks, cabinets, household fixtures, refrigerators, car parts, abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, or the scattered remains of items.

DETACHED. When a structural element is physically disconnected from another and that connection is necessary to provide a positive connection.

DETERIORATION. To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and lose effectiveness. The lowering in quality of the condition or appearance of a building, structure or parts thereof characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, peeling, rusting, or any other evidence of physical decay or neglect or excessive use or lack of maintenance over a substantial or widespread area as opposed to a limited or concentrated area.

DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or lots.

EQUIPMENT SUPPORT. Those structural members or assemblies of members or manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs, snuggers, hangers or saddles, that transmit gravity load, lateral load and operating load between the equipment and the structure.

EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.

EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places.

GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.

GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.

HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.

HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life threatening injury or death at any time.

INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.

INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reasons including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power.

JURISDICTION. The City of Crete, Nebraska.

LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.

LET FOR OCCUPANCY. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.

LITTER. Decaying or non-decaying solid and semi-solid wastes including, but not limited to, both combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, trash, cardboard, waste material, cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, debris, scrap paving material, discarded appliances, discarded furniture, dry vegetation, weeds, dead trees and branches, overgrown vegetation and trees which may become a fire hazard, piles of earth mixed with any of the above foreign objects, including inoperable vehicles, except, for the purposes of this code, litter shall not include organic material being composted in a safe and sanitary manner.

NEGLECT. The omission, failure, or unreasonable forbearance in providing maintenance, pursuant to the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Crete, to buildings and structures.

NUISANCE. Nuisance shall mean any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence including, but not limited to the following:

Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or on an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the Health Officer.
Overcrowding a room with occupants.
Insufficient ventilation or illumination.
Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.
Uncleanliness, as determined by the Health Officer.
Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the Health Officer.
Any building or structure which as a result of vandalism, neglect, inadequate maintenance, or lack of repair is permitted to become so blighted, deteriorated or dilapidated that such building or structure is detrimental to or endangers the health, safety, or welfare of the public or occupants thereof.
Any premises which as a result of vandalism, neglect or inadequate maintenance or lack of repair is permitted to become so blighted that such premises is detrimental to or endangers the health, safety, or welfare of the public or occupants thereof.
Vacant or abandoned buildings which for a period of three months or more have been boarded up, left in a partial state of destruction, or left in a state of partial construction after the expiration of a building permit for such construction.
OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.

OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building.

OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. This includes the authorized representative of the trust or estate, and the trustee, executor, personal representative, or administrator of a decedent’s estate that is authorized to take control or possession of real estate pursuant to court order or applicable law. This would include trusts as well as decedents’ estates.

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any entity recognized by law.

PEST ELIMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing of making inaccessible materials that serve as their food or water; or by other approved pest elimination methods.

PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon.

PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.

ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.

ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied of intended to be occupied for sleeping of living, but not for cooking purposes.

RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.

RUBBLE. Broken solid surface fragments usually resulting from the decay or deterioration of a building; miscellaneous mass of broken or apparently worthless materials.

SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating and sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.

SOLID WASTE. All putresible and nonputresible wastes whether in solid or liquid form and includes garbage, scavenger matter, rubbish, ashes, refuse, fill dirt, sewage sludge, street refuse, commercial and industrial wastes, demolition debris and all used construction material, building rubbish, discarded automobile and other types of vehicle body parts or portions thereof, machinery or parts thereof, discarded home or industrial appliances, iron steel and other old or metal scrap material, manure, human excrement, vegetable or animal solids and semi-solid waste, infectious waste, special waste, lawn waste, tree limbs, branches, shrubbery, bushes, and other similar organic waste, including garden vegetative material, dead animals or parts thereof, and other discarded solid materials.

SPALLING. To break off chips.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.

TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or other entity recognized by law, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.

TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower.

ULTIMATE DEFORMATION. The deformation at which failure occurs and which shall be deemed to occur if the sustainable load reduces to 80 percent or less of the maximum strength.

VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.

WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work.

YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.

(5) Section 302.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 12 inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with section 106.3 and as prescribed by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.

(6) Section 303.2.1 is added to the International Property Maintenance Code to read as follows:

Table 303.2.1 ASTM Safety Hot Tub and Pool Cover Standards. ASTM (American Society of Testing and Materials) has developed a standard for both swimming pool and hot tub covers. This standard, ASTM F 1346-91, establishes three separate cover classifications;

Power Safety Covers, typically found on swimming pools.
Manual Safety Covers, such as the hot tub insulating covers.
Other covers, which do not serve as a barrier for children under the age of five and do not qualify as a safety cover.

In order for a cover to meet the definition of a “Manual Safety Cover” it must meet certain requirements which include performance tests and labeling requirements.

Covers must be able to pass tests such as Static Load Tests for weight and support, Perimeter Deflection Tests for entry or entrapment between the cover and the side of the pool or hot tub and Surface Drainage Tests to see if a dangerous amount of rain could collect on the cover’s surface. There are also requirements to include labeling in consumer information (such as the warranty), and on the cover itself. Labeling must contain the proper warnings, and identify the product as a safety cover.
(7) Section 304.2 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or by other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint on more than 25% of any wall or face shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.

(8) Section 304.14 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: During the period from March 1st to October 31st, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch, and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self closing device in good working condition. Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellant fans, are employed.

(9) Section 304.19 is added to the International Property Maintenance Code to read as follows:

304.19 Maintenance of Buildings and Premises. All buildings, or portions thereof, shall be adequately maintained so as to be free of deterioration that endangers or is likely to endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or occupants thereof. All exposed exterior surfaces, windows and doors of buildings, structures and the premises upon which they are located shall be adequately maintained so as to not present a deteriorated or blighted appearance.

Inadequate maintenance of buildings shall include but not be limited to the following:

Any building or portion thereof which is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with the International Building Code as adopted by the City.
Buildings which for a period of three months or more are boarded up, left in a partial state of destruction, or left in a state of partial construction after expiration of a building permit for such construction.
Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions.
Unpainted buildings which have begun to dry rot, warp, or become infested with termites.
Buildings which have substantial and noticeable conditions of blight or deterioration.
Buildings which have cracked, chipped, flaking, peeling, or missing paint over 25% or more of any wall or face of the building.
Buildings which have upholstered or other furniture which is designed or manufactured primarily for indoor use with no original outdoor weatherproofing qualities including, but not limited to, upholstered chairs, upholstered couches, and mattresses used or left on unenclosed exterior porches, balconies, or in an exposed open area including, but not limited to, decks, patios, roofs, yards, driveways, or walkways.
Exterior porches shall not include any porch completely covered by a roof, when located at and attached to a building and completely enclosed by fully intact glass and/or fully intact screens which are designed to keep out insects and allow air flow.

Inadequate maintenance of the premises shall include, but not be limited to the following:

Accumulation of debris, litter, rubbish, rubble, solid waste, and similar materials or conditions.
Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which by reason of rotting or deteriorating condition or storm damage constitute a health or safety hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof.
Sources of infestation.
Premises which have substantial and noticeable conditions of blight or disrepair.
(10) Section 305.3 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, Chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. Surface mold or mildew shall be considered a sanitation issue and shall fall under the occupant’s responsibility for maintaining a sanitary and clean interior environment for the purposes of this code. Exception: When mold, mildew or dry rot is the direct result of a structural defect or code violation as determined by the code official the responsibility shall lie with the owner of the property.

(11) Section 402.1 Habitable spaces. Remove window requirement.

(12) Section 403.1 Habitable spaces. Remove window requirement.

(13) Section 502.5 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a safe sanitary and working condition in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code. Except for periodic maintenance or cleaning, public access and use shall be provided at all times during occupancy of the premises.

(14) Section 505.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public or private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code.

(15) Section 506.3 of the international Property Maintenance code is amended to read as follow: Where it has been determined that a grease interceptor is not being maintained and serviced as intended by this code and the manufacturer’s instructions, an approved interceptor monitoring system shall be required or a maintenance program shall be established with documentation submitted to the code official.

(16) Section 602.2 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 ̊ F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.

(17) Section 602.3 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from September 15th to May 15th to maintain a temperature of not less than 68 ̊ F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.

Exceptions:

When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity.
In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30 ̊ F a minimum temperature of 65 ̊ F shall be maintained.
(18) Section 602.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from September 15th to May 15th to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 ̊ F during the period the spaces are occupied.

Exceptions:

Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.
Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
(19) Section 702.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the NFPA as adopted by the City.

(20) Section 704.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire of any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the NFPA as adopted by the City.

(21) Appendix A. Boarding Standards. Deleted.


Source: Ord. 1796 (2011)



Article 12 Supplementary Building Codes
9-1201 International Swimming Pool And Spa Code; Adoption And Incorporation By Reference; Jurisdiction; Amendments And Conflicting Provisions
9-1202 Swimming Pool And Spa Code; Definitions
9-1203 Swimming Pool And Spa Code; Amendments

9-1201 International Swimming Pool And Spa Code; Adoption And Incorporation By Reference; Jurisdiction; Amendments And Conflicting Provisions
(1) The 2018 edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, including any appendices or attachments thereto, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. is hereby adopted as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Crete, Nebraska. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms found therein are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the Crete City Code as though printed in full therein and insofar as such regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms do not conflict with any laws of the State of Nebraska or the City of Crete.

(2) The provisions of the Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall be controlling throughout the City and its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction, and at least one physical copy of the Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall be on file in City Hall and available for public inspection at any reasonable time.

(3) The City Council may amend, modify, supplement, or delete any portion of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code or impose additional restrictions not contained therein in order to increase building safety, durability, or efficiency, establish best building or construction practices, or address special local conditions or concerns. In the event of a direct conflict between any provision of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as incorporated by reference, and any other provision of the Crete City Code, the Crete City Code shall overrule and supersede the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.

(3) Any other code or standard listed in the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code and adopted by reference therein shall be considered part of the requirements of the Swimming Pool and Spa Code unless the City has specifically adopted a different uniform or standard code that substantially encompasses the same subject or subjects.


Source: Ord. 2106, § 2 (2020)



9-1202 Swimming Pool And Spa Code; Definitions
For purposes of the Swimming Pool and Spa Code, unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions found in the incorporated International Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall apply.


Source: Ord. 2106, § 3 (2020)



9-1203 Swimming Pool And Spa Code; Amendments
(1) Section 101.1 shall be amended to read as follows: These regulations shall be known as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Crete, hereinafter referred to as “this code”.

(2) Section 103 shall be deleted in full.

(3) Section 104.1 shall be amended to read as follows: The code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code.

(4) Section 104.8 shall be deleted in full.

(5) Section 105.6.2 shall be amended to read as follows: The fees for work shall be as determined by the City Council.

(6) Section 105.6.3 shall be amended to read as follows: The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees on a sliding scale based on the amount of City review that has been provided. The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.

(7) Section 107.4 shall be amended to read as follows: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, or repair a pool or spa in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

(8) Section 107.5 shall be amended to read as follows: Upon notice from the code official, work on any system that is being performed contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner’s authorized agent, or to the person performing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.

(9) Section 108 shall be deleted in full.

(10) Section 305.1 shall be amended to read as follows: The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of barriers for restricting entry into areas having pools and spas. Where spas or hot tubs are equipped with a lockable safety cover complying with ASTM F1346, the areas where those spas or hot tubs are located shall not be required to comply with Sections 305.2 through 305.7.

(11) Section 305.6 shall be amended to read as follows: In the case where the pool or spa area abuts the edge of a lake or other natural body of water, public access is not permitted or allowed along the shoreline, and required barriers extend to and beyond the water’s edge to a water depth of not less than 6 inches, a barrier is not required between the natural body of water shoreline and the pool or spa area.


Source: Ord. 2106, § 4 (2020)



Article 13 [Reserved]

Article 14 Fair Housing
9-1401 Fair Housing; Purpose
9-1402 Fair Housing; Definitions
9-1403 Fair Housing; Unlawful Acts
9-1404 Fair Housing; Handicapped Person; Discriminatory Practices Prohibited; Design And Construction Standards
9-1405 Fair Housing; Transaction Related To Residential Real Estate; Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
9-1406 Fair Housing; Multiple Listing Service; Other Service; Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
9-1407 Fair Housing; Religious Organization, Private Home, Private Club, Or Housing For Older Persons; Restricting Use Not Prohibited
9-1408 Fair Housing; Information


9-1401 Fair Housing; Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to promote the general welfare of the residents of Crete, Nebraska, by endorsing the provisions of the Nebraska Fair Housing Act to the effect that there shall be no discrimination in the City of Crete, Nebraska in the acquisition, ownership, possession, or enjoyment of housing in accordance with Article I, Section 25 of the Constitution of the State of Nebraska.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 20-113



9-1402 Fair Housing; Definitions
As used in this Article unless the context otherwise requires:

(1) Aggrieved person shall include any person who:

(a) claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice, or

(b) believes that he or she will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.

(2) Commission shall mean the Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission.

(3) Dwelling shall mean any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence for one or more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.

(4) Familial status shall mean one or more minors being domiciled with:

(a) a parent or another person having legal custody of such individual; or

(b) the designee of a parent or other person having legal custody, with written permission of the parent of other person.

(5) Handicap shall mean, with respect to a person:

(a) a physical or mental impairment, excluding the current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-401, which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities,

(b) a record of having such an impairment, or

(c) being regarded as having such an impairment.

(6) Person shall include one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.

(7) Rent shall include lease, sublease, let, and otherwise grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.

(8) Restrictive covenant shall mean any specification limiting the transfer, rental, or lease of any housing because of race, creed, religion, color, national origin, sex, handicap, familial status, or ancestry.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 20-304 to 20-317



9-1403 Fair Housing; Unlawful Acts
(1) Except as exempted by section 9-1407, it shall be unlawful to:

(a) Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bonafide offer, refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny, refuse to show, or refuse to receive and transmit an offer for a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, familial status, or sex;

(b) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, religion, national origin, familial status, or sex;

(c) Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination;

(d) Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available;

(e) Cause to be made any written or oral inquiry or record concerning the race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex of a person seeking to purchase, rent, or lease any housing;

(f) Include in any transfer, sale, rental, or lease of housing any restrictive covenants or honor or exercise or attempt to honor or exercise any restrictive covenant pertaining to housing;

(g) Discharge or demote an employee or agent or discriminate in the compensation of such employee or agent because of such employee’s compliance with this Article or the Nebraska Fair Housing Act; and,

(h) Induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex.

(2) The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any minor.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 20-318



9-1404 Fair Housing; Handicapped Person; Discriminatory Practices Prohibited; Design And Construction Standards
(1) Except as exempted by section 9-1407, it shall be unlawful to:

(a) Discriminate in the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of:

(i) The buyer or renter;

(ii) Any person associated with the buyer or renter; or

(iii) A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or

(b) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with a dwelling because of a handicap of:

(i) Such person;

(ii) Any person associated with such person; or

(iii) A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available.

(2) For purposes of this section, discrimination shall include:

(a) A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the premises, except that in the case of rental, the landlord may, when it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted;

(b) A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford the handicapped person equal opportunity to use or enjoy a dwelling; and

(c) In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after September 1, 1991, a failure to design and construct the dwellings in such a manner that:

(i) The public use and common use portions of the dwelling are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons:

(ii) All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and

(iii) All premises within the dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design:

A. An accessible route into and through the dwelling;

B. Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;

C. Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and

D. Kitchens and bathrooms such that a handicapped person in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.

(3) Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standards Institute standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people, ANSI A1 17.1, shall satisfy the requirements of subdivision (2)(c)(iii) of this section.

(4) For purposes of this section, covered multi-family dwellings shall mean:

(a) Buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and

(b) Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units.

(5) Nothing in this section shall require that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 20-319



9-1405 Fair Housing; Transaction Related To Residential Real Estate; Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in transactions related to residential real estate to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.

(2) For purposes of this section, transaction related to residential real estate shall mean any of the following:

(a) The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance:

(i) For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or

(ii) Secured by residential real estate; or

(b) The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.

(3) Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 20-320



9-1406 Fair Housing; Multiple Listing Service; Other Service; Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on account of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 20-321



9-1407 Fair Housing; Religious Organization, Private Home, Private Club, Or Housing For Older Persons; Restricting Use Not Prohibited
(1) Nothing in this Article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of a dwelling which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes to persons of the same religion or from giving preferences to such persons unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex.

(2) Nothing in this Article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its members.

(3) Nothing in this Article shall prohibit or limit the right of any person or his or her authorized representative to refuse to rent a room or rooms in his or her own home for any reason or for no reason or to change tenants in his or her own home as often as desired, except that this exception shall not apply to any person who makes available for rental or occupancy more than four sleeping rooms to a person or family within his or her home.

(4) Nothing in this Article regarding familial status shall apply with respect to housing for older persons. For purposes of this subsection, housing for older persons shall mean housing:

(a) Provided under any state program that the Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons or defined in the program;

(b) Intended for and solely occupied by persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older; or

(c) Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 20-322



9-1408 Fair Housing; Information
The Municipal Clerk upon request shall make available to an aggrieved person, or any other person, information regarding the Nebraska Fair Housing Act and the Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission without cost to such individual.



Article 15 Electrical Code
9-1501 Electrical Code; Adopted By Reference

9-1501 Electrical Code; Adopted By Reference
All electric wiring, installation of electrical fixtures, apparatus, or electrical appliances for furnishing light, heat, or power, or other electrical work introduced into or placed in or upon, in any way connected on, any building or structure within the limits of the City shall be in the NFPA 70 National Electrical Code (NEC), 2014 Edition, as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, which is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of this City, one copy of the above adopted Code being on file in the office of the City Clerk.


Source: Ord. 955 (1984); Ord. 1031 (1987); Ord. 1106 (1990); Ord. 1189 (1993); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1746 (2010); Ord. 1979 (2016)



Article 16 Penal Provision
9-1601 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision

9-1601 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a violation of a municipal ordinance. Unless otherwise specified in the particular Article or section for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such violation shall be in any amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said payment, the offender shall stand committed to the County jail until such fine and costs be paid.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1746 (2010)



Chapter 10 Business Regulations
Article 1 Alcoholic Beverages
Article 2 Itinerant Sales
Article 3 Business Registration
Article 4 Bingo
Article 5 Junk And Junk Dealers
Article 6 Railroads
Article 7 Tobacco Sales
Article 8 Gas And Electric Distribution Companies
Article 9 Occupation Taxes
Article 10 Amusement Devices
Article 11 Hobbyist Permit
Article 12 [Repealed]
Article 13 Lottery
Article 14 Penalty Provision

Article 1 Alcoholic Beverages
10-101 Alcoholic Beverages; Definitions
10-102 Alcoholic Beverages; License Required
10-103 Alcoholic Beverages; Location
10-104 Alcoholic Beverages; Dwellings
10-105 Alcoholic Beverages; License Displayed
10-106 Alcoholic Beverages; Licensee Requirements
10-107 Alcoholic Beverages; Liquor Application; Municipal Examination
10-108 Alcoholic Beverages; Liquor License Renewal
10-109 Alcoholic Beverages; Municipal Power And Duties
10-110 Alcoholic Beverages; Owner Of Premises
10-111 Alcoholic Beverages; Employer
10-112 Alcoholic Beverages; Minors And Incompetents
10-113 Alcoholic Beverages; Credit Sales
10-114 Beverages; Spiking Beer
10-115 Alcoholic Beverages; Original Package
10-116 Alcoholic Beverages; Minor's Presence
10-117 Beverages; Sanitary Conditions
10-118 Alcoholic Beverages; Hiring Minors
10-119 Alcoholic Beverages; Consumption In Public Places
10-120 Alcoholic Beverages; Manufacture, Sale, Delivery, And Possession; General Prohibitions; Exceptions
10-121 Alcoholic Beverages; Removal Of Intoxicated Persons From Public Or Quasi-Public Property
10-122 Alcoholic Beverages; Citizen Complaints
10-123 Alcoholic Beverages; Hours Of Sale
10-124 Liquor Applications; Retail Licensing Standards; Binding Recommendations
10-125 Alcoholic Beverages; Liquor Application; Notice; Procedure
10-126 Alcoholic Beverages; Catering License
10-127 Alcoholic Beverages; Special Designated License; Designation Of The City Clerk Of The City Of Crete To Act As Agent

10-101 Alcoholic Beverages; Definitions
All words and phrases herein used are to have the definitions applied thereto as defined in the Liquor Control Act of the State of Nebraska.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 53-103.01 to 53-103.47



10-102 Alcoholic Beverages; License Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture for sale, sell, keep for sale, or to barter any alcoholic liquors within the Municipality unless said person shall have in full force and effect a license as provided by the Nebraska Liquor Control Act.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-168.06



10-103 Alcoholic Beverages; Location
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to own, maintain, manage, or hold open to the public any establishment for the purpose of selling at retail any alcoholic liquor within one hundred and fifty feet of any church, school, hospital, or home for aged or indigent persons or veterans, their wives, or children; provided, this prohibition shall not apply to any location within such distance when the said establishment has been licensed by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission at least two years and to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants where the selling of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on, if the said hotel, club, or restaurant were licensed and in operation prior to May 24, 1935. No alcoholic liquor, other than beer, shall be sold for consumption on the premises within three hundred feet from the campus of any college within the Municipality.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-177



10-104 Alcoholic Beverages; Dwellings
Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any premises which has any access which leads from such premises to any other portion of the same building used for dwelling or lodging purposes and which is permitted to be used by the public. Nothing herein shall prevent any connection with such premises and such other portion of the building which is used only by the licensee, his family, or personal guests.


State Law Reference: Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-178



10-105 Alcoholic Beverages; License Displayed
Every licensee under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act shall cause his license to be framed and hung in plain public view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premise.

(Ref 53-148 RS Neb)

10-106 Alcoholic Beverages; Licensee Requirements
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to own an establishment that sells at retail any alcoholic beverages unless said person is a resident of the county in which the premise is located; a person of good character and reputation; a citizen of the United States; a person who has never been convicted of a felony; a person who has never been associated with, or kept, a house of ill fame; a person who has never been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, a crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality; a person who has never had a liquor license revoked for cause; a person whose premises, for which a license is sought, meets standards for fire safety as established by the State Fire Marshal; or a person who has not acquired a beneficial interest in more than two (2) alcoholic beverage retail establishments since March 4, 1963; Provided, the beneficial interest requirement in this Section shall not apply to a person applying for an additional license for use in connection with the operation of a hotel containing at least twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms, or where the request is limited to on premises sale of beer only in a restaurant.

(Ref 53-124.07, 53-125 RS Neb)

10-107 Alcoholic Beverages; Liquor Application; Municipal Examination
Any person or persons desiring to obtain a license to sell alcoholic liquors at retail shall file with the Liquor Control Commission. The Commission shall then notify the Municipal Clerk by registered or certified mail. The Governing Body shall then meet and determine the desirability of the application and report its recommendation for approval or denial of the application in writing to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission within forty-five (45) days of receipt from the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission. The Governing Body may examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant; examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant; to hear testimony, and to take proof for its information in the performance of its duties. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired, the Governing Body may authorize its agent, Municipal Clerk or the Municipal Attorney, to act on its behalf. The Governing Body may conduct the examination and hold the hearing upon the receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy of the application. The Governing Body shall fix a time and place at which a hearing will be held, and at which time the Governing Body shall receive evidence, under oath, either orally, or by affidavit, from the applicant and any other person concerning the propriety of the issuance of such license. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a legal newspaper in, or of general circulation in, the Municipality one (1) time not less than seven (7), nor more than fourteen (14), days before the time of the hearing. Such notice shall include, but not be limited to, a statement that all persons desiring to give evidence before the local Governing Body in support of or in protest against the issuance of such license may do so at the time of the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not more than forty-five (45) days after the receipt of notice from the Commission. After such hearing, the Governing Body shall cause to be spread at large in the minute record of its proceedings a resolution recommending either issuance or refusal of such license. The Municipal Clerk shall thereupon mail to the Commission by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy of the resolution which shall state the cost of the published notice.

(Ref 53-131, 53-134 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 1014, 6/17/86: 1101, 11/21/89)

10-108 Alcoholic Beverages; Liquor License Renewal
Retail liquor licenses issued by the Commission and outstanding may be automatically renewed in the absence of a request by the Governing Body to require the said licensee to issue an application for renewal. The Municipal Clerk, upon notice from the Commission, between January tenth (10th) and January thirtieth (30th) of each year, shall cause to be published in a legal newspaper in, or of general circulation in the Municipality, one (1) time, a notice in the form prescribed by law of the right of automatic renewal of each retail liquor and beer license within the Municipality; Provided, Class C license renewal notices shall be published between the dates of July tenth (10th) and July thirtieth (30th) of each year. The Municipal Clerk shall then file with the Commission proof of publication of said notice on or before February tenth (10th) of each year or August tenth (10th) of each year for Class C licenses. In the event that written protests are filed by three (3) or more residents of the Municipality against said license renewal, the Municipal Clerk shall deliver the protests to the Governing Body who shall thereupon proceed to notify the Commission that they are to require the said licensee to submit an application.

(Ref 53-135, 53-135.01 RS Neb.)

10-109 Alcoholic Beverages; Municipal Power And Duties
The Governing Body is authorized to regulate by ordinance, not inconsistent with the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, the business of all retail, bottle club, or craft brewery licensees carried on within the corporate limits of the Municipality. (Neb. RS 53-134.03)
During the period of 45 days after the date of receiving from the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission an application for a new license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail, a bottle club license, or a craft brewery license, the Governing Body may make and submit to the commission recommendations relative to the granting or refusal to grant such license to the applicant. (Neb. RS 53-131(2))
The Governing Body, with respect to licenses within the corporate limits of the Municipality and with respect to Class D-1 licenses outside the corporate limits but within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the Municipality, has the following powers, functions, and duties with respect to retail, bottle club, and craft brewery licenses:
To cancel or revoke for cause retail, bottle club, or craft brewery licenses to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor issued to persons for premises within its jurisdiction, subject to the right of appeal to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission;
To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act to determine whether any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation adopted by the Governing Body has been or is being violated and at such time examine the premises of such licensee in connection with such determination;
To receive a signed complaint from any citizen within its jurisdiction that any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation relating to alcoholic liquor has been or is being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner provided in the Act;
To receive retail license fees, bottle club license fees, and craft brewery license fees as provided in Neb. RS 53-124 and pay the same, after the license has been delivered to the applicant, to the Municipal Treasurer;
To examine or cause to be examined any applicant or any retail licensee, bottle club licensee, or craft brewery licensee upon whom notice of cancellation or revocation has been served as provided in the Act, to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of any applicant or licensee, and to hear testimony and to take proof for its information in the performance of its duties. For purposes of obtaining any of the information desired, the Governing Body may authorize its agent or attorney to act on its behalf;
To cancel or revoke on its own motion any license if, upon the same notice and hearing as provided in 10-122 (Citizens Complaints), it determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or any valid and subsisting ordinance regulation duly enacted, adopted, and promulgated relating to alcoholic liquor. Such order of cancellation or revocation may be appealed to the Commission within 30 days after the date of the order by filing a notice of appeal with the Commission. The Commission shall handle the appeal in the manner provided for hearing on an application in Neb. RS 53-133;
Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy of application as provided in Neb. RS 53-131, to fix a time and place for a hearing at which the Governing Body shall receive evidence, either orally or by affidavit from the applicant and arty other person, bearing upon the propriety of the issuance of a license. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the Municipality, one time not less than 7 and not more than 14 days before the time of the hearing. Such notice shall include, but not be limited to, a statement that all persons desiring to give evidence before the Governing Body in support of or in protest against the issuance of such license may do so at the time of the hearing:
The hearing shall be held not more than 45 days after the date of receipt of the notice from the Commission, and after such hearing the Governing Body shall cause to be recorded in the minute record of their proceedings a resolution recommending either issuance or refusal of such license. The Municipal Clerk shall mail to the Commission by first-class mail, postage prepaid, a copy of the resolution which shall state the cost of the published notice, except that failure to comply with this provision shall not void any license issued by the Commission. If the Commission refuses to issue such a license, the cost of publication of notice shall be paid by the Commission from the security for costs. (Neb. RS 53-134)
When the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission mails or delivers to the Municipal Clerk a license issued or renewed by the commission, the Clerk shall deliver the license to the licensee upon proof of payment of:
The license fee if by the terms of Neb. RS 53-124(5) the fee is payable to the Municipal Treasurer;
Any fee for publication of notice of hearing before the Governing Body upon the application for the license;
The fee for publication of notice of renewal, if applicable, as provided in Neb. RS 53-135.01; and
Occupation taxes, if any, imposed by the Municipality.
Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to the contrary, the Municipality shall not impose an occupation tax on the business of any person, firm, or corporation licensed under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act and doing business within the corporate limits of the Municipality in any sum which exceeds two times the amount of the license fee required to be paid under the Act to obtain such license. (Neb. RS 53-132(4))
(Ord. No. 1550, 03/04/03)

10-110 Alcoholic Beverages; Owner Of Premises
The owner of any premise used for the sale at retail of alcoholic beverages shall be deemed guilty of a violation of these laws to the same extent as the said licensee if the owner shall knowingly permit the licensee to use the said licensed premise in violation of any Municipal Code Section or Nebraska Statute.

It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager or employee of such licensee or manager to drink any alcoholic liquor during the time that such person is on duty in the conduct of such business; and it shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager or employee to serve or sell alcoholic liquor while under the influence of such liquors.

(Ref. 53-1,101 RS Neb) (Amended by Ord. No. 1077, 3/7/89)

10-111 Alcoholic Beverages; Employer
The employer of any officer, director, manager, or employees working in a retail liquor establishment shall be held to be liable and guilty of any act of omission or violation of any law or ordinance, if such act is committed or omission made with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the employer or licensee, and each such act or omission shall be deemed and held to be the act of the employer, and will be punishable in the same manner as if the said act or omission had been committed by him personally.

(Ref. 53-1,102 RS Neb.)

10-112 Alcoholic Beverages; Minors And Incompetents
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to sell, give away, dispose of, exchange, permit the sale of or make a gift of, any alcoholic liquors, or to procure any such alcoholic liquors to or for any minor, or to any person who is mentally incompetent.

(Ref. 53-180 RS Neb.)

10-113 Alcoholic Beverages; Credit Sales
No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any person or persons for credit of any kind, barter, or services rendered; Provided, nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent any club holding a class C license from permitting checks or statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members, or guests of members, and charged to the accounts of the said members or guests in accordance with the by-laws of any such club; and Provided further, nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any hotel or restaurant holding a retail alcoholic beverage license from permitting checks or statements for liquor to be signed by regular guests residing in the said hotel, and charged to the accounts of such guests.

(Ref. 53-183 RS Neb.)

10-114 Beverages; Spiking Beer
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own, manage, or lease any premise in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is licensed, to serve or offer for sale any beer to which there has been added any alcohol, or permit any person or persons to add alcohol to any beer on the licensed premise of such licensee.

(Ref. 53-174 RS Neb.)

10-115 Alcoholic Beverages; Original Package
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own, manage, or lease any premise in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is licensed, to have in their possession for sale at retail any alcoholic liquors contained in bottles, casks, or other containers except in the original package.

(Ref. 53-184 RS Neb.)

10-116 Alcoholic Beverages; Minor's Presence
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own, manage, or lease an establishment selling alcoholic beverages at retail to allow any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to frequent or other-wise remain in the said establishment unless the said minor is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian, and unless said minor remains seated with, and under the immediate control of, the said parent or legal guardian.

(Ref. 53-147 RS Neb.)

10-117 Beverages; Sanitary Conditions
It shall be unlawful to open for public use any retail liquor establishment that is not in a clean and sanitary condition. Toilet facilities shall be adequate and convenient for customers and patrons and said licensed premise shall be subject to any health inspections the Governing Body or the Municipal Police may make, or cause to be made. All applications for liquor licenses shall be viewed in part from the standpoint of the sanitary conditions, and a report concerning the said sanitary conditions shall be made at all hearings concerning the application for, or renewal of, a liquor license.

(Ref. 53-118 RS Neb)

10-118 Alcoholic Beverages; Hiring Minors
It shall be unlawful for any person to hire a minor regardless of sex under the age of nineteen (19) years to serve or dispense alcoholic liquors, including beer, to said licensee's customers.

(Ref. 53-102 RS Neb.)

10-119 Alcoholic Beverages; Consumption In Public Places
Except when the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission has issued a license as provided in Neb. RS 53-186(2), it is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon property owned or controlled by the state or any governmental subdivision thereof unless authorized by the governing bodies having jurisdiction over such property.
It is unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing, or conducting any dance hall, restaurant, cafe, or club or any place open to the general public to permit or allow any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon the premises except as permitted by a license issued for such premises pursuant to the Nebraska Liquor Control Act. It is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor in any dance hall, restaurant, cafe, or club or any place open to the general public except as permitted by a license issued for such premises pursuant to the Act. This division does not apply to a retail license while lawfully engaged in the catering of alcoholic beverages.

Provided, it shall be lawful for persons to consume alcoholic liquors on the public property known as Tuxedo Park in the City of Crete, Saline County, Nebraska; Provided, that nothing herein shall be construed to allow said consumption inside motor vehicles while said motor vehicles are upon the public streets within said park. Provided further, that it shall be lawful for Fire Department members, their invitees and guests to consume alcoholic liquors on the public property known as the Fire Hall Building and Fire Training Grounds in the City of Crete, Saline County, Nebraska, at such times and in connection with Fire Department functions as determined by the officers of said Fire Department.
(53-186(1), 53-186.01 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 1040, 7/7/87; Ord. No. 1552, 03/04/03))

10-120 Alcoholic Beverages; Manufacture, Sale, Delivery, And Possession; General Prohibitions; Exceptions
No person shall manufacture, bottle, blend, sell, barter, transport, deliver, furnish, or possess any alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes except as specifically provided in this chapter and the Nebraska Liquor Control Act.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent:
The possession of alcoholic liquor legally obtained as provided in this chapter or the Act for the personal use of the possessor and his or her family or guests;
The making of wine, cider, or other alcoholic liquor by a person from fruits, vegetables, or grains, or the product thereof, by simple fermentation and without distillation, if made solely for the use of the maker and his or her family and guests;
Any duly licensed practicing physician or dentist from possessing or using alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of his or her profession, any hospital or other institution caring for the sick and diseased persons from possessing and using alcoholic liquor for the treatment of bona fide patients of such hospital or other institution, or any drug store employing a licensed pharmacist from possessing or using alcoholic liquor in the compounding of prescriptions of licensed physicians;
The possession and dispensation of alcoholic liquor by an authorized representative of any religion on the premises of a place of worship, for the purpose of conducting any bona fide religious rite, ritual, or ceremony;
Persons who are sixteen years old or older from carrying alcoholic liquor from licensed establishments when they are accompanied by a person not a minor;
Persons who are sixteen years old or older from handling alcoholic liquor containers and alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment;
Persons who are sixteen years old or older from removing and disposing of alcoholic liquor containers for the convenience of the employer and customers in the course of their employment; or
Persons who are nineteen years old or older from serving or selling alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment.
(Ref. 53-168.06, 53-175, 53-194.03 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 1329, 7/2/96; Ord. No. 1546, 02/04/03)

10-121 Alcoholic Beverages; Removal Of Intoxicated Persons From Public Or Quasi-Public Property
Any law enforcement officer with the power to arrest for traffic violations may take a person who is intoxicated and in the judgment of the officer dangerous to himself, herself, or others, or who is otherwise incapacitated, from any public or quasi-public property. An officer removing an intoxicated person from public or quasi-public property shall make a reasonable effort to take such intoxicated person to his or her home or to place such person in any hospital, clinic, alcoholism center, or with a medical doctor as may be necessary to preserve life or to prevent injury. Such effort at placement shall be deemed reasonable if the officer contacts those facilities or doctor which have previously represented a willingness to accept and treat such individuals and which regularly do accept such individuals. If such efforts are unsuccessful or are not feasible, the officer may then place such intoxicated person in civil protective custody, except that civil protective custody shall be used only as long as is necessary to preserve life or to prevent injury, and under no circumstances longer than twenty-four (24) hours. The placement of such person in civil protective custody shall be recorded at the facility or jail at which he or she is delivered and communicated to his or her family or next of kin, if they can be located, or to such person designated by the person taken into civil protective custody.

The law enforcement officer who acts in compliance with this Section shall be deemed to be acting in the course of his or her official duty and shall not be criminally or civilly liable for such actions. The taking of an individual into civil protective custody under this Section shall not be considered an arrest. No entry or other record shall be made to indicate that the person has been arrested or charged with a crime.

For purposes of this Section, public property shall mean any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park, or other state, county, or municipally-owned property.

For the purposes of this Section, quasi-public property shall mean and include private or publicly-owned property utilized for proprietary or business uses which invites patronage by the public or which invites public ingress and egress.

(Ref. 53-1, l21 RS Neb.)

10-122 Alcoholic Beverages; Citizen Complaints
Any five (5) residents of the Municipality shall have the right to file a complaint with the Governing Body stating that any retail or bottle club licensee, subject to the jurisdiction of the Governing Body, has been or is violating any provision of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or the rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto. Such complaint shall be in writing in the form prescribed by the Governing Body and shall be signed and sworn by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule, or regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which belief is based. If the Governing Body is satisfied that the complaint substantially charges a violation and that from the fact alleged there is reasonable cause for such belief, it shall set the matter for hearing within ten (10) days from the date of the filing of the complaint and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charge in the complaint; Provided, that the complaint must in all cases be disposed of by the Governing Body within thirty (30) days from the date the complaint was filed by resolution thereof, said resolution shall be deemed the final order for purposes of appeal to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission as provided by law.

(Ref. 53-1, ll4 RS Neb.)

10-123 Alcoholic Beverages; Hours Of Sale
It shall be unlawful for any licensed person or persons or their agents to sell any alcoholic beverages within the Municipality except during the hours provided herein:

HOURS OF SALE
Alcoholic liquors, including beer and wine

Secular Days:
Off Sale 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
On Sale 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.

Sundays:
Off Sale 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
On Sale 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.

No person or persons shall consume any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises for a period of time longer than fifteen (15) minutes after the time fixed herein for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on the said premises. For the purposes of this Section "on sale" shall be defined as alcoholic beverages sold by the drink for consumption on the premises of the licensed establishment; "off sale" shall be defined as alcoholic beverages sold at retail in the original container for consumption off the premises of the licensed establishment.

Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit licensed premises from being open for other business on days and hours during which the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by this Section.

(Ref. 53-179 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 1105, 12/5/89; 1140, 7/16/91; 1435, 11/03/98; 1879, 12/3/13)

10-124 Liquor Applications; Retail Licensing Standards; Binding Recommendations
Local governing bodies shall only have authority to approve applications and deny licenses pursuant to the Nebraska Liquor Control Act. The Governing Body shall only consider the following licensing standards and criteria at the hearing and an evaluation of any applicant for a retail alcoholic liquor license, for the upgrading of a license to sell alcoholic liquor, or for the expansion or change in location of the premises, and for the purpose of formulating a recommendation from the Governing Body to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission in accordance with the Nebraska Liquor Control Act:

The adequacy of existing law enforcement resources and services in the area;
The recommendation of the Police Department or any other law enforcement agency;
Existing motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic flow in the vicinity of the proposed licensed premises, potential traffic and parking problems, and the proximity and availability of on-street and off-street parking;
Zoning restrictions and the local governing body's zoning and land-use policies;
Sanitation or sanitary conditions on or about the proposed licensed premises;
The existence of a citizen's protest and similar evidence in support of or in opposition to the application;
The existing population and projected growth within the jurisdiction of the local governing body and within the area to be served;
The existing liquor licenses, the class of each such license, and the distance and times of travel between establishments that issued such licenses;
Whether the proposed license would be compatible with the neighborhood or community where the proposed premises are located;
Operated or presently operated in conjunction with the proposed license is and will be consistent with the public interest as declared in section 53-101.01;
Whether the applicant can ensure that all alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, will be handled by persons in accordance with section 53-102;
Whether the applicant has taken every precaution to protect against the possibility of shoplifting of alcoholic liquor, which alcoholic liquor shall be displayed and kept in and sold from an area which is reasonably secured;
Whether the applicant is fit, willing, and able to properly provide the service proposed in conformance with all provisions and requirements of and rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to the act; 
Whether the applicant has demonstrated that the type of management and control exercised over the licensed premises will be sufficient to ensure that the licensee can conform to all the provisions and requirements of and rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to the act;
The background information of the applicant established by information contained in the public records of the Commission and investigations conducted by law enforcement agencies;
Past evidence of discrimination involving the applicant as evidenced by findings of fact before any administrative board or agency of the local governing body, any other governmental board or agency of the local governing body, any other governmental unit, or any court of law;
Whether the applicant or the applicant's representatives suppressed any fact or provided any inaccurate information to the commission or local governing body or the employees of the commission in regard to the license application or liquor investigations. The applicant shall be required to cooperate in providing a full disclosure to the investigating agents of the local governing body;
Proximity of and impact on schools, hospitals, libraries, parks, and public institutions;
Whether activities proposed to be conducted on the licensed premises or in adjacent related outdoor areas will create unreasonable noise or disturbance; and
Compliance with state laws, liquor rules and regulations, and municipal ordinances and regulations and whether or not the applicant has ever forfeited bond to appear in court to answer charges of having committed a felony or charges of having violated any law or ordinance enacted in the interest of good morals and decency or has been convicted of violating or has forfeited bond to appear in court and answer charges for violating any law or ordinance relating to alcoholic liquor. 
It shall be the applicant's duty to produce evidence pertaining to the designated criteria prescribed in this subsection. The burden of proof and persuasion shall be on the party filing the application. When applicable for purposes of this section, "applicant" shall be synonymous with "license."

(Ref. 53-134 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 1013, 6/17/86) (Amended by Ord. No. 1102, 11/21/89)

10-125 Alcoholic Beverages; Liquor Application; Notice; Procedure
Notice. Notice of a hearing held pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. Section 53-134 shall be given to the applicant by the Municipal Clerk and shall contain the date, time, and location of the hearing. Two (2) or more proceedings which are legally or factually related may be heard and considered together unless any party thereto makes a showing sufficient to satisfy the Governing Body that prejudice would result there from.
Procedure. Hearings will be informal and conducted by the Municipal Attorney. The intent is an inquiry into the facts, not an adversarial action. Each witness may present their testimony in narrative fashion or by question and answer. The Governing Body of the applicant may order the hearing to be recorded by the Clerk, at the expense of the applicant(s).

The Governing Body may admit and give probative effect to evidence which possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonably prudent individuals. The Municipal Attorney may limit testimony where it appears incompetent, irrelevant, or unduly repetitious. If there is opposition to any application and such opposition desires the opportunity to present arguments and to cross-examine the applicant and any witnesses in favor of such application, they shall choose a spokesperson to perform such function who shall notify the Municipal Attorney of him/her representation prior to the start of the hearing.

The order of the proceeding is as follows:
Exhibits will be marked in advance by the Clerk and presented to the Municipal Attorney during the presentation;
Presentation of evidence, witnesses, and arguments by applicant;
Testimony of any other citizens in favor of such proposed license;
Examination of applicant, witnesses or citizens by Municipal Attorney, Governing Body, or duly appointed agent;
Cross-examination of applicant, witnesses or citizens by spokesperson for opposition, if any;
Presentation of evidence and witnesses by opposition;
Testimony of any other citizens in opposition to such proposed license.
Presentation of evidence by Municipality and law enforcement personnel;
Cross-examination by applicant;
Rebuttal evidence by both parties, and by Municipality administration and agent;
Summation by applicant and opposition spokesperson, if any.
In all cases, the burden of proof and persuasion shall be on the party filing the application.

Any member of the Governing Body and the Municipal Attorney may question any witness, call witnesses, or request information.

All witnesses shall be sworn.

The Governing Body may make further inquiry and investigation following the hearing.

The Governing Body or the applicant may order the hearing to be recorded by the Clerk, at the expense of the applicant(s).
(Ref. 53-134 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 1103, 11/21/89)

10-126 Alcoholic Beverages; Catering License
The holder of a Class C, Class D, or Class I license issued under Neb. RS 53-124(5) or a craft brewery license may obtain an annual catering license by filing an application and license fee with the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission. (Neb. RS 53-124.12(1))
Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy of the application as provided in Neb. RS 53-124.12, the governing body shall process the application in the same manner as provided in 10-109 (Alcoholic Beverages; Licenses; Municipal Powers). (Neb. RS 53-124.12(3))
The governing body, with respect to catering licensees within the Municipality's corporate limits, may cancel a catering license for cause for the remainder of the period for which the license is issued. Any person whose catering license is canceled may appeal to the District Court. (Neb. RS 53-124.12(4))
The Municipality may impose an occupation tax on the business of any person, firm, or corporation receiving a catering license and doing business within the Municipality. The tax may not exceed double the license fee for a catering license. (Neb. RS 53-124.12(6))
(Ord. No. 1287, 8/1/95, Ord. No. 1551, 03/04/03)

10-127 Alcoholic Beverages; Special Designated License; Designation Of The City Clerk Of The City Of Crete To Act As Agent
Pursuant to Nebraska Liquor Control Act of the State of Nebraska, the City Clerk is hereby appointed agent for the City for making recommendation, to approve or deny the application for special designated permit license, to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission. In making his or her recommendation, the City Clerk shall consult with the Mayor, Chief of Police and City Attorney and follow guidelines established by the Nebraska State Statutes and the Ordinances of the City of Crete, Nebraska, for the issuance of said license.

(Ord. No. 1392; 11/18/97)

Article 2 Itinerant Sales
10-201 Itinerant Sales; Application; Regulations
10-202 Itinerant Sales; Hours Of Solicitation
10-203 Itinerant Sales; Regulation, Exceptions
10-204 Itinerant Sales; Definition

10-201 Itinerant Sales; Application; Regulations
To prevent the sale of fraudulent, dangerous, and unhealthy goods and services, and to protect the public by maintaining records of the products sold and the persons and companies responsible for such sales, all itinerant sales personnel shall, before doing business within the Municipality, make application for, and be issued a permit. This regulation shall apply to all sales made, or solicited by businesses or organizations having no permanent business office or store building located in the Municipality.
Application for said permit shall be made to the City Clerk’s office and shall contain the necessary information required thereby and identification and documents required for the protection of the residents of the Municipality. Upon approval by the City Clerk’s Office, the City Clerk shall then have authority to issue a sales permit to said approved applicant. Each person granted a permit shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), for a seven (7) day permit or three hundred twenty-five dollars ($325.00) for a seasonal permit, to the City, and upon payment to the City Clerk may issue a sales permit to such approved applicant. Such permit shall be valid for a period of seven (7) continuous days from and after date of issuance, unless permit is for continuous seasonal sales of seasonal items, as determined by the City Clerk, and then the permit shall be for a period of time not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) continuous days, as determined by the City Clerk. The date of its expiration shall be clearly marked on the permit. A sales permit shall be required for each person desiring to do business within the Municipality. Any person or persons granted such permit shall be subject to any occupation taxes and other rules and regulations which the Governing Body deems appropriate for the purposes stated herein. Any person or persons granted such permit shall also provide proof of to the City Clerk of any necessary State or Federal licensing and sales tax permits. Any permit so granted shall be subject to revocation for good and sufficient cause by the City Clerk. The permit fee may be waived by the City for sales by not-for-profit organizations, and/or for seasonal sales events, including, but not limited to, weekly farmers market.
(Ref. 16-205, 16-246 RS Neb.) (Amended Ord. by 1699, 04/15/08)

10-202 Itinerant Sales; Hours Of Solicitation
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, salesman, or peddler to solicit any individual between the hours of eight (8:00) o'clock P.M., and eight (8:00) o'clock A.M., unless they have a previous appointment with the resident, or residents, of the premise solicited. It shall be unlawful at any hour for a solicitor, salesman, or peddler to solicit without a proper permit on his person at all times.

(Amended by Ord. 1700, 04/15/08)

10-203 Itinerant Sales; Regulation, Exceptions
The provisions of this Article shall not extend to individuals calling on retail merchants in the corporate limits of the City for the purpose of taking orders or selling of merchandise for resale by such merchants.

10-204 Itinerant Sales; Definition
A transient merchant, itinerant merchant, or itinerant vendor is defined as any person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee, or employee, and whether a resident of the Municipality or not, who engages temporarily within the Municipality in the business of selling and delivering goods, wares, or merchandise, or taking orders for goods or merchandise to or at homes, apartments, or other residential premises in the Municipality.

Article 3 Business Registration
10-301 Registration Required
10-302 Definitions
10-303 Purpose And Duration
10-304 Business Registration Fee
10-305 Registration Required
10-306 Exemptions And Charitable Organizations
10-307 False Application Unlawful
10-308 Administration Of Article
10-309 Appeal
10-310 Delinquent Payment
10-311 Confidentiality
10-312 Violations
10-313 Severability
10-314 Compliance With Other Codes
10-315 Nonexclusive Remedies

10-301 Registration Required
Every person or business engaged or intending to engage in any calling, business, occupation or profession by maintaining a business location, in whole or in part, within the limits of the City Crete, Saline County, Nebraska, is required to register and pay an annual business registration fee.

(Amended by Ord. 2049, 08/21/18)

10-302 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meaning ascribed herein:

“Business” means a calling, occupation, profession, or activity engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either directly or indirectly. Business shall include charitable organizations and organizations performing a charitable purpose.

“Business Location” means the premises, whether it be a personal residence, main business location or an outlet, branch or other location thereof, temporary or otherwise, to which the public is expressly or impliedly invited for the purpose of transacting of business, or where business in transacted by phone or using the internet, and includes a location where business activities are carried on within the City or outside the City attributable to a location within the City.

“Charitable Organization” means an organization that is determined by the Internal Revenue Service to be exempt from Federal income taxes.

“Charitable Purpose” means a benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose which does not result in personal gain to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the organization.

“City” means the City of Crete, Saline County, Nebraska.

“License Official” means a person designated by the City to administer the provisions of this Ordinance.

“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, LLP, LLC, cooperative non-profit membership, corporation, joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, holding company, or other group or combination acting as a unit, in the singular or plural, and the agent or employee having charge or control of a business in the absence of the principal.

(Amended by Ord. 2049, 08/21/18)

10-303 Purpose And Duration
The business registration required by this ordinance is for the purpose of establishing a database of business operating within the City, and assisting the City of Crete Revitalization effort in performing its functions.

10-304 Business Registration Fee
The required business registration fee of $20.00 for first time registrants, $10.00 for renewals, shall be paid for each business subject hereto on or before the 30th day of January in each year. This fee may be amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
A separate registration shall be required for each place of business and for each business conducted at one address. The registration fee will be prorated if a business is registered during the year. No refund shall be made for a business that is discontinued.
The City will allow for a one time waiver of the annual business registration fee for all business operating within the City on this date this ordinance becomes effective for registration fees applicable to registration of businesses for the year 2018.
10-305 Registration Required
The owner, agent or legal representative of every business subject to this ordinance shall register the business on or before the 30th day of January of each calendar year.
Registration shall be on the form attached hereto, as may be modified from time to time by Resolution of City Council, which shall contain the Social Security Number and/or the Federal Employer’s Identification Number, the business name as reported on the Nebraska income tax return, and all information about the applicant and the business deemed necessary for the City and to accomplish the purposes set forth above.
10-306 Exemptions And Charitable Organizations
No person or business shall be exempt from the requirements of the ordinance by reason of the lack of an established place of business within the City, unless exempted by State or Federal law. No person or business shall be exempt from this ordinance by reason of the payment of any other registration or license fee, unless exempted by State law, and no person shall be relieved of liability for payment of any other tax or fee by reason of application of this ordinance.
A Charitable Organization shall be deemed a business subject to this ordinance and the business registration fee.
10-307 False Application Unlawful
It shall be unlawful for any person or business subject to the provisions of this ordinance to submit a false registration for a business, or to give or file, or direct the giving or filing of, any false information with respect to the registration required by this ordinance.

10-308 Administration Of Article
The License Official shall administer the provisions of this article, administrative registrations, make or initiate investigations to insure compliance, report violations to the City Administrator, assist in prosecution of violators, produce forms, suggest regulations relating to the administration of this ordinance, and perform such other duties as may be duly assigned by the City Administrator. License Officials shall be designated by the City Administrator and can include Crete Police, City Building Inspector, Public Works employees, City Clerk, or other designee.

10-309 Appeal
If a person or business fails to register a business or to furnish the information required by this ordinance to the License Official, the License Official shall examine such records of the business or any other available records, as may be appropriate, and conduct such investigations and statistical surveys as the License Official may deem appropriate to assess any penalties as provided herein.
Any findings or penalties resulting from an inspection or investigation may be appealed to the City Administrator, or his/her appointed representative, by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days after of the day of written notification to the person or business.
10-310 Delinquent Payment
For non-payment of all or any part of the business registration fee, the License Official shall levy and collect a late penalty of five (5%) percent of the fee for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid. Penalties shall not be waived. If any fee remains unpaid for sixty (60) days after its due date, the License Official shall report it to the City Administrator for appropriate legal action.

10-311 Confidentiality
Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any official or employee to divulge or make known in any manner any personal or proprietary information set forth or disclosed in any application or report required under this ordinance. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports. Any registration data may be shared with other public officials or employees of the City in the performance of their duties, whether or not those duties relate to enforcement of this ordinance.

10-312 Violations
Any person violating any provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine up to $100.00 or imprisonment for not more than seven (7) days or both, upon conviction. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for fees, penalties and costs provided for herein. In addition the City may pursue any of the remedies available to it in law or in equity to mandate compliance with the terms hereof.

10-313 Severability
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this Ordinance shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sections, sentences, clauses or parts of this Ordinance; it being the intent of the City of Crete that the remainder of the Ordinance shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.

10-314 Compliance With Other Codes
In no instance shall the registration of a business and the payment of registration fees be construed to exonerate the owner, local agent or other responsible party from responsibility for compliance with any other City of Crete Code or Ordinance.

10-315 Nonexclusive Remedies
The penalty and collection provisions of this Ordinance shall be independent, non-mutually exclusive separate remedies, all of which shall be available to the City as may be deemed appropriate for carrying out the purposes of this Ordinance. The remedies and procedures provided in this Ordinance for violation hereof are not intended to supplant or replace to any other degree the remedies and procedures available to the City in the case of a violation of any other City of Crete Code or Ordinance, whether or not such other code or ordinance is referenced in this Article, and whether or not an ongoing violation of such other code or ordinance is cited as the underlying ground for a finding of a violation of this Article.

Enacted by (Ord. No. 2040, 03/06/18)

Article 4 Bingo
10-401 Bingo; Regulation
10-402 Bingo; Tax
10-403 Bingo; Quarterly Report
10-404 Bingo; Incorporated Regulation

10-401 Bingo; Regulation
Games of bingo shall be conducted thin the Municipality in accordance with all laws of the Municipality and the State of Nebraska if the said game of bingo is played for or involves profit or gain. Any association duly licensed by the State of Nebraska to conduct the game of bingo shall obtain a written permit from the Governing Body before commencing operation of said game. Application shall be made to the Municipal Clerk for such permit. Said application form shall contain such information and documents or copies thereof as the Governing Body deems necessary to determine whether to grant or reject the application. Upon the determination that granting the application would be proper, the Governing Body shall immediately direct the Municipal Clerk to issue the said license to the applicant upon the payment of an annual permit fee of ten ($10.00) dollars. Said license shall be subject to revocation at any time for good cause. Any person or persons, so licensed, shall be subject to any other fees, rules, and regulations which the Governing Body may designate. All permits so issued will automatically expire on September thirtieth (30th), following its issuance or renewal. The fee for each renewal unless otherwise prescribed shall be in the sum of ten ($10.00) dollars. Said fee shall be credited to the General Fund. The permit shall be on display at any place where a game of bingo is conducted.

(Ref. 9-166 RS Neb.)

10-402 Bingo; Tax
(Repealed by Ord. No. 1461, 8/17/00)

10-403 Bingo; Quarterly Report
(Repealed by Ord. No. 1461, 8/17/00)

10-404 Bingo; Incorporated Regulation
All applicable State statutes as they now exist or may hereafter be amended shall be, and will constitute, a part of this Article as if repeated verbatim herein, and violation of any State statute will be a distinct and separate offense against the Municipality as well as against the State. Violators thereof shall be separately prosecuted by the Municipality for each of such offenses, and if convicted, shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ref. 9-124 thru 9-176 RS Neb.)

Article 5 Junk And Junk Dealers
10-501 Junk And Junk Dealers; Terms Defined
10-502 Junk And Junk Dealers; License Required
10-503 Junk And Junk Dealers; Application For License
10-504 Junk And Junk Dealers; Record Of Purchases
10-505 Junk And Junk Dealers; Regulations

10-501 Junk And Junk Dealers; Terms Defined
Any person engaged in the business or occupation of exchanging, handling or storing scrap paper, bottles, rags, iron or junk, the dismantling or taking apart of automobiles, other than for repair, or the wrecking of automobiles; the storage of automobiles unfit for operation, or automobiles or parts thereof kept for storage, or the storage and accumulation of scrap from automobiles, or other sources, shall be construed and considered the storing of iron or junk, or the operation of a junk business, or junk yard within the meaning of this Article, and shall be subject to the provisions thereof.

10-502 Junk And Junk Dealers; License Required
It shall be unlawful for any person, to keep, conduct or operate within this City a junk business, or junk yard or to store iron and junk as defined in this Article, without first obtaining from the Mayor and Council a license therefor in the manner hereinafter provided.

10-503 Junk And Junk Dealers; Application For License
Any person, desiring to obtain a license for the keeping, conducting and operating, within the City a junk business or junk yard, or the storage of iron or junk shall make application in writing to the Mayor and Council for such license. The application shall particularly describe the location of the proposed business and shall set out the names of the owners thereof; said application shall be filed with the Clerk and action shall be taken thereon either at a special meeting or at the next regular meeting of the Council; and the Mayor and Council may grant or reject said application as the majority thereof shall decide.

The application shall be accompanied by a license fee of one ($1.00) dollar and shall be payable to the City. If the license is granted, the Clerk shall issue the same under the seal of the City; and the license shall recite the name of the applicant, the date issued, the character of business sought to be engaged in, the location thereof, the owners thereof; and the same shall terminate at the end of the fiscal year, during which it is granted or issued and shall not be assignable. As a condition precedent to the granting of said license, the applicant shall execute and file with the City a bond in the penal sum of two hundred ($200.00) dollars, with one (1) or more sufficient sureties, to be approved by the Clerk conditioned for the faithful performance and observance of this Article and regulations of this City respecting such business; and provided further, that if the holder of the license shall violate the provisions of this Article or the regulations made by the City respecting such business, said bond shall be forfeited and the City shall be entitled to recover the amount of the bond, and the license shall be revoked. Any license issued under this Article may be revoked by the Mayor and Council whenever the licensee shall violate the provisions of this Article. All licenses shall be taken out at the beginning of each fiscal year and shall be good only until the end of the fiscal year.

10-504 Junk And Junk Dealers; Record Of Purchases
Every person, engaged in the business of operating a junk yard, operating a junk business, or the storing of iron or junk shall at all times keep a record of purchases, and shall enter in a book the name of the person from whom said junk was purchased, the date of the purchase thereof, the amount paid, the address of the seller, and a description of the article purchased. This record shall be in writing in the English language and shall at all times be open to inspection to any policeman or other peace officer.

(Ref. 69-204 RS Neb.)

10-505 Junk And Junk Dealers; Regulations
It shall be unlawful in the operation of a junk business or junk yard or the storing of iron or junk to use any lot or parcel of land for the purpose of storing, piling or accumulating junk within the City, unless the following conditions are fully complied with by said licensee;

No combustible or flammable material shall be accumulated or assembled in piles or otherwise unless completely enclosed by fireproof sheds or buildings;
No accumulations, piles or heaps of iron, wood or other junk, as herein defined, shall be permitted upon said lot or parcel of land unless the same is within a building;
No junk emitting any offensive smells or odors shall be allowed or permitted on said premises;
The lot and premises upon which said junk yard or junk shop is located must at all times be kept in a neat, clean, sightly and sanitary condition and all unsightly views kept from the public;
No automobile bodies, frames or chassis shall be kept on said premises unless the same are stored in a building.
Article 6 Railroads
10-601 Railroad Companies; Safe Crossing
10-602 Railroad Companies; Speed
10-603 Railroad Companies; Lighting
10-604 Railroad Companies; Obstructing Traffic
10-605 Railroads; Speed Limit Ordinance, Procedure
10-606 Railroads; Drainage
10-607 Railroads; Flying Switches
10-608 Railroad Companies; Obstructing View At Crossings Prohibited

10-601 Railroad Companies; Safe Crossing
It shall be the duty of every railroad company doing business in, or traveling through, the Municipality to keep in a suitable, and safe condition the crossings and right-of-way in the Municipality. If any such crossing shall at any time fall into disrepair and become unsafe, or inconvenient for public travel, the Governing Body may, by resolution, call upon the said company to make whatever repairs that it may deem necessary to correct the dangerous condition. Notice of the said resolution shall be served upon the local agent of the said company. In the event that the railroad shall fail, or neglect to repair, and correct the said condition as aforesaid within thirty (30) days, neglect for each day thereafter shall be deemed, and is hereby made a separate, and distinct offense against the provisions herein.

(Ref. 16-211, 16-212 RS Neb.;)

10-602 Railroad Companies; Speed
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, its employees, agents, or servants to operate a railroad engine, locomotive, or other vehicle on its tracks within or through the Municipality at a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour.

(Ref. 16-612)

10-603 Railroad Companies; Lighting
It shall be the duty of all railroad companies owning, operating, and maintaining a railroad through the Municipality to sufficiently light all crossings and to install as many signal systems as the Governing Body shall deem necessary at the expense of the said company. Said lighting shall be of not less than six hundred (600) candlepower which said electric light shall be kept lighted at all times between one (1) hour after sunset in the evening until one (1) hour before sunrise in the morning following.

(Ref. 16-212 RS Neb.)

10-604 Railroad Companies; Obstructing Traffic
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, its employees, agents, or servants operating a railroad through the Municipality to obstruct traffic on any public street, except in the event of an emergency, for a longer period at one time than ten (10) minutes.

(Ref. 16-212 RS Neb.)

10-605 Railroads; Speed Limit Ordinance, Procedure
No speed limitation ordinance, which would directly affect the operations of an interstate railroad, shall be valid or enforceable unless its adoption is in compliance with this Section. Before the first (1st) reading of the proposed ordinance, the railroad whose operations would be directly affected by the ordinance shall be given written notice by United States mail of the proposed ordinance and the date, time and place of such reading. Such notice shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the reading. The affected railroad or railroads shall have an opportunity to be heard at the first (1st) reading. After enactment, the railroad or railroads whose operations would be directly affected shall be provided a written or printed copy of the ordinance by United States mail.

10-606 Railroads; Drainage
It shall be the duty of any railroad company owning, maintaining, or operating a railroad within or through the corporate limits of the City to construct and keep in repair ditches, drains, and culverts, along and under their railroad tracks at all places within the limits of the City, where the same may be necessary for the escape of water and the proper draining of the territory on either side of said railroads.

When any such drains, ditches, or culverts may be necessary for the escape of water and the proper drainage of the territory on either side of any such railroad track, the Mayor and Council may, by resolution, call upon the proper railroad company to construct or repair the said drain, ditch, or culvert and to place the same in a proper condition for the escape of water for the proper drainage of the territory on either side of said railroads. A copy of every such resolution shall be served upon the local agent of the railroad company, whose duty it is to construct or keep in repair any such drain, ditch, or culvert; and for a failure or refusal to comply with any such resolution within fourteen (14) days after the service thereof as aforesaid, such railroad company shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

10-607 Railroads; Flying Switches
No running or flying switches shall be made across any street opened and in public use.

10-608 Railroad Companies; Obstructing View At Crossings Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to obstruct or obscure the public's view by storing or parking any railroad car on a railroad track within fifty (50') feet of the crossing of any such railroad track and a public road within the corporate limits of the Municipality; provided, however, in no instance shall any person who is authorized to control the movement of such railroad car or cars within such distance be prevented from reasonably conducting his or her business.

(Ref. 74-1323 RS Neb.)

Article 7 Tobacco Sales
10-701 Tobacco Sales; License Required
10-702 Tobacco Sales; Term Of License
10-703 Tobacco Sales; Forfeiture Of License
10-704 Tobacco Sales; Transfer Of License
10-705 Tobacco Sales; New License Upon Revocation

10-701 Tobacco Sales; License Required
It shall be unlawful for any person, to sell, keep for sale, or give away any cigars, tobacco, cigarettes, or cigarette material to anyone without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided.

Every person, desiring a license under this Article shall file with the Clerk a written application stating the name of the person, partnership, or corporation for whom such license is desired, and the exact location of the place of business; and shall deposit with such application the sum of fifteen ($15.00) dollars; provided, any person selling cigarettes or tobacco in any form at wholesale shall pay a license fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars. The term for which said license shall run shall be for one (1) year; provided, however, if application for license is made after July 1 of any calendar year, the fee shall be one half (1/2) of the fee provided in this Section.

All moneys collected as license fees under the provisions of this Article shall be paid over by the Clerk to the Treasurer of the School District lying wholly or partially within the corporate limits.

(Ref. 28-1422 thru 28-1425 RS Neb.)

10-702 Tobacco Sales; Term Of License
The license herein provided, shall authorize the sale of cigars, tobacco, cigarettes, and cigarette material by the licensee and employees to persons over the age of eighteen (18) at that place of business described in said license from the date of filing such application and paying such license fee to and including December thirty-first (31st) of the calendar year in which application for such license is made unless the same be forfeited as hereinafter provided.

(Ref. 28-1423, 28-1426 RS Neb.)

10-703 Tobacco Sales; Forfeiture Of License
Any licensee who shall sell, give, or furnish in any way, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, or who shall willingly allow to be taken from his place of business by anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years, any cigars, tobacco, cigarettes, or cigarette material, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and in addition thereto his license shall be forfeited and revoked, and all rights under said license shall at once cease and terminate.

(Ref. 28-1425 RS Neb.)

10-704 Tobacco Sales; Transfer Of License
In case of the sale of the business where the owner has a license hereunder, the Clerk may authorize such license to be transferred to the purchaser. In case of the change of the location by a licensee hereunder, the Clerk may transfer such license to the new location.

(Ref. 28-1428 RS Neb.)

10-705 Tobacco Sales; New License Upon Revocation
In the event that the license of any licensee shall be revoked and forfeited, as herein provided for, no new license shall be issued to the licensee until the expiration of one (1) year from the date of such revocation and forfeiture.

(Ref. 28-1429 RS Neb.)

Article 8 Gas And Electric Distribution Companies
10-801 Gas Distribution Companies; Regulation
10-802 Gas Distribution Companies; Tax
10-803 Adoption Of Natural Gas Regulation Act
10-804 Other Rate Changes
10-805 Electric Distribution Companies; Tax

10-801 Gas Distribution Companies; Regulation
This Article shall apply to any person, firm or corporation supplying natural gas service to the City of Crete, Nebraska and the inhabitants thereof. Any such person, firm or corporation shall be hereinafter referred to as the Gas Distribution Company, or Company.

The Gas Distribution Company shall provide two (2) classes of service to its customers as hereinafter specified and defined:

FIRM GAS SERVICE: Firm gas service is defined as gas service that is supplied on a non-interruptible basis. Firm gas service shall be made available to all customers whose maximum space heating requirements are less than one thousand (1,000) cubic feet per hour.
INTERRUPTIBLE GAS SERVICE; Interruptible gas service is defined as gas service that is supplied on an interruptible basis. It shall be subject to curtailment or interruption on demand of the Gas Distribution Company whenever necessary to protect the service of its firm gas customers.

The Gas Distribution Company shall not charge more for such gas service than the applicable gas rates that are set by ordinance and on file with the Municipal Clerk. Such Gas Distribution Company may, however, enter into written contracts with any customer or class of customer making application therefor without discrimination for special gas service for commercial and industrial uses at such rates and on such conditions as the contracting parties may agree.
10-802 Gas Distribution Companies; Tax
There is hereby assessed an occupation tax against all persons distributing natural gas for sale in an amount equal to five (5%) per cent on the gross receipts derived from the business of distributing and selling natural gas within the City, exclusive of such sales to governmental agencies, departments or other bodies whether they be Federal, State, or local. Payment shall be made to the Clerk semiannually on or before May 31 of each year for the preceding six (6) month period ending April 30th, and on or before November 30th of each year for the preceding six (6) month period ending October 31. If the tax is not paid when due, nine (9%) per cent per annum on the amount in default shall be added to the tax. Any person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall file with the clerk a verified statement covering such tax period. The statement shall show the gross receipts derived from the distribution and sale of natural gas within the City, exclusive of such governmental agencies, departments or other bodies. The duly authorized representatives of the City, may, upon request and during business hours, inspect the books and records of any person subject to the tax imposed by this Article for the purpose of verifying such statement or statements files with the Clerk.

(Ord. 1577; 06/17/03, Ord 1650; 05/16/06)

10-803 Adoption Of Natural Gas Regulation Act
The provisions of Article 46, Chapter 19 of the Municipal Natural Gas Regulation Act as set forth in the Revised Statutes of Nebraska 1943, 1987 Supplement thereto and any amendments made thereto, except as otherwise provided for in this ordinance are hereby adopted by this reference thereto and made a part of this ordinance as fully as if set forth at length herein, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance.

10-804 Other Rate Changes
In the event the FRANCHISEE desires to change its rates for natural gas service within the City other then to reflect an adjustment for the cost of purchased gas, the FRANCHISEE will present to the City copies of present and proposed rate schedules and information supporting the proposed rates to be charged for natural gas service within the City. The rate schedule and information submitted with the rate schedules shall be referred to as the Rate Filing. Any such Rate Filing shall be deemed filed upon receipt of the same and the filing fee by the City Clerk. A filing fee in the amount of one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars shall be paid to the CITY with the Rate Filing. Such fee shall be considered as an operating cost of the FRANCHISEE and shall not be separately itemized on any customer bill.

The Governing Body of the City shall have the right to select and engage rate consultants, accountants, auditors, attorneys, engineers and other experts as deemed necessary or desirable to advise and represent the Governing Body in evaluating any proposed rate change. FRANCHISEE shall reimburse the City within ninety (90) days of the presentation of a bill by the city for the reasonable costs of those services only to the extent that said costs exceed the filing fee for the Rate Filing.

If the proposed rates sought by the FRANCHISEE in its Rate Filing have not been passed on final reading by the City Council within ninety (90) days after it was filed, or as such time may be extended by agreement between FRANCHISEE and CITY in order to supply additional information if requested by the CITY, the proposed rates shall be put into effect as interim rates and shall be collected subject to refund pursuant to Section 18-415 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, 1943, as the same may be amended from time to time. Such Interim rates shall remain in effect pending final determination by the CITY, which determination shall be made within one (1) year, or in the event of litigation, final rate determination by the courts.

The rates proposed to be charged for non-contract firm natural gas service within the CITY shall be based upon the utility's cost of providing service to the CITY or the representative costs in that part of utility's service area which includes the CITY. The period for which the cost of service is to be recognized is to be projected twelve (12) month period commencing not later than the proposed effective date of the increase. The cost of service shall be determined in a manner consistent with regulated public utility practices and shall include (1) appropriate costs as defined and set forth in the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Uniform System of Accounts Prescribed for Natural Gas Companies FERC Accounts, and (2) a reasonable return on the utility's rate base.

In determining a reasonable return, a rate (percentage) shall be employed that is representative of the cost of debt, preferred stock, and common equity capital. The rate base shall consist of the applicable net investment in utility plant (as defined in the FERC Accounts), allowance for working capital, and such other items as may reasonably be included; less such investment as may, unless otherwise prevented by law, be attributed to other than investor capital.

The FRANCHISEE'S appropriate costs and items of rate base shall include allocated or apportioned expenses and rate base items, when such allocations or apportionments are reasonably representative of assigned common costs and arise from the manner in which the FRANCHISEE's operations are conducted or from an avoidance of excessive and costly financial record keeping.

Rate Filings, not including changes reflecting the cost of gas, shall be limited to a maximum of one (1) in any twelve (12) calendar month period.

10-805 Electric Distribution Companies; Tax
There is hereby assessed an occupation tax against all persons distributing electricity for sale in an amount equal to three (3%) per cent of the gross receipts derived from the business of distributing and selling electricity within the city, exclusive of such sales to governmental agencies, departments or other bodies whether they be Federal, State, or local. Payment shall be made to the Clerk semiannually on or before May 31 of each year for the preceding six (6) month period ending April 30, and on or before November 30th of each year for the preceding six (6) month period ending October 31. If the tax is not paid when due, nine (9%) percent per annum on the amount in default shall be added to the tax. Any person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall file with the clerk a verified statement covering such tax period. The statement shall show the gross receipts derived from the distribution and sales of electricity within the City, exclusive of such governmental agencies, departments or other bodies. The duly authorized representative of the City, may, upon request and during business hours, inspect the books and records of any person subject to the tax imposed by this Article for the purpose of verifying such statement or statements filed with the Clerk. Nothing herein shall prohibit said payments being made on a quarterly or monthly basis by agreement of the parties or from the payment being based on the previous fiscal year.

(Ord. 1578; 06/17/03)

Article 9 Occupation Taxes
10-901 Occupation Tax; Power To Levy; In Addition To; Cumulative
10-902 Occupation Tax; General Collection Date; Records
10-903 Occupation Tax; Certificates
10-904 Occupation Tax; Failure To Pay
10-905 Occupation Tax; Verification Statement
10-906 Occupation Tax; Inspections
10-907 Occupation Tax; Alcohol And Liquor
10-908 Occupation Tax; Fireworks
10-909 Occupation Tax; Hotels And Lodging
10-910 Occupation Tax; Telephone And Telecommunications

10-901 Occupation Tax; Power To Levy; In Addition To; Cumulative
An excise, license, privilege, or occupation tax may be levied on and collected from any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, association, or other business entity that resides, operates, or conducts business within the corporate limits of the City.
The levy of any tax imposed by this article is in addition to all other fees, taxes, excises, and licenses levied and imposed under any federal, state, or local law or under any contract or other legal instrument. Payment of any tax imposed by this article shall not relieve the person or entity paying the same from payment of any other fee or tax now or hereafter imposed by federal, state, or local law or by any contract or other legal instrument.
All excise, license, privilege, or occupation taxes imposed by this article shall be cumulative except where otherwise specifically provided.
(Ord. 1961 (2015), Ord. 2094 (2019))

10-902 Occupation Tax; General Collection Date; Records
Except as otherwise specifically provided, all occupation taxes imposed by this article shall be due and payable on the last day of September of each year. Upon collection, the tax revenue shall immediately be deposited into the general fund by the Finance Department.
The Finance Department shall keep an accurate account of all tax revenue received and, if the annual revenue raised by an occupation tax is more than seven hundred thousand dollars, shall produce an annual report on the collection and use of such occupation taxes that shall include, but not be limited to:
A list of all such occupation taxes collected by the City;
The amount generated annually by each such occupation tax;
Which funds the revenue generated by each such occupation tax are deposited into;
Whether any such occupation tax is dedicated for a specific purpose, and if so, the amount dedicated for such purpose; and,
The scheduled or projected termination date, if any, of each such occupation tax.
(Ord. 2094 (2019))

10-903 Occupation Tax; Certificates
The receipt issued after the payment of any occupation tax shall be the Occupation Tax Certificate. The said certificate shall specify the amount of the tax and the name of the person, and business that paid the said tax. The Occupation Tax Certificate shall then be displayed in a prominent place, or carried in such a way as to be easily accessible, while business is being conducted.

10-904 Occupation Tax; Failure To Pay
If any person or entity fails or neglects to pay an occupation tax as provided in this article on the day it becomes due and payable, the City Attorney shall be authorized to initiate any legal action to collect the amount due. All delinquent taxes shall bear simple interest at the rate of fourteen percent (14%) per annum until paid.

(Ord. 2094 (2019))

10-905 Occupation Tax; Verification Statement
Where the occupation tax imposed is based upon gross receipts, the person or entity subject to the tax imposed shall file with the Finance Department, on or before the date said tax is due and payable, a verification statement covering each tax period. Said statement shall show the gross receipts derived from the business for which said tax is levied as set forth in this article.

(Ord. 2094 (2019))

10-906 Occupation Tax; Inspections
Duly authorized representatives of the City may upon request and during business hours inspect the books and records of any company whose occupation tax is based upon gross receipts for the purpose of verifying such statement or statements filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer.

10-907 Occupation Tax; Alcohol And Liquor
Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, association, or other business entity that obtains or renews a license issued by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission shall pay an occupation tax in the amount of two times the amount of the license fee required to be paid under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act to obtain or renew such license, except as otherwise provided for by law.
The tax levied and imposed by this section shall be due and payable at the same time the fee to obtain or renew a license is due and payable.
(Ord. 2094 (2019))

10-908 Occupation Tax; Fireworks
Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, association, or other business entity that sells fireworks at retail shall pay an occupation tax in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
The tax levied and imposed by this section shall be due and payable at the same time the fee to obtain a license is due and payable.
(Ord. 2094 (2019))

10-909 Occupation Tax; Hotels And Lodging
Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, association, or other business entity engaged in the business of operating a hotel within the City for any period of time during a calendar month shall pay an occupation tax in the amount of five percent (5%) of all gross receipts for each calendar month derived from the rental of rooms and any supplementary services provided by a hotel in the City.
Hotel means any commercial, nonprofit, or state-owned facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in any space ordinarily used for such accommodations. The term shall include, but not be limited to: hotels, motels, inns, tourist hotels, bed and breakfast establishments, lodging houses, and boarding houses. The term shall not include: hospitals, nursing homes, chronic care centers, or dormitories or facilities operated by an educational institution and regularly used to house students.
Gross receipts means the total amount of consideration, donation, contributions, or monetary charges of any nature received for providing goods or services.
Room means any space ordinarily used for sleeping accommodations for which any occupant has, for consideration, obtained the use or possession, or the right to use or possess, for any period of time.
Supplementary services means any additional services, including, but not limited to, food and beverage services, provided by a hotel to customers.
The tax imposed by this section may be collected by the hotel operator from customers; however, the operator shall, at all times, remain liable for payment of all taxes imposed whether or not the taxes are actually collected from customers. If collected from customers, the tax may be shown as a separate itemized add-on to a customer’s bill, receipt, or other invoice and shall be collectible at the time the services are furnished, regardless of when the charges are paid.
The tax imposed by this section shall be due and payable on the first day of each calendar month next succeeding the month during which the rooms and services were provided. All taxes not paid by the fifteenth (15th) day of the month in which they are due and payable shall be deemed to be delinquent.
(Ord. 2094 (2019))

10-910 Occupation Tax; Telephone And Telecommunications
Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, association, or other business entity that provides telephone, telecommunications, wireless, and/or advanced telecommunications capability services shall pay an occupation tax in the amount of five percent (5%) of all gross receipts derived from business to, from, and within the City, except as otherwise provided for by law.
Advanced telecommunications capability service means high-speed, broadband telecommunications capability that enables users to originate and receive high-quality voice, data, graphics, and video communications using any technology.
Telecommunications service means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing without a change in the form or content of the information as sent or received.
Wireless service means any mobile service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153 and 47 C.F.R. 27.4, any commercial mobile service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 332, or any commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. 20.
The tax imposed by this section shall be due and payable semiannually, on or before March 31 of each year for the preceding six (6) month period and on or before September 30 of each year for the preceding six (6) month period.
(Ord. 2094 (2019))

Article 10 Amusement Devices
10-1001 Amusement Devices; Definitions
10-1002 Amusement Devices; License Required
10-1003 Amusement Devices; License Fee
10-1004 Amusement Devices; Application For License-Nontransferable
10-1005 Amusement Devices; Increasing Number Of Devices
10-1006 Amusement Devices; Evidence Of Ownership To Be Filed With Clerk

10-1001 Amusement Devices; Definitions
The term "coin operated amusement device" as used herein means any amusement machine or device operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token, or similar object, for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. The term does not include vending machines in which are not incorporated gaming or amusement features, nor does the term include any coin-operated mechanical musical devices.

Operator: The term "operator" as used herein is hereby defined to be any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who sets up for operation by another, any device as herein defined, whether such setting up for operation, leasing or distributing be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such device, or otherwise.

Proprietor: A "proprietor" is hereby defined to be any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club who, as the owner, lessee, or proprietor has under his or its control any establishment, place or premises in or at which such device is placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play.

10-1002 Amusement Devices; License Required
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an operator or proprietor of coin-operated amusement devices as the terms are herein defined, without first having obtained the proper license therefore.

10-1003 Amusement Devices; License Fee
The license fee of each operator and proprietor as hereto defined shall be ten ($10.00) dollars per year for each coin-operated amusement device set up for operation, used, played or exhibited for use or play. All license fees shall be payable annually in advance. In no case shall any portion of said license fee be refunded to the licensee.

10-1004 Amusement Devices; Application For License-Nontransferable
Application for license hereunder shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk, on a form to be provided by the City, and shall specify:

The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses;
The address of the premises where the licensed device or devices are to be operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such place;
The trade name and general description of the device or devices to be licensed, the name of the manufacturer and the serial number and if the applicant is a proprietor, the number of devices to be licensed;
The name and address of the operator of the device or devices, if other than the proprietor.
The proper license fee shall accompany such application. Application for license hereunder shall be first referred by the City Clerk to the Mayor and Council who shall make or cause to be made such investigation as they deem necessary. If the application is approved by the Mayor and Council, the license shall be issued by the Clerk, and the Clerk shall remit the fee to the City Treasurer. If the license is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. All licenses under this Article shall expire on July 1 following their issuance. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee. Such license shall be non-assignable and non-transferable, and in the case of a proprietor shall apply only to the premises for which such license is if issued.

10-1005 Amusement Devices; Increasing Number Of Devices
In case a proprietor licensed under the provisions of this Article desires, after the expiration of any portion of any license year, to increase the number of devices to be used or played, or exhibited for use or play in his establishment, he shall surrender his license to the City Clerk who shall issue a new license showing the number of devices licensed thereunder, upon payment of the proper license fee therefor.

10-1006 Amusement Devices; Evidence Of Ownership To Be Filed With Clerk
Any proprietor who owns such device or devices at the time this Article becomes effective shall file with the City Clerk evidence of such ownership prior to the issuance of a license; and any proprietor purchasing a device or devices after the effective date of this Article shall file with the City Clerk evidence of ownership thereof before exhibiting or placing said device or devices for use or play.

Article 11 Hobbyist Permit
10-1101 Hobbyist Permit

10-1101 Hobbyist Permit
The Crete Police Department may issue a hobbyist permit to any owner, agent, occupant, tenant, or person in possession of, charge or control of any real property for the restoration or repair of no more than two non-operating, partially dismantled, and unregistered vehicles for a period of no more than 180 days.

Application. The applicant shall file an application for a hobbyist permit with the Crete Police Department on a form provided by the City. The application shall contain the name and address of the applicant and the make, model, year, location, and vehicle identification number of each vehicle to be restored or repaired.
Ownership. The applicant shall own vehicle(s) to be restored or repaired and shall provide proof of ownership to the Crete Police Department at time of application.
Fee. The applicant shall pay a fee of $100 per vehicle at time of application.
Expiration. All hobbyist permits shall expire on the 180th day following the issuance thereof.
Renewal. If the applicant demonstrates just progress toward the restoration or repair of said vehicle(s), prior to the expiration of the hobbyist permit, to the Crete Police Department, the Department may renew the hobbyist permit, but only one time, for an additional 90 days. The applicant shall pay a fee of $100 per vehicle at time of renewal.
Limit. No individual may hold hobbyist permits) for more than two (2) vehicles and no property may contain more than two (2) vehicle(s) to be restored or repaired at any given time.
Nuisance. Said vehicle(s) found on any property after the expiration of the hobbyist permit shall be declared a nuisance.
(Ord. No. 1355, 10/1/96; Ord. No. 1626, 01/18/05)

Article 12 [Repealed]
10-1201 [Repealed]

10-1201 [Repealed]
(Article 12 was repealed by Ordinance No. 1619, 09/021/04)

Article 13 Lottery
10-1302 Lottery; Sales Outlet Locations; Approval Required; Qualification Standards

10-1302 Lottery; Sales Outlet Locations; Approval Required; Qualification Standards
The lottery operator whom the Governing Body contracts to conduct its lottery shall not operate the lottery at a sales outlet location other than the location of the lottery operator without prior approval of the sales outlet location by the Governing Body. The Governing Body shall approve or disapprove each sales outlet location and individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, or corporation which desires to conduct the lottery at its sales outlet location solely on the basis of the qualification standards prescribed in subsection
Any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, or corporation which seeks to have its location approved as an authorized sales outlet location shall:
first obtain a retail liquor license for consumption on the premises pursuant to Chapter 53, article 1, RS Neb.;
not have been convicted of, forfeited bond upon a charge of, or pleaded guilty to forgery, larceny, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, willful failure to make required payments or reports to a governmental agency at any level, filing false reports with any such agency, or any similar offense of offenses or any crime, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving gambling activity or moral turpitude;
not have had a gaming license revoked or cancelled under the Nebraska Bingo Act, the Nebraska Pickle Card Lottery Act, the Nebraska Lottery and Raffle Act, of the Nebraska county and City Lottery Act;
be fit, willing, and able to properly provide the service proposed in conformance with all provisions and requirements of the Nebraska County and City Lottery Act and the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to the act;
be licensed to sell liquor on the premises, and on-premises liquor sales shall actually be provided during a majority of the time keno play is offered;
have sufficient capacity to accommodate persons who may wish to come to the location to observe or play keno, or to engage in all activities conducted on the premises;
have sufficient facilities to permit the sales of keno tickets;
provide proper security for the keno lottery operations and associated activities;
have no tax delinquencies, tax liens, or other tax compliance deficiencies, whether federal, state or local, against the business property or the business, furthermore, the proposed owner, lessee, or manager of the satellite location must not have been convicted of, forfeited bond upon a charge of, or a charge of, or pleaded guilty to or nolo contenders to, forgery, theft, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, willful failure to make required payments or reports to a governmental agency at any level, filing false reports with any such agency, or any similar offense or offenses or any crime, whether a felony or misdemeanor, involving any gambling activity or moral turpitude under any state or federal law.
If the person seeking to have its location approved as an authorized sales outlet location is a partnership or corporation, the qualification standards shall apply to every partner of such partnership, every officer of such corporation, and stockholder owning more than ten (10) percent of the stock of such corporation.
The Governing Body shall notify the Department of Revenue of all approved lottery locations within thirty (30) days of approval.
(Ref. 9-642.01) (Ord. No. 1404; 05/05/98)

Article 14 Penalty Provision
10-1401 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision

10-1401 Violation Of Code; Penalty Provision
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provision of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a violation of a Municipal Ordinance. Unless otherwise specified in the particular Article or Section for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such violation shall be in any amount not to exceed $500.00 for any one (1) offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said payment, the offender shall stand committed to the County jail until such fine and costs be paid.

(Ref. 16-246 RS Neb.)

Chapter 11 Municipal Planning
Article 1 Comprehensive Plan
Article 2 Zoning Regulations
Article 3 Subdivision Regulations
Article 4 Flood Plain Districts
Article 5 Supplementary District Regulations
Article 6 Airport Hazard Area
Article 7 Penal Provision
Article 8 Sign Regulations

Article 1 Comprehensive Plan
11-101 Comprehensive Plan; Adopted

11-101 Comprehensive Plan; Adopted
In order to accommodate anticipated long-range future growth, the Comprehensive Development Plan for the City of Crete, Nebraska, as prepared by the Crete Planning Commission with the assistance of Hanna:Keelan Associates of Lincoln, Nebraska, is adopted by ordinance. A copy of the adopted Plan shall be kept on file with the Municipal Clerk and available for inspection by any member of the public during office hours.


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1925 (2015)



Article 2 Zoning Regulations
11-201 Establishment Of Zoning Districts
11-202 Official Zoning Map
11-203 Rules For Interpretation Of District Boundaries
11-204 Application Of District Regulations
11-205 Nonconforming Uses; Intent
11-206 Schedule Of Fees, Charges And Expenses
11-207 Amendments
11-208 Provisions Declared Minimum Requirements
11-209 Complaints Regarding Violations
11-210 Penalties For Violation
11-211 Definitions
11-212 A-1 Agricultural Districts
11-213 R-1 Low Density Residential Districts
11-214 R-2 Two-Family Residential Districts
11-215 R-3 Multi-Family Residential Districts
11-216 R-4 Mixed Residential Districts
11-217 C-1 Central Commercial District
11-218 C-2 General Commercial Districts
11-219 C-3 Highway Commercial Districts
11-220 I-1 Light Industrial Districts
11-221 I-2 Heavy Industrial Districts
11-222 P Public District
11-223 PO Parking Overlay District
11-224 WPO Wellhead Protection Overlay District
11-225 [Reserved]
11-226 Administration And Enforcement
11-227 [Repealed]
11-228 Certificates Of Zoning Compliance
11-229 Construction And Use As Per Applications, Plans, Permits And Certificates
11-230 Special Exceptions
11-231 Separability Clause

11-201 Establishment Of Zoning Districts
District regulations shall be as set forth in the schedule of district regulations, hereby of this article, as set out in sections 11-212 through 11-230.

For the purposes hereof, the following zoning districts and zoning map designations are established:

A-1      Agricultural
R-1      Low Density Residential
R-2     Two-Family Residential
R-3     Multiple-Family Residential
R-4     Mixed Residential
C-1      Central Commercial
C-2     General Commercial
C-3     Highway Commercial
I-1       Light Industrial
I-2      Heavy Industrial
P         Public
PO      Parking Overlay
WPO  Wellhead Protection Overlay
SF-1    Selected Floodway Overlay District
F-1      Floodway Overlay District


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1926 (2015)



11-202 Official Zoning Map
The City and certain properties within two miles in all directions of its corporate limits is hereby divided into zones or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which together with all explanatory matters thereon, or as determined and described in the FIRM Flood Hazard Boundary Map on May 19, 2015, to date or passage of this ordinance, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter.



The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 1 of Ordinance No. 2036 of the City of Crete, Nebraska” together with the date of adoption of this Article. The Official Zoning Map, and all changes, amendments or additions thereto shall be located in the office of the City Clerk.


Source: Ord. 988 (1985); Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1438 (1998);  Ord. 1463 (1999); Ord. 1773 (2010); Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 2031 (2017); Ord. 2036 (2018)



11-203 Rules For Interpretation Of District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:

(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of roads, streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;

(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;

(3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits;

(4) Boundaries indicated as following standard survey subdivision lines such as one-quarter (1/4) or one-eighth (1/8) section lines shall be so construed;

(5) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks;

(6) Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines;

(7) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Subsections A through E above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the Map;

(8) Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered in Subsections A through E above, the City Council shall interpret the district boundaries;

(9) Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this Article, the City Council may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



11-204 Application Of District Regulations
The regulations set by this article within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter provided:

(1) No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located; provided, however, that outside of the corporate limits of the City and outside of the Commission floodway, the use of land for farming or agricultural purposes, except feed lots, is specifically exempt from the provisions of this article.

(2) No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:

(a) To exceed the height or bulk;

(b) To accommodate or house a greater number of families;

(c) To occupy a greater percentage of lot area;

(d) To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or 

(e) In any other manner be contrary to the provisions of this article.

(3) No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this article shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.

(4) No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this article shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this article shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this article.

(5) Districts or parts of districts which are also included within the boundary of a selected floodway district or a floodway district shall comply with all use regulations of the selected floodway district or floodway district, whichever may apply, and with the use regulations of the primary district to which it is attached, except in the case of conflicting regulations, in which case the more restrictive of the regulations shall apply.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



11-205 Nonconforming Uses; Intent
Nonconformities are of three types: nonconforming lots of record, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming uses. Any lawful use of land or structure existing at the time of enactment or subsequent amendment of this ordinance, but not in conformity with its provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions:

(1) Nonconforming Lots of Record. The Zoning Administrator may issue a permit for any nonconforming lot of record provided that:

(a) Said lot is shown by a recorded plat or deed to have been owned separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when the creation of a lot of such size and width at such location would not have been prohibited;

(b) Said lot has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining tracts of land continuously during the entire time that the creation of such lot has been prohibited by the zoning regulation; and

(c) Said lot can meet all required yard regulations for the district in which it is located.

(2) Nonconforming Structures. Any structure which is devoted to a use which is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, but which is located on a lot which does not comply with the use regulations or the applicable yard and height regulations may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful.

(a) Any nonconforming structure may be enlarged, maintained, repaired, remodeled, or rebuilt; provided, however, that no such enlargement, maintenance, repair, or remodeling shall not create any additional nonconformity or increase the degree of existing nonconformity of all or any part of such structure, unless the property owner receives a special use permit in accordance with the zoning district in which it is located.

(b) In the event any nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than fifty percent of its assessed fair market value, such structure shall not be restored unless it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. When a structure is damaged to the extent of fifty percent or less of its assessed fair market value, no repairs or restoration shall be made unless a building permit is obtained within six months and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.

(c) No nonconforming structure shall be moved in whole or in part for any distance whatever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being moved.

(3) Nonconforming Uses. Any lawfully existing nonconforming use of part or all of a structure or any lawfully existing nonconforming use of land, not involving a structure or only involving a structure which is accessory to such use or land, may be continued so long as otherwise lawful.

(a) Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement, installation, or relocation of nonbearing walls, nonbearing partitions, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, water, or waste disposal systems may be performed on any structure or system that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use. Nothing in these regulations shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of a structure in accordance with an order of a public official in charge of protecting the public safety who declares such structure to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition.

(b) A nonconforming use shall not be extended, enlarged, or increased in intensity. Such prohibited activities shall include, without being limited to, the extension of such use to any structure or land area other than that occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of these regulations or on the effective date of subsequent amendments hereto that cause such use to become nonconforming.

(c) No structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged or added to in any manner unless such structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.

(d) In the event that a nonconforming building or use is damaged to the extent of more than fifty percent of its reasonable replacement value, the property shall conform to the zone in which it is located.

(e) No structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part for any distance whatsoever, to any location on the same or any other lot, unless the entire structure and the use thereof or the use of land shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved.

(f) If no external structural alterations are made which will expand the area or change the dimensions of the existing structure, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the governing body after receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission, by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. More appropriate shall mean creating less traffic, noise, glare, odor, or other characteristics of the proposed use. In permitting such change, the governing body may require appropriate conditions and safeguards to protect surrounding areas and properties. Once such use has changed, it may no longer be returned to the original use or any other less appropriate use.

(g) When a nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned for a period of twelve consecutive months, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished or resumed, and any subsequent use or occupancy of such land shall comply with the regulations of the zoning district in which such land is located.

(h) No use which is accessory to a principal nonconforming use shall continue after such principal use shall cease or terminate.


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1926 (2015)



11-206 Schedule Of Fees, Charges And Expenses
The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of zoning compliance, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this article. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Administrative Official and may be altered or amended only by the City Council. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



11-207 Amendments
(1) The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this article may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed; provided that, such modification or repeal shall in each instance be proposed in an ordinance presented to the Governing Body for adoption in the same manner and upon the same notice as required for the adoption of the original article.

(2) Prior to consideration of amending, supplementing, changing, modifying, or repealing this article by the Governing Body, notice of public hearing shall be provided as follows:

(a) A notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property upon which action is pending. Such notice shall be not less than eighteen inches in height and twenty-four inches in width with a white or yellow background and black letters not less than one and one-half inches in height. Such posted notice shall be so placed upon such premises that it is easily visible from the street and shall be so posted at least ten days before the date of such hearing. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, mutilate, destroy, or change such posted notice prior to such hearing.

(b) At least ten days before the date of hearing, the City Clerk shall have published in a weekly newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Crete, a notice of the time, place, and subject matter of such hearing.


Source: Ord. 1169 (1992)



11-208 Provisions Declared Minimum Requirements
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this article are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, resolution, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



11-209 Complaints Regarding Violations
Whenever a violation of this article occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint shall state fully the causes and basis thereof and shall be filed with the Administrative Official. He shall properly record such complaint, immediately investigate same, and take action thereon as provided by this article.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



11-210 Penalties For Violation
(1) Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.

(2) The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who knowingly commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.

(3) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.


Source: Ord. 1400 (1998)



11-211 Definitions
A-E
F-J
K-O
P-T
U-Z

For the purpose of this Chapter,  unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions apply:

A-E
ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING, OR STRUCTURE. A use, building, or structure on the same premises with a principal use, building, or structure. An accessory use is one that is incidental to the principal use of the premises. An accessory building or structure is a subordinate building or structure, or a portion of the principal building or structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building or structure or the principal use of the premises.

ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment that regularly features live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical area or by specified sexual activities, or films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions in which more than 10 percent of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material that is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area.

ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

ADULT ESTABLISHMENT. Any business which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas, "including, but without limitation, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, saunas, adult companionship establishments, adult health clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotel or motel, and adult body painting studios.

ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

ADULT INTERNET INDUSTRIES. Any business within an enclosed building or outdoors that is producing materials for distribution on the Internet of an adult nature, including live video streaming, tape delayed video broadcasts, live simulcasting, still photographs, audio broadcasts, animated video or hard copy. Said uses are intended for viewing by other parties while on-line and for a specified charge.

ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR; HEALTH CLUB. A massage parlor or health club, which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business premises within an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting visual-media material if such business as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if said material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motor picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS. A business premises within an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting visual media material if said business as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if said material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction of description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.

ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business which has a principal activity of the sale of devices which simulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.

ADULT SAUNA. A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

Specified anatomical area shall mean anatomical areas consisting of:
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the areola; and
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified sexual activities shall mean activities consisting of the following:
Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, or anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts of conduct: Anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or
Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or
Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or
Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast(s); or
Situation involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding, or other physical restraint or any such persons; or
Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or
Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
ALTERATION. Repair, reconstruction, renovation, addition, expansion, or enlargement of buildings or structures to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its current fair market value.

ARTIFICIAL OBSTRUCTION. Any obstruction which is not a natural obstruction.

BUILDABLE AREA. The buildable portion of the lot remaining after the yard setbacks have been determined on all sides of the lot.

BUILDING. An enclosed structure, or part of a structure, that (i) is anchored to a permanent foundation, (ii) has exterior or party walls and a roof, and (iii) is designed or intended for the enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or property. A structure may contain one or more buildings divided by party walls.

BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance to the highest point of the roof; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, measured from the average grade line of the building.



BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. Any building within which the main or primary use of the lot or premises is located.

BUILDING, TEMPORARY. Any portable or demountable building or any building not securely and permanently anchored or bounded to a substantial foundation and which is used primarily for temporary office or storage space or for emergency enclosure purposes.

BUFFER AREA. A landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another.



CHANNEL. The geographical area within the natural or artificial banks of the watercourse or drain way.

CHILD CARE CENTER. A facility which is or should be licensed by the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services under the authority of Sections 71-1908 through 71-1918, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, as provided and defined under the Title 474 of the Nebraska Administrative Code, Chapter 6, Section 002.

CHILD CARE HOME. A private home providing care for children for compensation. No person shall operate a child care home for four or more children without being licensed by the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services under the authority of Sections 71-1908 through 71-1918, Revised Statutes of Nebraska.

CIVIC USE. Of or related to municipal activities.

COMMISSION FLOODWAY. A floodway whose limits have been designated and established by order of the Nebraska Natural Resources Commission, and shall be contiguous with the floodway of a flood of one hundred (100) year frequency.

COMMUNITY UNIT PLAN. A flexible plan for the development of properties within a zoning district, as distinguished from subdivisions of standard lot sizes and standard street systems; provided, that the plan must meet the basic intent of the zoning district for which it is planned.

COMPOSTING FACILITY. A solid waste facility licensed by the State of Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality which utilizes a controlled biological process of degrading non-hazardous solid waste.

CONVENIENCE STORE. A retail store that carries a limited selection of basic items, as packaged foods and drugstore items, and is open long hours for the convenience of shoppers.

DRAINWAY. Any depression two feet or more below the surrounding land serving to give direction to a current of water less than nine months of the year, having a bed and well-defined banks; provided, that in the event of doubt as to whether a depression is a watercourse or drain way it shall be presumed to be a watercourse.

DWELLING. Any building or structure, or portion thereof, that is designed, intended, and used for residential purposes. Dwelling does not include accessory buildings or structures, whether attached or detached, or portions of principal buildings that are designed or intended for accessory uses, such as cellars, garages, and sheds.

DWELLING, FARM AND RANCH. Dwellings including mobile homes, appurtenant to agricultural operations, including living quarters for persons employed on the premises (but not including labor camps or dwellings for transient labor), guest houses not rented or otherwise conducted as a business, and private garages, stables, and barns.

DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A residential building designed, altered, or reconstructed to have three or more dwelling units, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.

DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A residential building, other than a mobile home, designed, altered, or reconstructed to have one dwelling unit and to have accommodations for and be occupied exclusively by one family.

DWELLING, TOWNHOME. One of a group or row of not less than two nor more than twelve attached, single-family dwellings designed and built as a single structure facing upon a street in which the individual townhouse may or may not be owned separately. For the purpose of the side yard regulations, the structure containing the row or group of townhouses shall be considered as one building occupying a single lot.

DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A residential building designed, altered, or reconstructed to have two dwelling units and to have  accommodations for and be occupied exclusively by two families.

DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms connected together that (i) constitute a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for one family, (ii) contain independent cooking and sleeping facilities, and (iii) are physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units that may be in the same building or structure. Dwelling units may be owner occupied or rented on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis.

F-J
FAMILY. One or more persons, related or unrelated, living together as a single family housekeeping unit with or without domestic servants, caregivers, foster children, and supervisory personnel in a group living arrangement. The term "family" shall not include occupancy of a residence by persons living in fraternities, sororities, and clubs. Also excluded are nursing and convalescent homes.

FARMSTEAD. An area of twenty acres or more on which is located at least one dwelling unit and on which farm products of a value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more are normally produced each year.

FLOODPLAIN. Floodplain shall mean those lands which are subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

FLOODWAY. The channel of a watercourse or drain way and those portions of the land areas normally expected to be inundated by the discharge of flood waters from that watercourse or drain way.



FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES. The lines limiting a Commission floodway.

GAS STATION. A retail establishment at which motor vehicles are refueled.

HOME OCCUPATION. A business, occupation, profession, or income-generating activity carried on within a dwelling unit by a resident thereof that is incidental and secondary to the residential occupancy and does not change the residential character thereof. The regulations pertaining to home occupations are included in section 11-512.

K-O
LANDFILL. A disposal site employing an engineering method of disposing solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume, and applying cover material over all exposed waste at the end of each operating day and in conformance with the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Service System.

LIVESTOCK CONFINEMENT FACILITY OR OPERATION. The confined feeding of food, fur or pleasure animals in buildings, lots, pens, pools or ponds which normally are not used for raising crops or for grazing animals, which are designed and/or used for on-going confined raising, feeding or management of animals for more than one hundred eighty consecutive days.

LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, sealed to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space.

LOCATE. To construct, place, insert, or excavate.

LOT. Any parcel, lot, tract, or portions of lots of record which is or may be occupied by a use herein permitted, together with yards and other open spaces herein required, that has frontage upon a street and is a part of a recorded subdivision plat or has been recorded prior to the adoption of the ordinance or a parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey, lot split, or sub-parceling map as filed in the office of the County Recorder and having frontage along at least one public street or right-of-way, permanent ingress/egress easement meeting city standards, or on a private road.

LOT AREA. The total area, on a horizontal plane, within the lot lines of a lot, but not including any area occupied by the waters of a lake or river.

LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the angle is greater than 135 degrees, the lot shall be considered an "Interior Lot". The front of such lot shall be the shortest of the two sides fronting on streets. The other yard shall be referred to as the street side yard. The street side yard setback may conform to existing setbacks of existing principal structures along that street, however in new developments (approved since 1998), the street side yard setback shall be equal to the front yard setback.

LOT, COVERAGE. The portion of a lot or building site which is occupied by any building or structure, excepting paved areas, walks and swimming pools, regardless of whether said building or structure is intended for human occupancy or not.

LOT, CURVED. A lot fronting on the outside curve of the right-of-way of a curved street, which street has centerline radius of 300 feet or less.



LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured within the lot boundaries.

LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot. On a double frontage lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.

LOT, FLAG. A lot with frontage and access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor.

LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest to and facing the street. In all zoning areas, for the purpose of determining yard requirements on a corner lot, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and must meet the minimum front yard requirements. Except in R-2 through R-5 developed before 1994, one front yard other than the apparent front yard may be reduced in depth to conform with other "existing residences" located on that side of the block, provided that the yard frontage shall not be less than ten feet. Front yards in R-2 and R-3 zoning areas developed before 1994 which have existing residential structure located with less than twenty-five foot front yard minimum may be reduced to a distance of not less than twenty feet.

LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.

LOT LINE. The property line bounding a lot.

LOT LINE, FRONT. The property line abutting a street, and where no public street exists, it shall be where line abuts to a public or private way as designated.

LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line not abutting a street which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.

LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line.

LOT MEASUREMENT. Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard, provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than eighty (80%) percent of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sacs, where the eighty (80%) percent requirement shall not apply.

LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two dedicated streets, not including a corner lot.

LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Clerk, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.

LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the front yard setback line.

LOT, ZONING. A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on the approved private street, and may consist of: a single lot of record; a portion of a lot of record; a combination of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of record; or, a parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance.



MIXED USE BUILDING. A building or structure designed, altered, or reconstructed to have two or more major uses. All uses must be principal permitted or special exception uses for the district in which it is located, and each floor of the building or structure must be used solely for a single use.

MANUFACTURED HOME DWELLING. A factory built structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation, which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a permanent site: does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles: bears a label certifying that it was built in compliance with the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 C.F.R. 3280 et seq., promulgated by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development; and which complies with the following architectural and aesthetic standards:

The home shall have at least 900 square feet of floor area;
The home shall have an exterior width of at least 18 feet;
The roof shall be pitched with a maximum vertical rise of 2.5 inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run;
The exterior material is of a color, material, and scale comparable with those existing in the residential site on which the manufactured home dwelling is being permanently installed;
The home shall have a no-reflective roof material which is or simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile, or rock;
Permanent utility connections shall be installed in accordance with local regulations;
The home shall have all wheels, axles, transporting lights, and towing apparatus removed; and
The home shall be installed upon a permanent foundation that is constructed and built in accordance with local regulations.
MOBILE HOME. A building type designed to be transportable in one or more sections, constructed on a permanent chassis or undercarriage, and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or other use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, but not bearing a seal attesting to the approval and issuance of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services System or conformance to the manufactured home procedural and enforcement regulations, as adopted by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development; or not otherwise satisfying the definition of Manufactured Home Dwellings.

MOBILE HOME PARK. Any area of land which two or more mobile homes are parked, connected to utilities and used by one or more persons for living or sleeping purposes and is licensed accordingly by the state as described in these regulations. A mobile home parked in this area can either be placed on permanent foundation or supported only by its wheels, jacks, blocks, or skirting’s or a combination of these devices. A mobile home park includes any premises set apart for supplying to the public parking space, either free of charge or for revenue purposes for one or more mobile homes, connected to utilities and used by one or more persons living, or sleeping purposes and shall include only those dwelling units that are in compliance with standards as defined herein.

MODULAR HOME. Any dwelling whose construction consists entirely of or the major portions of its construction consist of a unit or units not fabricated on the final site for the dwelling units, which units are movable or portable until placed on a permanent foundation and connected to utilities. All modular homes shall bear a label or seal indicating that it was built in accordance with the Nebraska Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units Act, as established in Section 71-1557 of the Nebraska revised Statutes.

NATURAL OBSTRUCTION. Any rock, tree, gravel or analogous natural material that is an obstruction and has been located within the floodway by a non-human cause.

NET METERING. A utility policy for consumers in which a property owner utilizes one or a combination of alternative energy sources including Wind, Solar, Geothermal, Biomass, or Methane, to generate a portion or all of their electrical energy needs for their home or business. If the property owner is able to generate more power than needed for the home or business, the local utility company is required by Nebraska Law to purchase the “extra” or excess electrical power from the property owner.

NON-FARM BUILDING. All buildings except those utilized for agricultural purposes on a farmstead of twenty acres or more which produces one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more of farm products each year.

OBSTRUCTION. Any structure, dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levy, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, or other analogous structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any floodway which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the natural flow of the water would carry the same downstream to the damage or detriment of either life or property.

ONE HUNDRED YEAR FREQUENCY FLOOD. A flood magnitude expected to recur on the average of once every one hundred years or a flood magnitude which has a one (1%) percent chance of occurring in any given year.

OUTDOOR ADVERTISING BUSINESS. The provision of outdoor displays or display space on a lease or rental basis and in conformity with the outdoor advertising standards as set forth in this article.

OUTDOOR STORAGE CONTAINER. A fully enclosed, detached, and self-supporting structure, by itself incapable of motion or movement. The container must be manufactured/assembled off-site and transportable, by means other than its own, to a location where it is set into place on a graded surface of concrete, asphalt, or gravel and not upon a foundation or wheels. It shall be made of metal or a similar stable, durable, and acceptable material and shall not include a foundation, electricity, plumbing, or other mechanical systems as part of its assembly or use. Truck boxes meeting this definition shall be considered outdoor storage containers.

P-T
PERSON. An individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, or any other legal entity.

PREMISES. An area of land consisting of one platted lot or irregular tract or more than one platted lot or irregular tract if such lots or tracts are under common ownership and contiguous.

RECYCLING CENTER. A facility which accepts salvage material limited to paper, aluminum foil, containers made of glass, plastic, metal, aluminum, and paper; and similar household wastes; no hazardous material as defined by state and federal law is accepted; there is no wrecking or dismantling of salvage material and no salvage material is held outside a building.

SALVAGE OR JUNK YARD. A place where waste, discarded or salvaged metals, building materials, paper, textiles, used plumbing fixtures, abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles or parts thereof, and other used materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled or cleaned; and places or yards for the storage of salvaged metal, materials and equipment; but not including pawn shops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars or trucks presently in operable condition, boats or trailers presently in operable condition, and used furniture and household equipment in usable condition and not including the processing of used, discarded or salvaged material as part of manufacturing operations.

SANITARY LANDFILL. A lot or parcel of land used primarily for the disposal, abandonment, dumping, burial or burning of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery or motor vehicles, or parts thereof, or other waste, and which is in conformance with the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Service System.

SERVICE STATION. A retail establishment at which motor vehicles are refueled and repairs made.

SIGHT TRIANGLE. No fence, wall, hedge, shrub, structure or other Obstruction to view shall be erected, placed or maintained within a triangle formed by the property line immediately adjacent to a street, road, railroad right-of-way, or nonresidential drives as illustrated in the figure below.

Street/Road	Required Distance from
Alley	20'
Non-residential	25'
Local	25'
Collector	40'
Arterial 	55'


SIGN. Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is located, provided, however, that the following shall not be included in the application of the regulations herein:

Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property numbers, post box number, names of occupants or premises, or other identification of premises not having commercial connotations;
Flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion;
Legal notices, identification, informational, or directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies;
Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts, or moving lights;
Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property but bearing no advertising matter.
SIGN, ON-SITE. A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located or to products, accommodations, services, or activities on the premises, and conforming to the on-site sign standards contained in this article. On-site signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor advertising business.

SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE. A special exception is a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning division or district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare.

STREET LINE. The right-of-way line of a street.

STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, billboards and poster panels.

TRAVEL TRAILER. A portable structure or vehicle, having a body which is less than eight feet wide and forty feet long, which is supported upon its own chassis and wheels and is so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance, either propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, for purposes of occupancy as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for recreational, vacation or travel purposes.

U-Z
VARIANCE. Relief from or variation of the provisions of certain zoning regulations, not including use regulations and distinct from rezoning, as applied to a specific piece of property as further set out in section 2-401.

WATERCOURSE. Any depression two feet or more below the surrounding land serving to give direction to a current of water at least nine months of the year, having a bed and well-defined banks; provided, that it shall, upon order of the Nebraska Natural Resources Commission, also include any particular depression which would not otherwise be within the definition of a watercourse.

WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, COMMERCIAL. A wind energy conversion system under common or aggregated ownership or operating control that includes substations, MET towers, cables/wires and other building accessories, whose main purpose is to supply electricity to off-site customers.

WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, SMALL. A wind energy conversion system which has a rated capacity of up to twenty-five  kilowatts and which is incidental and subordinated to another use of the same parcel. A system is considered a small wind energy system only if it supplies electrical power for site use, except that when a parcel on which the system is installed also received electrical power supplied by a utility company, access electrical power generated and not presently needed for onsite use may be sold back to the utility company. (25 Kilowatt limit approved by the Crete Planning Commission and City Council may be increased to a maximum of 100 Kilowatts with Nebraska State Legislature authorization by future amendment)

YARD, FRONT. A yard across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the main building to the front line of the lot.

YARD, REAR. A yard across the full width of the lot between the back line of the main building and the back line of the lot.

YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the adjacent side line of the lot, and extending entirely from a front yard to the rear yard.



YARD SETBACK. An open space on the same lot with a building, buildings, structure or structures, lying between the front, side or rear wall of such building, buildings, or such structure or structures and the nearest lot line, unoccupied except for specific minor structures permitted to be located in this open space by this ordinance.

YARD SETBACK, FRONT. A yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the front lot line and the nearest point of the primary building. For purposes of determining yard requirements for corner and through lots, all sides of a lot abutting a street shall be considered a front yard and shall comply with the requirements thereof.

YARD SETBACK, REAR. A yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the primary building.

YARD SETBACK, SIDE. On single frontage lots, a yard extending along the side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard and lying between the side lot line and the nearest part of a primary building. On through lots, a yard extending along the side lot line from front yard to front yard and lying between the side lot lines and the nearest part of the primary building. On corner lots, a yard extending along the side lot line from the front yard to the opposite side lot line, lying between the side lot line and the nearest part of the primary building.

YARD SETBACK, TRANSITIONAL. A yard in effect where a nonresidential zoning district abuts or is adjacent across a street or alley from a residential zoning district.

ZONING MAP. The term zoning map means a map or maps officially enacted by the governing body as part of this ordinance showing the boundaries of a zoning district or districts, a copy or copies of which, certified to have been enacted as provided by law, is filed in the office of the City Clerk as an official record of the City.


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1262 (1995); Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 1965 (2016); Ord. 1974 (2016); Ord. 2021 (2017); Ord. 2118 (2020)



11-212 A-1 Agricultural Districts
(1) INTENT: The intent of this District is to recognize the gradual transition of agricultural uses of land to community land; to encourage the continued use of that land which is suitable for agriculture, but to limit any land uses that may be a detriment to normal community expansion.

(2) PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES: The following shall be permitted as uses by right:

(a) Agricultural uses, excluding expansion of existing or development of new livestock confinement/facilities or operations. Animals confined for purposes including personal consumption and for 4H competitions, shall be exempt from this requirement and can confine up to a maximum of ten head of animals.

(b) Ranch and farm dwellings; single-family dwellings.

(c) On-site signs.

(d) Outdoor advertising business.

(e) Recreational camps, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, country clubs, tennis courts, horse riding academies, and other similar recreational uses.

(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES: The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted if the principle use or structure is present:

(a) Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as special uses;

(b) Home occupations in accordance with section 11-512; and,

(c) Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural produce grown on the agricultural farm or operation.

(4) SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the A-1 Agricultural District if a special use permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with section 11-230.

(a) Cemeteries, crematories, mausoleums, and columbaria.

(b) Educational and health services to include medical, dental, and other health clinics.

(c) Veterinary services and animal hospitals.

(d) Utility substations, filter beds, sanitary landfills, sewage treatment, and water supply plants.

(e) Commercial mines, quarries, sand and gravel pits, and accessory uses.

(f) Mobile home parks in compliance with Supplementary District Regulations.

(g) Rural subdivisions when individual lots are serviced by a joint or community-style water system or sanitary sewer system in conformance with the requirements of the Nebraska Departments of Health and Human Services (NHHS) and Environmental Quality (NDEQ), then the minimum lot size of an individual dwelling can be reduced to one acre.

(h) Airports and airport facilities.

(i) Churches and places of worship.

(j) Communication towers in conformance with the provisions of section 11-528.

(k) Expansion of existing livestock confinement/facilities or operations, when located between one and two miles beyond the corporate limits of the City of Crete and in conformance with the permitting procedures and regulations of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality.

(l) Alternative energy systems utilizing biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar, or wind sources in conformance with Net Metering per Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005 (August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems (SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of sections 11-525 and 11-526.

(m) Commercial Wind Energy Conversion Systems (CWECS) utilizing a single tower application, multiple tower applications, or Wind Farm, held in single ownership or in an association of multiple owners, in conformance with the provisions of sections 11-525 and 11-527.

(n) Salvage or junk yards, in conformance with the provisions of section 11-523.

(o) Landfills and sanitary landfills, in conformance with the provisions of section 11-524.

(p) Outdoor storage containers.

(q) Other uses that are consistent with the intent of this District.

(5) PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES: All other uses and structures, which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special exception uses, shall be prohibited from the A-1 Agricultural District.

(6) SPECIAL REGULATION: Provisions must be made for disposal of wastes in accordance with local and state regulations.

(7) MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS: No residential structure shall be constructed or substantially improved within a floodplain or flood prone area unless the lowest floor, including basement, is elevated to at least one foot above the base flood level. Additionally, no structures for human habitation shall be allowed in a designated floodway. No property shall be utilized for any purpose other than permitted by this District, and no structure shall be moved, constructed, or substantially improved without complying with the provisions of section 11-400. The following shall apply except as otherwise allowed for Community Unit Plans of the Supplementary District Regulations.

(a) The minimum lot size within the A-1 Agricultural District shall be 3 acres. More details below:


Lot Area (sq. ft.)	Lot Width	Required Front Yard	Required Side Yard	Required Rear Yard	Max Height*
Dwelling, single-family	3 acre	200 feet	70 feet	40 feet
50 feet
35 feet
Other permitted uses	1 acre	200 feet
70 feet
40 feet
50 feet
None
*Maximum height is for structures intended for human occupancy, all other structures shall have no limitations.

(b) Accessory uses and structures in the A-1 Agricultural District shall have minimum side yard and rear yard setbacks of fifteen feet and a front yard setback of seventy feet.

(8) SIGN REGULATIONS: Signs within the A-1 Agricultural District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-519.01.

(9) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS: Supplementary District Regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.


Source: Ord. 941 (1983); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1774 (2010); Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 2022 (2017)



11-213 R-1 Low Density Residential Districts
(1) INTENT: This District is intended to provide for single-family residential dwellings within the existing range of municipal services and at a lower density of development than other residential areas of the City.

(2) PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES: The following shall be permitted as uses by right, when in conformance with the Residential Design Standards in section 11-521:

(a) Single-family dwellings.

(b) Manufactured single-family dwellings that comply with the provisions of section 11-518.

(c) Churches and places of worship.

(d) Public and private schools, including elementary, middle, senior primary schools and post-secondary schools, colleges, and universities.

(e) Public parks, playgrounds, or playfields.

(f) Community buildings owned or occupied by public agencies.

(g) Child care homes.

(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES: The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted if the principal use or structures are present:

(a) Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as special uses.

(b) Private garages.

(c) Home occupations in accordance with section 11-512.

(d) Temporary buildings, mobile homes, or travel trailers for dwelling, storage, office, or other uses incidental to construction or building remodeling work, provided that such temporary buildings or mobile homes are removed within sixty days after occupancy of the permanent residential dwelling.

(e) Travel trailer which is being stored or otherwise kept, provided said trailer is not used for occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping space for any one period of time to exceed thirty days in duration.

(4) SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the R-1 Residential District if a special use permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with section 11-230.

(a) Utility substations.

(b) Hospitals and nursing, convalescent, and retirement homes.

(c) Medical clinics.

(d) Alternative energy systems utilizing biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar, or wind sources in conformance with Net Metering per Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005 (August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems (SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of sections 11-525 and 11-526.

(e) Child care centers.

(f) Commercial business meeting facilities, group activity centers, or fraternal organization meeting facilities.

(g) Country clubs.

(h) Co-location of additional cellular or communication antennas on an existing tower in conformance with the provisions of section 11-528.

(i) Community Unit Plans, in compliance with Supplementary District Regulations.

(5) PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES: All other uses and structures, which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special exception uses, shall be prohibited from the R-1 Residential District.

(6) MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS: No residential structure shall be constructed or substantially improved within a floodplain or flood prone area unless the lowest floor, including basement, is elevated to at least one foot above the base flood level. Additionally, no structures for human habitation shall be allowed in a designated floodway. No property shall be utilized for any purpose other than permitted by this District, and no structure shall be moved, constructed, or substantially improved without complying with the provisions of section 11-400. The following shall apply except as otherwise allowed for Community Unit Plans of the Supplementary District Regulations.

(a) The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the R-1 Residential District shall be as follows:

Zone standards
District
Lot Area (sq. ft)	Lot Width	Required Front Yard	Required Side Yard	Required Rear Yard	Max Height*
Dwelling, single-family	10,000	75 feet*	25 feet	10 feet	Smaller of 30 feet or 20% of lot depth	35 feet
Other permitted uses	10,000	75 feet*
25 feet
10 feet
Smaller of 30 feet or 20% of lot depth
35 feet
Notes:
* Frontage on a cul-de-sac or loop-out street may have a frontage of not less than forty feet provided that the width of the site as measured along the front yard setback line is at least seventy-five feet.

(b) Maximum lot coverage shall be 40%.

(7) SIGN REGULATIONS: Signs within the R-1 Residential District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-519.01.

(8) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS: Supplementary District Regulations shall be complied with herein defined.

(9) PARKING REGULATIONS: Parking within the R-1 Residential District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-508.

(10) FENCE REGULATIONS: Fences within the R-1 Residential District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-502.


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1926 (2015)



11-214 R-2 Two-Family Residential Districts
(1) INTENT. This District is intended to provide for single and two-family residential dwellings within the existing ranges of municipal services or where municipal services can be obtained or developed economically.

(2) PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES. The following shall be permitted as uses by right, when in conformance with the Residential Design Standards in section 11-521:

(a) Single-family dwellings.

(b) Manufactured single family dwellings that comply with the provisions of section 11-512.

(c) Two-family dwellings.

(d) Churches and places of worship.

(e) Public and private schools including elementary, middle, senior primary schools, and post-secondary schools, colleges, and universities.

(f) Public parks, playgrounds, or playfields.

(g) Community buildings owned or occupied by public agencies.

(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted if the principle use or structure is present:

(a) Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as special uses.

(b) Private garages.

(c) Home occupations in accordance with section 11-512.

(d) Temporary buildings, mobile homes, or travel trailers for dwelling, storage, office, or other uses incidental to construction or building remodeling work, provided that such temporary buildings or mobile homes are removed within sixty days after occupancy of the permanent residential dwelling.

(e) Travel trailer which is being stored or otherwise kept, provided said trailer is not used for occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping space for any one period of time to exceed thirty days in duration.

(4) SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES. A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the R-2 Two-Family Residential District if a special use permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with section 11-230.

(a) Utility substations.

(b) Hospitals and nursing, convalescent, and retirement homes.

(c) Medical clinics.

(d) Alternative energy systems utilizing biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar, or wind sources in conformance with Net Metering per Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005 (August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems (SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of sections 11-525 and 11-526.

(e) Child care centers.

(f) Commercial business meeting facilities, group activity centers, or fraternal organization meeting facilities.

(g) Co-location of additional cellular or communication antennas on an existing tower in conformance with the provisions of section 11-528.

(h) Community Unit Plans, in compliance with Supplementary District Regulations.

(i) Child care homes.

(5) PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES. All other uses and structures, which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special exception uses, shall be prohibited from the R-2 Two-Family Residential District.

(6) MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS. No residential structure shall be constructed or substantially improved within a floodplain or flood prone area unless the lowest floor, including basement, is elevated to at least one foot above the base flood level. Additionally, no structures for human habitation shall be allowed in a designated floodway. No property shall be utilized for any purpose other than permitted by this District, and no structure shall be moved, constructed, or substantially improved without complying with the provisions of section 11-400. The following shall apply except as otherwise allowed for Community Unit Plans of the Supplementary District Regulations.

(a) The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the R-2 Residential District shall be as follows:

Zone standards 
District
Lot Area (sq. ft.)
Lot Width	Required Front Yard	Required Side Yard	Required Rear Yard	Max Height*
Dwelling, single-family	5,000	50 feet*	25 feet	8 feet	Smaller of 20 feet or 20% of lot depth.	35 feet
Dwelling, two-family	3,000 per  dwelling unit	50 feet*
25 feet
8 feet
Smaller of 20 feet or 20% of lot depth.
35 feet
Other permitted uses	10,000	50 feet*
25 feet
8 feet
Smaller of 20 feet or 20% of lot depth.
35 feet

Notes:
* Frontage on a cul-de-sac or loop-out street may have a frontage of not less than thirty-five feet provided that the width of the site as measured along the front yard setback line is at least fifty-nine feet. 

(b) Maximum lot coverage shall be 50%.

(7) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS: Supplementary District Regulations shall be complied with as herein defined.

(8) SIGN REGULATIONS: Signs within the R-2 Two-Family Residential District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-519.01.

(9) PARKING REGULATIONS: Parking within the R-2 Two-Family Residential District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-508.

(10) FENCE REGULATIONS: Fences within the R-2 Two-Family Residential District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-502.


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1240 (1994); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 2023 (2017)



11-215 R-3 Multi-Family Residential Districts
(1) INTENT. This District is intended to provide for single family, two-family, and multiple-family residential dwellings within the existing ranges of municipal services or where municipal services can be obtained or developed economically.

(2) PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES. The following shall be permitted as uses by right when in conformance with the Residential Design Standards in section 11-521:

(a) Single-family dwellings.

(b) Manufactured single family dwellings that comply with the provisions of section 11-512.

(c) Two-family dwellings.

(d) Multiple-family dwellings.

(e) Churches and places of worship.

(f) Public and private schools including elementary, middle, senior primary schools and post-secondary schools, colleges, and universities.

(g) Public parks, playgrounds, or playfields.

(h) Community buildings owned or occupied by public agencies

(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted if the principle use or structure is present:

(a) Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as special uses.

(b) Home occupations in accordance with section 11-512.

(c) Private garages.

(d) Temporary buildings, mobile homes, or travel trailers for dwelling, storage, office, or other uses incidental to construction or building remodeling work, provided that such temporary buildings or mobile homes are removed within sixty days after occupancy of the permanent residential dwelling.

(e) Travel trailer which is being stored or otherwise kept, provided said trailer is not used for occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping space for any one period of time to exceed thirty days in duration.

(4) SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES. A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District if a special use permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with section 11-230:

(a) Child care centers.

(b) Child care homes.

(c) Commercial business meeting facilities, group activity centers, or fraternal organization meeting facilities.

(d) Community Unit Plans, in compliance with Supplementary District Regulations.

(e) Hospitals and nursing, convalescent, and retirement homes.

(f) Medical clinics.

(g) Mobile home parks, or any expansion of an existing mobile home park, in compliance with section 11-515.

(h) Professional, medical, and business offices, including personal services offices that are appropriate in a residential neighborhood.

(i) Utility substations.

(j) Alternative energy systems utilizing biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar, or wind sources in conformance with Net Metering per Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005 (August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems (SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of sections 11-525 and 11-526.

(k) Co-location of additional cellular or communication antennas on an existing tower in conformance with the provisions of section 11-528.

(5) PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES. All other uses and structures, which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special exception uses, shall be prohibited from the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District.

(6) MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS. No residential structure shall be constructed or substantially improved within a floodplain or flood prone area unless the lowest floor, including basement, is elevated to at least one foot above the base flood level. Additionally, no structures for human habitation shall be allowed in a designated floodway. No property shall be utilized for any purpose other than permitted by this District, and no structure shall be moved, constructed, or substantially improved without complying with the provisions of section 11-400. The following shall apply except as otherwise allowed for Community Unit Plans of the Supplementary District Regulations.

(a) Height and area regulations. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District shall be as follows:

Zone standards
District
Lot Area (sq. ft.)	Lot Width	Required Front Yard	Required Side Yard
Required Rear Yard
Max Height*
Dwelling, single-family	5,000	50 feet	25 feet
8 feet	Smaller of 20 feet or 20% of lot depth	45 feet
Dwelling, two-family 	2,500 per dwelling	50 feet
25 feet
8 feet
Smaller of 20 feet or 20% of lot depth
45 feet
Dwelling, multi-family	2,000 per dwelling
50 feet
25 feet
8 feet
Smaller of 20 feet or 20% of lot depth
45 feet
Other permitted uses	5,000	50 feet
25 feet
8 feet
Smaller of 20 feet or 20% of lot depth
45 feet
(b) Maximum lot coverage shall be 50%.

(c) Sites that front on a cul-de-sac or loop-out street may have a frontage of not less than 35 feet provided that the width of the site as measured along the front yard setback line is at least 50 feet.

(7) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS: Supplementary District Regulations shall be complied with as herein defined.

(8) SIGN REGULATIONS: Signs within the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-519.01.

(9) PARKING REGULATIONS: Parking within the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-508.

(10) FENCE REGULATIONS: Fences within the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-502.


Source: Ord. 1116 (1990); Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1240 (1994); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 2023 (2017)



11-216 R-4 Mixed Residential Districts
(1) INTENT. The intent of this District is to provide for medium to high density residential development, including single-family, two-family, multiple-family, and mobile home dwellings and mobile home parks.

(2) PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES. The following shall be permitted as uses by right when in conformance with the Residential Design Standards in section 11-521:

(a) Single-family dwellings.

(b) Two-family dwellings.

(c) Multiple-family dwellings.

(d) Mobile homes.

(e) Mobile home parks, or any expansion of an existing mobile home park, in compliance with section 11-515.

(f) Child care homes.

(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted if the principle use or structure is present:

(a) Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as special uses.

(b) Private garages.

(c) Home occupations in accordance section 11-512.

(d) Temporary buildings, mobile homes, or travel trailers for dwelling, storage, office, or other uses incidental to construction or building remodeling work, provided that such temporary buildings or mobile homes are removed within sixty days after occupancy of the permanent residential dwelling.

(e) Travel trailer which is being stored or otherwise kept, provided said trailer is not used for occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping space for any one period of time to exceed thirty days in duration.

(4) SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES. A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the R-4 Mixed Residential District if a special use permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with section 11-230:

(a) Utility substations.

(b) Hospitals and nursing, convalescent, and retirement homes.

(c) Medical clinics.

(d) Professional, medical, and business offices, including personal services offices that are appropriate in a residential neighborhood.

(e) Child care centers.

(f) Alternative energy systems utilizing biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar, or wind sources in conformance with Net Metering per Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005 (August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems (SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of sections 11-525 and 11-526.

(g) Co-location of additional cellular or communication antennas on an existing tower in conformance with the provisions of section 11-528.

(h) Commercial business meeting facilities, group activity centers, or fraternal organization meeting facilities.

(i) Community Unit Plans, in compliance with Supplementary District Regulations.

(5) PROHIBITED USES: All other uses and structures, which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special exception uses, shall be prohibited from the R-4 Mixed Residential District.

(6) SPACE LIMITATIONS. No residential structure shall be constructed or substantially improved within a floodplain or flood prone area unless the lowest floor, including basement, is elevated to at least one foot above the base flood level. Additionally, no structures for human habitation shall be allowed in a designated floodway. No property shall be utilized for any purpose other than permitted by this District, and no structure shall be moved, constructed, or substantially improved without complying with the provisions of section 11-400. The following shall apply except as otherwise allowed for Community Unit Plans of the Supplementary District Regulations:

(a) The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the R-4 Mixed Residential District shall be as follows:

Zone standards
District
Lot Area (sq. ft.)	Lot Width	Required Front Yard	Required Side Yard
Required Rear Yard
Max Height*
Dwelling, single-family	5,000	44 feet	20 feet	5 feet	Smaller of 20 feet or 20% of lot depth.	35 feet
Dwelling, two-family
2,500 per dwelling	44 feet
20 feet
5 feet
Smaller of 20 feet or 20% of lot depth.
35 feet
Dwelling, multi-family
2,000 per dwelling
44 feet
20 feet
5 feet
Smaller of 20 feet or 20% of lot depth.
35 feet
Other permitted uses	5,000	50 feet	20 feet
5 feet
Smaller of 20 feet or 20% of lot depth.
35 feet
(b) Maximum lot coverage shall be 60%.

(7) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS: Supplementary District Regulations shall be complied with as herein defined.

(8) SIGN REGULATIONS: Signs within the R-4 Mixed Residential District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-519.01.

(9) PARKING REGULATIONS: Parking within the R-4 Mixed Residential District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-508.

(10) FENCE REGULATIONS: Fences within the R-4 Mixed Residential District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-502.


Source: Ord. 1116 (1990); Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1264 (1995); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1926 (2015)



11-217 C-1 Central Commercial District
(1) INTENT. The intent of the C-1 Central Commercial District is to provide for commercial business services and activities to support community and trade area needs and to promote the traditional character of the original center of the community.

(2) PRINCIPAL USES. Principal uses in the C-1 Central Commercial District are those primarily considered to be, or similar to, service or retail businesses or establishments. The following shall be principal uses by right when located within a building or structure that conforms with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations:

(a) Antique stores.

(b) Apparel and accessory stores.

(c) Appliance stores.

(d) ATM drive-thru or walk-up locations.

(e) Automobile wash facilities.

(f) Bakeries.

(g) Banks, savings and loan associations, and other financial institutions.

(h) Barber and beautician services.

(i) Book and stationery stores.

(j) Bowling alleys.

(k) Business or professional offices that supply commodities or perform services.

(l) Bus terminals.

(m) Camera supply stores and photographic studios.

(n) Confectionery stores.

(o) Contract construction services.

(p) Drapery, curtain, and upholstery stores.

(q) Drug and proprietary stores.

(r) Eating places, indoor or outdoor.

(s) Food and beverage stores, general retail.

(t) Food lockers without preparation facilities.

(u) Furniture and home furnishing retail stores.

(v) Garden supplies and nurseries.

(w) Gas stations.

(x) General merchandise retail stores.

(y) Hardware retail stores.

(z) Jewelry retail.

(aa) Laundry, self-service or dry cleaning plants.

(bb) Lumber yards.

(cc) Medical, dental, and other health services.

(dd) Mixed use buildings.

(ee) Motels.

(ff) Multi-family dwellings.

(gg) Paint, glass, and wallpaper retail.

(hh) Plumbing and heating services.

(ii) Public buildings, parks, and other similar property.

(kk) Radio and television, sales and service.

(ll) Sporting goods, retail.

(mm) Taverns.

(nn) Variety and gift stores.

(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES. The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted if the principle use or structure is present:

(a) Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as special exception uses.

(4) SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES. A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the C-1 Central Commercial District if a special use permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with section 11-230:

(a) Bed and breakfast guest homes.

(b) Child care centers.

(c) Churches and places of worship.

(d) Civic, social, and fraternal associations.

(e) Electrical and gas distribution substations, and other public utility substations and other public utility installations, but not including equipment storage or maintenance yards.

(f) Funeral homes.

(g) Motion picture theaters.

(h) Outdoor advertising businesses.

(i) Recycling centers.

(j) Single and two-family dwellings.

(k) Alternative energy systems utilizing biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar, or wind sources in conformance with net metering per Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005 (August 30, 2009, as amended) and shall also be in conformance with the provisions of sections 11-525 and 11-526.

(l) Co-location of additional cellular or communication antennas on an existing tower in conformance with the provisions of section 11-528.

(5) PROHIBITED USES. All other uses and structures, which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special exception uses, shall be prohibited from the C-1 Commercial District.

(6) SPACE LIMITATIONS. No residential structure shall be constructed or substantially improved within a floodplain or flood prone area unless the lowest floor, including basement, is elevated to at least one foot above the base flood level. Additionally, no structures for human habitation shall be allowed in a designated floodway. No property shall be utilized for any purpose other than permitted by this District, and no structure shall be moved, constructed, or substantially improved without complying with the provisions of section 11-400. The following shall apply except as otherwise allowed for Community Unit Plans of the Supplementary District Regulations:

(a) The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the C-1 Central Commercial District shall be as follows:

Zone standards
District
Lot Area (sq. ft.)
Lot Width
Required Front Yard
Required Side Yard
Required Rear Yard
Permitted principal uses	2,684	22 feet
None
0 feet or 
10 feet when abutting a residential area
0 feet or
25 feet when abutting a residential area
Other permitted uses	2,684
22 feet
None
0 feet or 
10 feet when abutting a residential area
0 feet or
25 feet when abutting a residential area
(7) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS. Supplementary District Regulations shall be complied with as defined herein, except there shall be no minimum parking or loading requirements for any commercial use. Minimum parking and loading requirements shall be complied with for all residential uses, except for residential uses located on the second or higher floors of a commercial building built prior to January 1, 1990.

(8) SIGN REGULATIONS. Signs within the C-1 Central Commercial District shall be in conformance with the Sign Regulations.

(9) FENCE REGULATIONS. Fences within the C-1 Central Commercial District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-502.


Source: Ord. 941 (1983);  Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1774 (2010); Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 1964 (2015); Ord. 1974 (2016); Ord. 2023 (2017); Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-218 C-2 General Commercial Districts
(1) INTENT. The C-2 General Commercial District is intended to provide for commercial business services and activities generally along the Highway 33 or 103 corridors, including areas contiguous to the C-1 Central Business District, to support community and trade area needs.

(2) PRINCIPAL USES. The following shall be principal uses by right when located within a building or structure that conforms with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations:

(a) Automobile and truck sales, service, and repair.

(b) Automobile wash facilities.

(c) Barber shops, beauty salons, and shoe repair shops.

(d) Banking and financial services institutions.

(e) Child care centers.

(f) Construction sales and services.

(g) Commercial operations and businesses intended for the purpose of servicing travel and recreational users.

(h) Commercial recreational facilities, bowling alleys, miniature golf courses, and similar uses.

(i) Detached banking facilities (ATMs).

(j) Electric and telephone substations.

(k) Garden centers and nurseries.

(l) Gas stations, service stations, and convenience stores.

(m) Grocery stores.

(n) Irrigation equipment sales and services.

(o) Lumber yards and construction materials sales.

(p) Machine shops.

(q) Medical, dental, and other health services.

(r) Mini-storage facilities.

(s) Mobile home sales.

(t) Motels, including accessory service uses such as swimming pools, liquor stores, and restaurants.

(u) Restaurants and cafes.

(v) Single-family dwellings.

(w) Stores or shops for sale of goods at retail.

(x) Transportation warehousing.

(y) Trucks and freight terminals.

(z) Utilities including shops and offices.

(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES. The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted if the principal use or structure is present:

(a) Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as special exception uses.

(4) SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES. A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the C-2 General Commercial District if a special use permit for such use as been obtained in accordance with section 11-230:

(g) Bulk fertilizer plants.

(b) Churches and places of worship.

(a) Civic, social, and fraternal associations.

(e) Electrical and gas distribution substations, and other public utility substations and other public utility installations, but not including equipment storage or maintenance yards.

(c) Funeral homes.

(d) Motion picture theaters.

(g) Outdoor advertising businesses.

(f) Veterinary services and small animal hospitals.

(i) Alternative energy systems utilizing biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar, or wind sources in conformance with Net Metering per Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005 (August 30, 2009, as amended) and shall also be in conformance with the provisions of sections 11-525 and 11-526.

(h) Co-location of additional cellular or communication antennas on an existing tower in conformance with the provisions of section 11-528.

(5) PROHIBITED USES. All other uses and structures, which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special exception uses, shall be prohibited from the C-2 General Commercial District.

(6) SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.

(a) Where a site adjoins or is located across an alley from a Residential District, a solid wall, fence, compact evergreen hedge six feet in height, or buffering area may be required on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard.

(b) Open storage of materials associated with a permitted use or permitted special exception use shall be allowed only within an area surrounded or screened by a solid wall or fence.

(7) SPACE LIMITATIONS. No residential structure shall be constructed or substantially improved within a floodplain or flood prone area unless the lowest floor, including basement, is elevated to at least one  foot above the base flood level. Additionally, no structures for human habitation shall be allowed in a designated floodway. No property shall be utilized for any purpose other than permitted by this District, and no structure shall be moved, constructed, or substantially improved without complying with the provisions of section 11-400. The following shall apply except as otherwise allowed for Community Unit Plans of the Supplementary District Regulations:

(a) The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the C-2 General Commercial District shall be as follows:


Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
Lot Width
Required Front Yard
Required Side Yard
Required Rear Yard
Permitted principal uses
2,500 
44 feet	10 feet
0 feet or 
10 feet when abutting a residential area

Smaller of 20 feet or 
20% of lot depth.
Dwelling, two-family
2,500 per family dwelling
44 feet
20 feet
5 feet
Smaller of 20 feet or 
20% of lot depth.
Dwelling, multi-family	
2,000 per family dwelling

44 feet
20 feet
5 feet
Smaller of 20 feet or 
20% of lot depth.
Other permitted uses	5,000	50 feet	20 feet
5 feet
Smaller of 20 feet or
20% of lot depth.
(8) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS: Supplementary District Regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.

(9) SIGN REGULATIONS: Signs within the C-2 General Commercial District shall be in conformance with the Sign Regulations.

(10) PARKING REGULATIONS: Parking within the C-2 General Commercial District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-508.

(11) FENCE REGULATIONS: Fences within the C-2 General Commercial District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-502.


Source: Ord. 941 (1983); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1774 (2010); Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 1964 (2015); Ord. 1974 (2016); Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-219 C-3 Highway Commercial Districts
(1) INTENT. The C-3 Highway Commercial District is intended to provide for the trade, service, cultural, and recreational uses which are appropriate to be developed in conjunction with a highway and offer a desired convenience in location and accessibility to the motoring public.

(2) PRINCIPAL USES. The following shall be principal uses by right when located within a building or structure that conforms with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations:

(a) Automobile and truck dealerships, service, and repair facilities.

(b) Automotive parts supplies stores.

(c) Big box discount department stores, grocery, and hardware stores.

(d) Child care centers.

(e) Fast food dine-in and drive-through restaurants.

(f) Farm machinery and equipment sales and services.

(g) Feed, grain, and fertilizer sales.

(h) Gas stations, service stations, and convenience stores.

(i) Golf driving ranges and miniature golf courses.

(j) Lumber yards and construction materials sales.

(k) Machine shops.

(l) Medical, dental, and other health services.

(m) Mobile home sales.

(n) Motion picture theaters, including drive-in theaters.

(o) Motels and hotels, including accessory service uses.

(p) Railroad and truck terminals, excluding stockyards.

(q) Shopping centers and strip-malls.

(r) Wholesale distribution and warehousing.

(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES. The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted if a principle use or structure is present:

(a) Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as special exception uses.

(4) SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES. A building or premise may be used for the following purposes in the C-3 Highway Commercial District if a special use permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with section 11-230:

(a) Bulk fertilizer plants.

(b) Churches and places of worship.

(c) Civic, social, and fraternal associations.

(d) Dwelling units, including mobile homes, for use by the owner, operator, or caretaker of the commercial establishment.

(e) Electrical and gas distribution substations and other public utility substations and other public utility installations, but not including equipment storage or maintenance yards.

(f) Funeral homes.

(g) Motion picture theaters.

(h) Outdoor advertising businesses.

(i) Veterinary services and small animal hospitals.

(j) Alternative energy systems utilizing biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar or wind sources in conformance with net metering per Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005 (August 30, 2009, as amended.) and shall also be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-525 and 11-526. 

(k) Co-location of additional cellular or communication antennas on an existing tower in conformance with the provisions of section 11-528.


(5) LANDSCAPING AND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.

(a) Landscaped parking lots, including trees and landscaped islands as separations between parking bays.

(b) Roof-lines shall incorporate peaked parapet false front facades or peaked roofs.

(c) Wide sidewalks abutting the storefronts with canopy or roof overhangs extending over pedestrian areas.

(6) PROHIBITED USES. All other uses and structures, which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special exception uses, shall be prohibited from the C-3 Highway Commercial District.

(7) SPACE LIMITATIONS. No residential structure shall be constructed or substantially improved within a floodplain or flood prone area unless the lowest floor, including basement, is elevated to at least one foot above the base flood level. Additionally, no structures for human habitation shall be allowed in a designated floodway. No property shall be utilized for any purpose other than permitted by this District and no structure shall be moved, constructed, or substantially improved without complying with the provisions of section 11-400. The following shall apply except as otherwise allowed for Community Unit Plans of the Supplementary District Regulations.

(a) The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the C-3 Highway Commercial District shall be as follows:


Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
Lot Width
Required Front Yard	Required Side Yard	Required Rear Yard
Permitted principal uses	10,000
80 feet
10 feet
0 feet or
10 feet when abutting a residential area

Smaller of: 20 feet or 
20% of lot depth.

Other permitted uses	10,000
80 feet
20 feet
0 feet or
10 feet when abutting a residential area
Smaller of: 20 feet or 
20% of lot depth.
(8) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS. Supplementary District Regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.

(9) SIGN REGULATIONS. Signs within the C-3 Highway Commercial District shall be in conformance with the provisions of the Sign Regulations.

(10) PARKING REGULATIONS. Parking within the C-3 Highway District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-508.

(11) FENCE REGULATIONS. Fences within the C-3 Highway Commercial District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-502.


Source: Ord. 965 (1984); Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1544 (2003); Ord. 1579 (2003); Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 1952 (2015); Ord. 1964 (2015); Ord. 1974 (2016); Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-220 I-1 Light Industrial Districts
(1) INTENT. The I-1 Light Industrial District is intended to provide for light industrial activities in areas where ingress and egress can be provided in a safe and convenient manner. The activities located in this District should be engaged in wholesale commercial trade or manufacturing, compounding, assembly, or treatment of articles or materials with the exception of heavy manufacturing and the processing of raw materials. It is further intended that activities proposing to locate in any of the areas designed Light Industrial shall satisfy the Planning Commission and the City Council that the activity conducted in the aforementioned areas shall conform to the pollution control standards in existence for the State of Nebraska. No use shall be permitted that does not conform to these minimum pollution control standards.

(2) PRINCIPAL USES. The following shall be principal uses by right when located within a building or structure that conforms with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations:

(a) Concrete batch plant, cement, clay, or pottery products manufacturing.

(b) Contract construction equipment storage.

(c) Beverage bottling or distribution.

(d) Food processing and packaging.

(e) Foundry casting, light weight non-ferrous metal not causing noxious fumes or odor.

(f) Fuel storage yards.

(g) Machine shops.

(h) Manufacturing or assembly of component parts.

(i) Mobile or modular home manufacturing.

(j) Raising of field crops and horticulture.

(k) Sawmills or planing mills, including manufacturing or wood products not involving chemical treatment.

(l) Terminal yards, trucking.

(m) Truck and tractor repair.

(n) Wholesale distribution and warehousing.

(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES. The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted if a principal use or structure is present:

(a) Dwelling units, including mobile homes, for use by the owner, operator, or caretaker of the industry.

(b) Other uses normally appurtenant to the permitted uses when established in conformance with the space limits of this District.

(4) SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES. A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the I-1 Light Industrial District if a special use permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with section 11-230:

(a) Animal sales yards, auctions, and slaughter locker plant operations.

(b) Auto wrecking and salvaging operations thereof, sufficiently screened from public view.

(c) Contractor storage yards or plants.

(d) Gravel, sand, or dirt removal, stockpiling, processing, or distribution and sales thereof.

(e) One additional dwelling unit (in addition to that allowed under permitted accessory uses), including mobile homes, for use by the owner, operator, or caretaker of the industry.

(f) Outdoor advertising businesses.

(g) Outdoor storage containers.

(h) Retail sales of products constructed on-site.

(i) Alternative energy systems utilizing biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar, or wind sources in conformance with net metering per Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005 (August 30, 2009, as amended) and shall also be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-525 and 11-526.

(j) Co-location of additional cellular or communication antennas on an existing tower in conformance with the provisions of section 11-528.

(5) PROHIBITED USES. All other uses which are not specifically permitted or are not permissible as a special exception use and specifically:

(a) Commercial cattle feed lots.

(b) Any residential use except for owner, operator, or watchman quarters.

(c) No use shall be permitted to be established or maintained which by reason of its nature or manner of operation is or may become hazardous, noxious, or offensive owing to the emission of odor, dust, smoke, cinder, gas, fumes, noise, vibrations, refuse matter, or water-carried waste.

(6) SPACE LIMITATIONS. The following shall apply except as otherwise allowed for Community Unit Plans of the Supplementary District Regulations.

(a) The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the I-1 Light Industrial District shall be as follows:


Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
Lot Width	Required Front Yard	Required Side Yard	Required Rear Yard	Max Height
Permitted principal uses
20,000
80 feet
50 feet
10 feet
20 feet 
50 feet
Other permitted uses
20,000
80 feet
50 feet
10 feet
20 feet 
50 feet
(7) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS. Supplementary District Regulations shall be complied with as herein defined. All uses within this District shall meet the minimum performance standards for industry as defined herein.

(8) SIGN REGULATIONS. Signs within the I-1 Light Industrial District shall be in conformance with the Sign Regulations.

(9) PARKING REGULATIONS. Parking within the I-1 Light Industrial District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-508.

(10) FENCE REGULATIONS. Fences within the I-1 Light Industrial District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-502.


Source: Ord. 966 (1984); Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1165 (1992); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 2022 (2017); Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-221 I-2 Heavy Industrial Districts
(1) INTENT. The I-2 Heavy Industrial District is intended to provide areas for activities and uses of a heavy industrial character, which permits the manufacturing or treatment of any goods from raw materials or any other activity with which hazardous processes, products, or fumes are associated. It is the least restrictive of any district.

(2) PRINCIPAL USES. The following shall be principal uses by right when located within a building or structure that conforms with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations:

(a) Concrete batch plant, cement, clay, or pottery products manufacturing.

(b) Contractors construction equipment storage.

(c) Beverage bottling or distribution.

(d) Food processing and packaging.

(e) Fuel storage yards.

(f) Machine shops.

(g) Manufacturing or assembly of component parts.

(h) Mobile or modular home manufacturing.

(i) Raising of field crops and horticulture.

(j) Sawmills or planing mills, including manufacturing or wood products not involving chemical treatment.

(k) Terminal yards, trucking.

(l) Truck and tractor repair.

(m) Wholesale distribution and warehousing.

It is further intended that structures or activities proposing to locate in any of the areas designated Heavy Industrial shall certify to the Planning Commission and the City Council that the activities conducted in the aforementioned areas shall conform to the pollution control standards in existence for the State of Nebraska. No use shall be permitted that does not conform to these minimum pollution control standards.

(3) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES. The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted if a principal use or structure is present:

(a) A dwelling unit, including a mobile home, for use by the owner, operator, or caretaker of the industry.

(b) Other uses normally appurtenant to the permitted uses when established in conformance with the space limits of this District.

(4) SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES. A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the I-2 Heavy Industrial District if a special use permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with section 11-230:

(a) Animal sales yards, auctions, and slaughter locker plant operations.

(b) Auto wrecking and salvaging operations thereof, sufficiently screened from public view.

(c) Composting facilities.

(d) Gravel, sand, or dirt removal, stockpiling, processing, or distribution and sales thereof.

(e) One additional dwelling unit (in addition to that allowed under permitted accessory uses), including a mobile home, for use by the owner, operator, or caretaker of the industry.

(f) Outdoor advertising businesses.

(g) Outdoor storage containers.

(h) Retail sales of products constructed on-site.

(i) Alternative energy systems utilizing biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar, or wind sources in conformance with net metering per Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005 (August 30, 2009, as amended) and shall also be in conformance with the provisions of sections 11-525 and 11-526.

(j) Co-location of additional cellular or communication antennas on an existing tower in conformance with the provisions of section 11-528.

(5) PROHIBITED USES. All other uses and structures, which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special exception uses, shall be prohibited from the I-2 Heavy Industrial District.

(6) SPACE LIMITATIONS. All principal or accessory structures housing a use permitted only in the I-2 District shall be located at least 200 feet from any residential or commercial district boundary and not less than 100 feet from any other district, except a Light Industrial District, boundary.

(a) The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the I-2 Heavy Industrial District shall be as follows:


Lot Area
(sq. ft.)	Lot Width	Required Front Yard	Required Side Yard	Required Rear Yard	Max Height
Permitted principal uses
20,000 
80 feet
50 feet
50 feet
50 feet
50 feet
Other permitted uses	20,000 
80 feet
50 feet
10 feet	20 feet	50 feet
(7) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS. The best practical means known for the disposal of refuse matter or water-carried waste and the abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, or similar nuisance shall be employed.

(8) SIGN REGULATIONS. Signs within the I-2 Heavy Industrial District shall be in conformance with the Sign Regulations.

(9) PARKING REGULATIONS. Parking within the I-2 Heavy Industrial District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-508.

(10) FENCE REGULATIONS. Fences within the I-2 Heavy Industrial District shall be in conformance with the provisions of section 11-502.


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 2022 (2017); Ord. 2056 (2019); Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-222 P Public District
INTENT: The Public District is intended to provide parks, natural open space and public facilities. The district is a special use classification intended to provide areas for the retention of public lands necessary for open spaces, parks, playgrounds, trails and structures designed for public recreation and to provide areas for the location of government buildings and structures for public education, recreation and other public uses. This zoning classification is intended to be applied to those portions of the city that are designated as developed open space and public facility in the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan.

PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES: The following shall be permitted as uses by right, when in conformance with the Public District regulations:
Agriculture
Camping Facilities
Cemetery
Community Gardens
Community Center
Drainage or Flood Control Facility
Emergency Facilities
Fair Grounds
Fire Facilities
Fueling or Electrical Charging Facility
Government Offices
Library
Lift Station
Outdoor Container Storage
Outdoor Material Storage
Park
Picnic Shelters
Playground
Police or Law Enforcement Facilities
Postal Facilities
Public Airport
Public Golf Course
Public Hospital
Public Maintenance Shop and yard
Public Recreational Facilities
Public Refuse Transfer Station
Public Restrooms
Public Swimming Pool or Splash Pad
Public Trails
Public Utilities
Public Warehousing.
Publicly Operated Child Care Center
Recycling Center
Sanitary Sewer Facilities
Sports Stadium or Facility
PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES: The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted if the Principle Use or Structure is present:
Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as special exception uses.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: All special exception uses permitted in the P Public District.
Alternative energy systems utilizing Biomass, Geothermal, Hydropower, Solar and/or Wind sources in conformance with “Net Metering” per Nebraska State Statutes § 70-2001 to 70-2005 (August 30, 2009, as amended.) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of Section 11-525 and 11-526 of these Regulations. (Ord. No. 1579, 06/17/03)
Public jail or human detention facility.
Public Animal Shelter
Sanitary Landfill.
Other Publicly Operated Facilities
PROHIBITED USES: All other uses and structures, which are not specifically permitted or not permissible, as special exception uses shall be prohibited from the P Public District.
SCREENING REQUIREMENTS:
Open storage of materials associated with a permitted use or permitted special exception use shall be allowed only within an area surrounded or screened by a solid wall or fence.
SPACE LIMITATIONS:
Height and area regulations. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the P Public District shall be as follows:


Lot Area	Lot Width	Required Front Yard	Required Side Yard
Required Rear Yard
Max. Height
Permitted Principle Uses	2,500	44 feet*	20 feet	0' or 10' when abutting residential districts	Smaller of 20 feet or 20% of lot depth.	35 feet
Other Permitted Uses	5,000	50 feet*	20 feet
5 feet	Smaller of 20 feet or 20% of lot depth.
35 feet
SIGN REGULATIONS: Signs within the P Public District shall be in conformance with the provisions of Article 5, Section 11-519.01 of these Regulations.
PARKING REGULATIONS: Parking within the P Public District shall be in conformance with the provisions of Article 5, Section 11-508 of these Regulations.
FENCE REGULATIONS: Fences within the P Public District shall be in conformance with the provisions of Article 5, Section 11-502 of these Regulations.
(Ord. No. 2024, 11/7/17)

11-223 PO Parking Overlay District
INTENT. This zone is designed to provide for the parking of automobiles in zones which do not allow the activity which generates the need for automobile parking.
PERMITTED USES.
Any principal uses permitted in the Primary Zoning District to which PO Parking Overlay District classification is appended when established according to the regulations and provisions of the primary zoning district.
Parking lots for automobiles when meeting the following construction and operation standards:
All parking lots established in a PO Parking Overlay District shall be surfaced with a dust free material.
Any lighting shall be so oriented that it will not shine on adjacent property in residential use.
A foliage or decorative masonry barrier shall be planted or constructed and maintained so as to shield the parking lot from any residential use adjacent to or across a street and facing said parking lot.
No parking lot shall encroach on any required front or side yard required by the Space Limits provisions of the primary zone.
No parking lot shall encroach on a required yard or open space or upon the minimum site area required for an existing use.
No access drive to a parking area in a PO Parking Overlay District shall traverse any land other than a PO Parking Overlay District or other district in which such parking lot may be legally established.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
Any special exception use permitted in the primary zone to which the PO Parking Overlay District is appended when established according to the rules and conditions of the primary district.
PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
Any permitted use allowed in the primary district to which the PO Parking Overlay District is appended when established according to the rules and conditions of the primary district.
SPACE LIMITS
All space limit provision of the primary district to which the PO Parking Overlay District is appended shall be adhered to, except under the following conditions:
Automobile parking may be placed in any required rear yard provided the required side yard is maintained when adjacent to a property in residential use in a zoning district requiring a side yard.
Automobile parking may be placed within a required side yard when such side yard is adjacent to a zone which does not require a side yard.
PROCEDURE
The PO Parking Overlay District shall be appended to a primary district in the same manner in which zoning map changes are made, and shall have the effect of modifying the uses allowed on the specific site or zoning lot.
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS. All miscellaneous provisions of the primary district to which the PO Parking Overlay District is appended shall apply.
(Ord. No. 2025, 11/7/17)

11-224 WPO Wellhead Protection Overlay District
INTENT: The intent of this district is to protect the public water wells in the jurisdiction of Crete. In order to provide protection for such wells, and maintain the health, safety, and general welfare of Crete residents, the regulation of land uses having the potential for contamination of groundwater sources is necessary within a specified boundary area surrounding said wells. The Wellhead Protection Plan has identified the area of protection. An area used in the plan includes is the area delineated by the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services. This area is required by Title 179 of the Nebraska Administrative Code to protect the municipal water supply from microbiological contamination within a calculated one (1) year time of travel for groundwater flow. Other areas include areas within a twenty-four (24) hour time of travel for surface water, areas near the well field where surface run-off can have a significant potential for surface contamination, and areas where development review and control is necessary to ensure proper control of run-off. The Wellhead Protection Overlay District establishes performance standards to protect the integrity of Crete’s well fields including regulations related to the ability of contamination in the area to affect the quality of the City’s water supply.
PREREQUISITE REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION OF THIS DISTRICT: Prior to making such application and approval of any application of this district to any lands within the City by the City Council, the City shall first comply with all other requirements of the Wellhead Protection Act (Neb. Rev. Stat. 46-1505 through 46-1509). These requirements include, but are not limited to the following:
Delineation of the Wellhead Protection Area based upon a twenty (20) year time of travel recharge zone;
Approval of such Wellhead Protection Area by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality, Completion and mapping of an inventory or potential contamination sources within the Wellhead Protection Area;
Formulation of emergency/contingency/long-range plans in the event of disruption of supply of water from the wells in the Wellhead Protection Area;
Formulation of and ability to implement an ongoing Public Involvement/Education Program to permit public comment in the establishment of the Wellhead Protection Program and to provide information to the public regarding the program and voluntary cooperation with said program;
Development of a program to install and maintain Wellhead Protection Area signs on roadways around the wellhead Protection Area.
LIMITATION ON APPLICATION OF THIS DISTRICT: This district may be applied only to Wellhead Protection Areas officially approved by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality. In the event the boundaries of any such officially approved Wellhead Protection Areas do not follow easily identifiable boundaries such as roads, rivers, creeks, section, quarter section or quarter-quarter section lines, the boundaries of such area shall be expanded to the nearest such lines to avoid confusion and added administrative costs associated with infield determination of such boundaries.
AMENDMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP: Whenever the requirements of Section B have been complied with and the City Council has approved the application of this overlay zoning district on land with the City, in accordance with the procedures for amendment of the Official Zoning Map set forth in this Ordinance, the boundaries of such overlay district shall be indicated on said Official Zoning Map.
ALLOWABLE USES AND STRUCTURES: Any use or structure indicated as an allowable use, a permitted use, a special exception use, or an accessory use in the primary zoning district to which this overlay district is applied shall be allowed or permitted in accordance with the zoning requirements of the primary zoning district, except when specifically prohibited in Section G, and provided all such uses further comply with the additional wellhead protection restrictions set forth in Section H of this Article.
MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS: The minimum lot requirements as set forth on the primary zoning district shall apply within this overlay district, according to the location of each primary zoning district. Such requirements include lot area, lot width and frontage, setback requirements, and height restrictions.
PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES: All other uses and structures which are not permitted in the underlying district either as a permitted use, accessory use or special exception use are prohibited. Furthermore, the following uses and/or structures shall be specifically prohibited:
Commercial feed lots;
Livestock auction sale yards;
Sludge and waste application and stockpiling from livestock operations or municipal waste;
Landfills and other types of waste handling facilities;
Commercial mines, quarries, sand and gravel pits;
Commercial or industrial uses which utilize or generate any materials determined by the United States Department of Environmental Protection as hazardous materials, including commercial or industrial uses which store bulk petroleum products, agricultural chemicals, anhydrous ammonia or other fertilizers in excess of fifty (50) gallons.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION RESTRICTIONS: The following restrictions shall apply to uses within any area of land on which this overlay district is applied:

Storage of gasoline, diesel fuel, fuel oil or other similar fuels, whether on a farm or ranch or in association with another land use, shall comply with the rules and regulations of Titles 126 and 159, administered by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality or other responsible agency or department. Storage of gasoline or diesel fuel in excess of one-thousand one-hundred (1,100) gallons per aboveground storage tank or five hundred (500) gallons per underground storage tank, or two thousand five-hundred (2500) gallons total of all tanks shall be prohibited, except when a special exception use for a commercial or industrial use is authorized. In any such authorization, a condition of approval shall be compliance with the rules and regulations of such Titles 126 and 129.

Fuel storage associated with irrigation well motors shall be equipped with a containment area in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association Code 30 and with Title 126, administered by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality, in the event of a fuel release.

No fuel storage, except when associated with Item 2 (above) shall be permitted within one-thousand (1,000) feet of any water well protected under this overlay district.

No septic tank or tile field or waste lagoon, or man-made or constructed earthen water storage (including irrigation re-use pits) associated with any residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, or other type of use shall be permitted within one-thousand (1,000) feet of any water well protected under this overlay district.

Any development must be connected to City water services if such services are available within five hundred (500) feet of the site. If a connection is impossible, all new wells shall be installed in accordance with Title 178 of the Nebraska Administrative Code. Well installation further requires the approval of both the City’s Director of Utilities and the appropriate State of Nebraska regulatory agencies.

Domestic, irrigation and any other water well shall not be located closer than one-thousand (1,000) feet to any water well protected under this overlay district.

All storage tanks permitted by this Section shall be operated safely and maintained in an operable and serviceable condition and meet all Department of Environmental Quality and Fire Marshall’s regulations. All storage tanks with a capacity of at least three hundred (300) gallons shall receive a Storage Tank Permit before being place into service.

Storage of fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides and other materials, determined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency to be hazardous materials, shall be prohibited, except when a special exception use for such use is authorized and such authorization includes a condition that all such uses shall comply with the applicable rules and regulations of Title 118, 121, 126, 128, 159 and 198, administered by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and other agencies.

Any application of fertilizers, pesticides, or herbicides to the land or crops through an irrigation system (chemigation) shall comply with the rules and requirements of Title 195.

If any land area contained within a wellhead protection overlay district is also part of a special protection area or ground water management area, established under the Groundwater Management Protection Act, all uses within such areas, including agricultural uses, shall comply with the action plan and best management practices established for such areas by the local Natural Resources District(s).

Surface water run-off shall be contained within the boundaries of any proposed development.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE PERMITS: Uses identified herein may be used or expanded in the WPO Wellhead Protection Overlay District if a Special Exception Use Permit for such use has been obtained pursuant to the following provisions:

The Special Exception Permit provisions within the Zoning Regulations must be complied with.

Municipal Review: The planning commission and governing body shall be notified by the Crete City Manager or his/her designee of any application for a Special Exception Use Permit within the respective wellhead protection area.
(Ord. No. 2026, 11/7/17)

11-225 [Reserved]




11-226 Administration And Enforcement
(1) The City Building Inspector shall administer and enforce this article. He or she may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the City Council may direct.

(2) If the City Building Inspector shall find any of the provisions of this article are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or, shall take any other action authorized by this article to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.



11-227 [Repealed]
Repealed. Ordinance 1523 (2001).



11-228 Certificates Of Zoning Compliance
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of, any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure, until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefore by the Building Inspector stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this Article.



11-229 Construction And Use As Per Applications, Plans, Permits And Certificates
Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Building Inspector authorize only the use, arrangement, and constructions set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Article and punishable as provided by Section 11-210.



11-230 Special Exceptions
(1) The City Council shall hear and decide only such special exceptions as are provided for by the terms of this Article, decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special exceptions should be granted, and grant special exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this Article or deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Article.

(2) A special exception shall not be granted by the City Council unless and until:

(a) A written application for a special exception is submitted indicating the section of this Article under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested;

(b) Notice shall be given at least ten days in advance of a public hearing. The owner of the property for which special exception is sought or his agent shall be notified by mail. Notice of such hearings shall be posted on the property for which special exception is sought, at City Hall, and in one other public place at least ten days prior to the public hearing;

(c) The public hearing shall be held, and any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney;

(d) The City Council shall make a finding that it is empowered under the section of this Article described in the application to grant the special exception and that the granting of the special exception will not adversely affect the public interest; and,

(e) Before any special exception shall issue, the City Council shall make written findings certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual special exceptions and that satisfactory provision and arrangement has been made concerning the following, where applicable:

(i) Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and in case of fire or catastrophe;

(ii) Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the items in E,1 above and the economic, noise, glare or odor effects of the special exception on adjoining properties and properties generally in the district;

(iii) Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items in E,1 above;

(iv) Utilities, with reference to locations, availability and compatibility;

(v) Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions and character;

(vi) Sign, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district;

(vii) Required yards and other open space; and,

(viii) General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the district.

(3) The following is a listing of additional items that will need to be submitted to the City as part of the submittal or submittals as conditions of approval for special exception for a composting facility. The binding agreement/enforcement (as outlined in subdivision (q)) will need to be in place prior to the start of operations of the facility.

(a) Quantify compost facility individual VOC constituents that have the potential to result from composting as a maximum potential pound-per-hour emission rate without odor emission control. Provide emission factor sources, supporting calculations, and assumptions used to quantify odor emissions.

(b) Quantify compost facility individual hazardous air pollutant (HAP) emissions as a maximum potential pound-per-hour emission rate without odor emission control. Provide supporting calculations, emission factor sources, and assumptions used to quantify the odor emissions.

(c) Quantify compost facility emission for ammonia and hydrogen sulfide as a maximum potential pound-per-hour emission rate without odor emission control. Provide supporting calculations, emission factor sources, and assumptions used to quantify the odor emissions.

(d) Quantify fugitive emissions that are not routed through a stack or vent for the odor constituents of concern.

(e) Summarize the odor emission inventory for the proposed compost process including maximum potential hourly emission rate for odor constituents of concern and characteristics for the exhaust points (stack, vent, or other), including height above ground level, diameter, exit velocity, exit temperature, and orientation. For fugitive emission sources, provide the anticipated minimum release height, width, and length.

(f) Provide a proposed facility layout identifying the location of potential sources of odor emissions and proposed compost processes. The layout should include a scale and north direction. For each proposed building, identify the anticipated building width, length, and height above ground level for modeling purposes.

(g) Complete an ambient odor quality dispersion modeling analysis using the recommended air dispersion modeling approach in subdivision (l), with and without anticipated odor emission control strategies or emission reduction technologies, to plot the following odor annoyance free isopleths for each odor constituent of concern to odor annoyance free zones of 99%, 98%, 97%, 96%, and 95%.

(h) Indicate the basis for the odor threshold used to determine the odor annoyance free isopleths as either an odor recognition threshold or as an odor detection threshold and the source of the value.

(i) Five years of Lincoln, Nebraska surface and Omaha, Nebraska upper air data are generally recommended as a representative weather dataset for use in EPA’s American Meteorological Society/Environmental Protection Agency Regulatory Model (AERMOD) or other approved software.

(j) A uniform cartesian receptor grid using 50-meter spacing is recommended. The center of the receptor grid should be located at the center of the facility’s odor emission sources.

(k) Base elevations for the odor emission sources, receptors, and buildings shall be calculated using AERMAP, the terrain processor for AERMOD.

(l) A recommended odor dispersion modeling approach is generally described as follows:

(i) Model each odor emission source at its maximum potential pound-per-hour uncontrolled odor emission rate for each odor constituent of concern using AERMOD.

(ii) In a separate model run, model each odor emission source at its maximum potential pound-per-hour controlled odor emission rate for each odor constituent of concern using AERMOD.

(iii) Setup each model run to find each instance of a concentration that equals or exceeds the odor threshold identified in subdivision (g).

(iv) Post-process each model run output using a program that calculates the percentage of time in the year the modeled pollutant would not exceed the odor threshold (odor annoyance free percentages) accounting for hours described as missing by AERMOD – missing hours not included in modeled total hours.

(v) Plot the odor annoyance free percentages and overlay the plots on aerial maps to identify the location of the 99%, 98%, 97%, 96%, and 95% odor annoyance free isopleths in comparison with nearby residences and the City of Crete.

(vi) For each odor annoyance free level (99%, 98%, etc.) identify the distance from the facility center-point to the most distant occurrence of the odor annoyance free level.

(m) Anticipated traffic or additional traffic generated to and from the site in vehicle counts to supplement traffic flow information provided in subsection (2).

(n) Composting facility shall comply with the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (NDEQ), state, and federal regulations.

(o) Owner or operator shall provide the City a copy of the NDEQ Title 132 permit application for operation of a solid waste compost site at the time of submittal to the NDEQ. Title 132 permit applications to NDEQ include addressing locational criteria, describing facility design and construction quality assurance plan, an operational plan, a closure plan and financial assurance requirements, recordkeeping requirements, and required maps.

(p) If a composting facility is exempt or partially exempt from NDEQ Title 132 requirements, the City will require a draft operational plan from the owner or operator that addresses facility size, general types and quantities of feedstocks, methods of compost operation, and control procedures (i.e. for pest control, litter control, dust control, protection of groundwater and surface waters, and contingency plan) such that facility will not constitute a hazard or threat to human health or the environment.

(q) The City will require a separate binding agreement for the site to address long term operational and compliance issues. This agreement will be required to be executed prior to the start of operation of the facility. All items associated with the binding agreement are to be submitted and reviewed by the City. The binding agreement will need to include the following at a minimum:

(i) Describe, in general, the planned compost facility design and features with specific attention to odor prevention and control.

(ii) Prepare a site-specific draft Odor Management/Prevention Plan. The plan must include information on how facility operators will prevent or reduce odors from migrating beyond the property boundaries, including the following components: facility name, location, and contact information; describe compost facility design and features with specific attention to odor prevention/retention (e.g., mixer equipment, aeration system, sensors and controls, biofilters, pile coverage, etc.); describe compost facility operational features to be utilized in the prevention and control of odors; general description of types of feedstocks and delivery schedule; maximum time new materials, especially potential odorous feedstocks, are allowed to stockpile in receiving area before being blended with other feedstocks; active compost pile management procedures (e.g., maintaining C:N ratio, temperature, moisture, porosity, air circulation); use best management practices at composting facility to maintain aerobic conditions; description of operational contingencies, mitigation plans or backup systems on foreseeable events (e.g., equipment breakdown, power failure, wet weather conditions, light or calm wind conditions, sensors high/low alarms, etc.); and, personnel training.

(iii) Describe the facility’s plan to monitor odor, including frequency of odor assessment and methods to detect potential odors originating from the facility.

(iv) Describe the facility’s plans to monitor weather, including data collection frequency and parameters planned to be monitored. Such parameters may include precipitation, temperature, and wind speed and direction obtained from the nearest local weather station.

(v) Description of how odor complaints will be addressed including responsibilities, verification, and mitigation process.

(vi) The Odor Management Plan may be part of the binding agreement by reference.

(vii) Compliance requirements are anticipated to be based on the information submitted above. This may include odor emission stack testing, where available, and fence line monitoring.

(viii) Associated enforcement costs, fines for noncompliance, and enforcement steps for repeated violations will be identified in the agreement. These costs or fines may include: fees associated with odor complaint tracking and verification (if applicable); compliance testing (if applicable); fines for noncompliance; and, any other anticipated associated costs to the City. If the operator fails to mitigate the odor as required by the agreement or is not being responsive, the City may initiate procedures to suspend or withdraw the approval of the binding agreement and the facility will be required to shut down.

(ix) A copy of the approved operating permit application from NDEQ. If a composting facility is exempt or partially exempt from NDEQ Title 132 requirements, the facility’s Operational Plan as described above is required.

(4) The concurring vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the City Council shall be necessary to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Article.



11-231 Separability Clause
Should any section or provision of this Article be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Article as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



Article 3 Subdivision Regulations
11-301 Purpose
11-302 Jurisdiction
11-303 Applicability
11-304 Definitions
11-305 Severability
11-306 Procedures
11-307 Streets, Alleys, Sidewalks, Driveways
11-308 Utility And Drainage Facilities
11-309 Shared Improvement Costs
11-310 Subdivision
11-311 Operation And Maintenance
11-312 Dedication Of Public Land
11-313 Annexation And Recording Of Plat
11-314 Variances
11-315 Public Sites And Open Spaces
11-316 Waiver For Small Subdivisions
11-317 Plans, Plats, And The Like; Municipal Officials; Duty
11-318 Amendments


11-301 Purpose
The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the orderly development of Crete and its environs, to proscribe standards for the laying out of subdivisions in harmony with the comprehensive plan, for the coordination of streets and utilities within subdivisions with other existing or planned streets and utilities, for coordination of subdivisions with other features of the comprehensive plan, to provide for adequate open space for traffic, recreation, light, and air, and for the distribution of population and traffic in such a manner so as to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience, or prosperity, all under authority of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-916 to 19-922 and 16-901 to 16-905 and amendments thereto.


Source: Ord. 1167 (1992); Ord. 1945 (2015)



11-302 Jurisdiction
The provisions of this Article shall apply within the area of planning and zoning jurisdiction as defined on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Crete, Nebraska, as may be amended from time to time.


Source: Ord. 1167 (1992)



11-303 Applicability
(1) Any plat hereafter made for each subdivision or part thereof lying within the jurisdiction of this Article shall be prepared for approval and recorded as herein prescribed. The regulations contained herein shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, or other division of land for the purpose of sale or development, whether immediate or future, including the resubdivision or replatting of land or lots, except that the division of land when the smallest parcel created is more than ten acres in area shall be exempt from these regulations. Further, the regulations set forth by this Article shall be minimum regulations which shall apply uniformly throughout the jurisdiction of this Article except as hereafter provided.

(2) Each separate principal use or building within the jurisdiction of this Article shall be situated on a separate and single subdivided lot of record unless otherwise provided in the zoning ordinances of the City of Crete, Nebraska.

(3) No subdivision of land shall be permitted within the jurisdiction of this Article unless a plat is approved in accordance with the provisions of this Article. Further, no lot in a subdivision may be sold, transferred, or negotiated to sell; no permit to erect, alter, or repair any building upon land in a subdivision may be issued; and, no building may be erected in a subdivision unless a final plat has been approved by the City Council and recorded with the Saline County Register of Deeds.

(4) These regulations shall not apply to the following:

(a) To a subdivision of land whereby the smallest parcel created or remaining is more than ten acres.

(b) The subdivision of burial lots in cemeteries.

(c) A change in the boundary between adjoining lands which does not create an additional lot or results in a non-conformity of an existing lot.


Source: Ord. 1167 (1992)



11-304 Definitions
For the purposes of this Article, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:

BUILDING INSPECTOR. The person duly designated by the City Council of said City to enforce this Article.

BUILDING LINE. A line established generally parallel with and measured from the lot line defining the limits of a yard in which no building or structure may be located above ground, except as may be provided in this Article.

COMMON OPEN SPACE. That undivided land in a subdivision which may be jointly owned by all property owners of the subdivision for the benefit of the owners of the individual building sites of said development.

COMMON SEWER SYSTEM. A sanitary sewage system in public ownership which provides for the collection and treatment of domestic effluent in a central sewage treatment plant which meets the minimum requirements of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality for primary and secondary sewage treatment and which does not include individual septic tanks or portable sewage treatment facilities.

COMMON WATER SYSTEM. A water system which provides for the supply, storage, and distribution of potable water on an uninterrupted basis which is in public ownership.

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The long range development plan adopted by the City Council.

COVENANT. Written promise or pledge.

CULVERT. A transverse drain that channels water under a bridge, street, or driveway.

EASEMENT. A grant by property owner to the public, a corporation, or persons of the use of a tract of land for a specific purpose.

ENGINEER. One, licensed by the State of Nebraska, designated by the City Council to act for the City.

FRONTAGE. The length of the property abutting on one side of a street measured along the dividing line between the property and the street.

GREEN AREA. Same as common open space.

IMPROVEMENT. Street pavement or resurfacing, curbs, gutter, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, storm drains, street lights, flood control, and drainage facilities, utility lines, landscaping, and other related matters normally associated with the development of raw land into building sites.

LOT. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this Article, including one main building together with its accessory buildings, the open spaces and parking required by this Article and fronting upon a street.

LOT OF RECORD. A tract of land described as an integral portion of a subdivision plat which is properly recorded in the office of the Saline County Clerk.

LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines and the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees.

LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street.

LOT, THROUGH. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as a double frontage lot.

LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE. A lot in which the frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles, interior angle less than one hundred thirty-five degrees, to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a comer lot, an interior lot, or a through lot.

MONUMENTS. Permanent concrete or iron markers used to establish definitely all lines of the plat of a subdivision, including all lot comers, boundary line corners, and points of change in street alignment.

OUT LOT. Property shown on a subdivision plat outside of the boundaries of the land which is developed and which is to be excluded from the development of the subdivision.

PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. Off-street parking space shall consist of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room. Required off-street parking areas for three or more automobiles shall have individual spaces marked and shall be so designed, maintained, and regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street, walk, or alley and so that any automobile may be parked and unparked without moving another.

PEDESTRIAN WAYS. A tract of land dedicated to public use, which cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjoining streets and properties.

PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. Special development of certain tracts of land planned and designed as a unit for one or more land uses under the regulations and procedures contained in this Chapter.

PLANNING AREA. The statutory zoning jurisdiction of the City.

PLANNING COMMISSION. The appointed planning body designated by the City Council.

PLAT. Map, drawing, or chart upon which the developer's plan of subdivision is presented to the City Council for approval and, after such approval, to the County Clerk for recording.

PLOT. A parcel of ground.

PUBLIC WAY. An alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch, easement, expressway, freeway, highway, land, parkway, right-of-way, road, sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk, or other ways in which the general public or a public entity have a right, or which are dedicated, whether improved or not.

RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting, and drainage facilities and may include special features such as grade separation, landscaped areas, viaducts, and bridges.

SETBACK LINE. See Building Line.

SEWERS, ON-SITE. A septic tank or similar installation on an individual lot which utilizes an aerobic bacteriological process or equally satisfactory process for the elimination of sewage and provides for the proper and safe disposal of the effluent, subject to the approval of health and sanitation officials having jurisdiction.

SIDEWALK. A dedicated public way, four feet or more in width, whether along the side of a road or not.

STREET. A way for vehicular traffic and when used in this Article without further explanation, shall indicate platted street or right-of-way.

SUBDIVIDER: The owners, developers or agents of persons or corporations affecting subdivision.

SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership, building development, or, if a new street is involved, division of a parcel of land. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.

SURVEYOR. Any person registered in Nebraska to practice surveying.

THOROUGHFARE, STREET OR ROAD. The full width between property lines bounding every public way of whatever nature, with a part thereof to be used for vehicular traffic and designated as follows:

Alley: A dedicated public right-of-way, other than a street, which provides only a secondary means of access to abutting property.

Arterial Street: A street which provides for through traffic movement between and around streets with direct access to abutting property, subject to necessary control of entrances, exits, and curb use.

Collector Street: A street which provides for traffic movement between arterials and local streets, with direct access to abutting property.

Cul-de-sac: A local street of relatively short length with one end open to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.

Dead-end Street: A street temporarily having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and intended to be extended or continued in the future.

Local Street: A street which provides direct access to abutting land and local traffic movement, whether in business, industrial or residential land.

Marginal Access Street: A local or collector street parallel and adjacent to an arterial or collector street, providing access to abutting properties and protection from arterial or collector streets. (Also called Frontage Street or Service Road)

VICINITY MAP. A drawing located on the plat which sets forth, by dimensions or other means, the relationship of the proposed subdivision or use to other nearby developments or landmarks and community facilities and services within the City of Crete, in order to better locate and orient the area in question.

WALKWAY. See Sidewalk.

ZONE OR DISTRICT. A section of the zoning area for which uniform regulations governing the use, height, area, size, and intensity of the use of building, land, and open spaces about buildings are established.


Source: Ord. 1167 (1992); Ord. 1945 (2015)



11-305 Severability
Should any section or provision of this Article be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Article as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



11-306 Procedures
11-306.01 Preliminary Plat
11-306.02 Final Plat
11-306.03 Administrative Subdivision


11-306.01 Preliminary Plat
(1) Pre-application Meeting. A pre-application meeting between the applicant or their representative and Building Inspector will be required prior to the submission of an application for approval of a preliminary plat. No application for preliminary plat will be accepted until after the pre-application meeting. The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to review policies, procedures and forms required By the City of Crete. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information as part of a conceptual review sketch plan:

(a) The proposed layout of streets, lots and utilities in relation to existing streets, utilities, topography and other conditions; and

(b) A general location map showing the proposed subdivision and its relationship to existing abutting subdivisions and community facilities in the area, such as streets, alleys, schools, parks, commercial areas and other data supplementing the plans which outline or describe all of the proposed development as it relates to existing conditions.

(2) Plat Submission Requirements. The subdivider shall submit to the Building Inspector nine (9) copies of the preliminary plat and supplemental material specified, with written application for conditional approval, at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning Commission at which the request will be heard.

(3) Fees. The pre-application procedure does not require formal application, fee, or filing of plat with the Planning Commission. Fees thereafter will be set by the City Council.

(4) Scale and Preliminary Plat Contents. Preliminary plats shall be a scale of one inch to one hundred feet or one inch to two hundred feet if seventy-five (75%) percent of the lots are one acre or larger, and shall be prepared with the following information:

(a) Name, location, acreage, owner and designer of subdivision with legal description as shown by land records.

(b) Present zoning

(c) Date, north point and graphic scale.

(d) Location of property lines, roads, existing utilities with size of lines, and other underground installations and easement.

(e) Names of adjoining properties or subdivisions.

(f) Proposed utility system, including water, sewer and paving.

(g) Dimensions, lot lines, except that in industrial type subdivisions, lot lines may be excluded.

(h) Location of proposed drainage.

(i) Contours at intervals of two (2') feet or five (5') feet intervals at 1" = 200' scale.

(j) Proposed improvements and grading concepts.

(k) Location of existing buildings.

(l) Proposed easements, dedications and reservations of land required.

(5) Notification of Improvement Schedule. Sub-divider shall indicate by a letter when improvements as required will be provided; any proposed restrictive covenants for the land involved shall accompany the letter.

(6) Notification of County Planning Commission. The City shall notify the County Planning Commission of any proposed subdivision plat and provide the Commission with all available materials on the proposed plat when such proposed plat lies partially or totally within the extraterritorial subdivision jurisdiction being exercised by that Municipality in such County. The Commission shall be given six (6) weeks to officially comment on the appropriateness of the design and improvements proposed in the plat. The review period shall run concurrently with subdivision review activities of the City after the Commission receives all available material for a proposed subdivision plat.

(7) Notification of School Board. At least ten (10) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the preliminary plat is to be considered for approval, the Planning Commission shall submit a copy of the proposal to the School Board of each School District which the proposed development affects, and shall notify the School Board of the meeting date. Copies of the plat may be submitted to any other agency which may be affected.

(8) Approval or Rejection. After review of the preliminary plat and negotiations with the sub-divider, the Planning Commission shall reject or conditionally approve the preliminary plat, within forty (40) days after the official meeting at which the plat was considered.

(9) Recording of Action. The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on three (3) copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One (1) copy shall be returned to the sub-divider, one (1) copy relayed to the City Council and one (1) copy retained by the Planning Commission.

(10) Approval is Conditional. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat; it shall be deemed an expression of approval or conditional approval of the submitted plat, as a guide for the preparation of the final plat, which will be subject to further consideration by the Planning Commission and the City Council. Any conditional approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one (1) year unless an extension is granted by the Planning Commission.

(11) Installation of Improvements for Final Plat Approval. Following approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall:

(a) Agree to install the required improvements;

(b) Sign an agreement, which shall be entered into only at the option of the City, thereby guaranteeing the installation of improvements; or

(c) Furnish a bond or enter into an escrow or security agreement approved by the City Attorney in an amount sufficient to guarantee the installation of the required improvements.



11-306.02 Final Plat
(1) Final Plat Submission Requirements. Final plats, showing entire concept, shall be submitted to the City Clerk within one (1) year of approval of the preliminary plat, unless an extension is granted by the Planning Commission. The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and to the requirements of all applicable ordinances and State statutes; and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the sub-divider proposes to record and develop at the time; Provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations.

(2) Scale and Final Plat Contents. One (1) original and two (2) Mylar copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for approval shall be submitted. The final plat shall be drawn in ink on mylar and shall be at a scale of one (1") inch to one hundred (100') feet or larger. The final plat shall show the following:

(a) Date, title, name and location of subdivision.

(b) Streets and street names, lots, setback lines, lot numbers, etc., except that in industrial type subdivision lot designation may be excluded.

(c) Graphic scale and north arrow.

(d) Monuments (ferrous) one (1") inch diameter, maximum, thirty (30") inches length minimum.

(e) Dimensions, angles and bearings, and complete legal description of the property.

(f) Sufficient survey data to reproduce any line on the ground.

(g) Names of adjoining subdivisions.

(h) Location and dimensions of any easements.

(i) Purpose for which sites are dedicated or reserved, and the transfer of ownership of the same.

(j) Certification by surveyor as to accuracy of survey and plat.

(k) Certification signed and acknowledged by all parties holding title or having any title interest in the land subdivided and consenting to the preparation and recording of the plat as submitted.

(l) Certification recording the approval of the Planning Commission.

(m) Certification recording the approval of the City Council.

(3) Supplementary Data Required. The final plat shall be accompanied by:

(a) Detailed construction plans of all required public improvements, approved by an Engineer.

(b) Certificate by the City Clerk certifying that the subdivider has posted a bond or certified check which is available to the City, and in sufficient amount to complete all required public improvements as approved by an Engineer.

(4) Professional Assistance. The City Council or the Planning Commission may request such professional assistance as it deems necessary to properly evaluate the plats submitted.

(5) Planning Commission Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall reject or approve the final plat and have prepared a recommendation to the City Council recommending rejection or approval. All reasons for recommending rejection shall be clearly stated. Notification of approval or rejection by the Planning Commission or City Council shall be given to the subdivider within sixty (60) days after submission of the final plat to the Planning Commission.



11-306.03 Administrative Subdivision
(1) Purpose. In the event that a proposed subdivision does not involve the platting and dedication of streets, extension of utility systems, change in subdivision class and type, change in zoning district, change in surface drainage, and will not result in the creation of more than three (3) lots of record, the subdivider may apply for administrative subdivision under the provisions of this section. The utilization of the administrative subdivision does not relieve the subdivider of its obligation to comply with Section 8: Streets, Alleys, Sidewalks and Driveways; and Section 9: Utility and Drainage Facilities of the Subdivision Regulations. The necessity of establishing and dedicating easements for utilities shall not bar the utilization of the administrative subdivision.

(2) Application. Application will be made to the City Council and the City Council may act or may at their option refer the application to the Planning Commission. In the event it is referred to the Planning Commission, the procedures outlined under the final plat provisions shall be followed.

(3) Scale and Plat Contents. The subdivider shall submit an original and eleven (11) copies of the plat. The original shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth, mylar, or similar material and shall be at a scale of 1" to 100' or larger. The plat shall contain the following:

(a) Date, title, name, and location of the subdivision.

(b) Names and locations of abutting streets and lots identifying street names and lot and block numbers.

(c) Identification of the new lot and block numbers and set back lines.

(d) Graphic scale and true north point.

(e) Monuments.

(f) Dimensions, angles and bearings, and complete legal description of the property.

(g) Sufficient engineering data to reproduce any line on the ground.

(h) Location, dimensions, and purposes of any existing easements.

(i) Certification by surveyor or engineer certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plat.

(j) Certification signed and acknowledged by all parties holding title or having any title interest in the land subdivided and consenting to the preparation and recording of the plat as submitted.

(4) Supplementary Data Required. The plat shall be accompanied by:

(a) Protective covenants in form for recording if such are desired by the subdivider.

(b) For subdivisions adjoining or touching the boundaries of the Crete corporate limits; a tract or area for which annexation proceedings have commenced; an approved subdivision which touches or adjoins the Crete corporate limits, a petition signed by the owner or owners requesting annexation to the City.

(c) Utility easements signed by the owner or owners to permit all lots created access to all utilities available in the City, including but not limited to, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water, electrical, telephone, and cable television.



11-307 Streets, Alleys, Sidewalks, Driveways
(1) Streets. The arrangements, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive development plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.

(2) Street Extensions. The street layout of the proposed subdivision shall provide for the continuation of appropriate projection of streets and alleys already existing in areas being subdivided. Where, at the determination of the City Council, it is desirable to provide street access to adjoining properties, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundaries of such properties. Where the City Council deems it necessary, such dead end streets shall be provided with a temporary turnaround having a radius of at least sixty (60’) feet. The street system for the proposed subdivision shall provide for extending existing streets at the same or greater width, but in no case shall a street extension be of less width than the minimum width required in these regulations for a street in its category.

(3) Dedication of Right-of-Way for New Streets. The dedication of right-of-way for new streets measured from lot line to lot line shall be as shown on the comprehensive development plan. All streets classified as arterial streets by the comprehensive development plan shall have all points of access approved by the City Council. Marginal access streets may be required by the City Council for subdivisions fronting on arterial streets.

(4) Dedication of Right-of-Way for Existing Streets Subdivisions platted along existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way if necessary to meet the minimum street width requirements set forth in this Article. The entire minimum right-of-way width shall be dedicated where the subdivision is on both sides of an existing street. When the subdivision is located on only one (1) side of an existing street, one half of the required right-of-way width, measured from the center line of the existing roadway, shall be dedicated. Dedication of one half of the right-of-way for proposed streets along the boundaries of land proposed for subdivision shall be prohibited.

(5) Intersections. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at an angle of ninety (90˚) degrees, and no intersection shall be at any angle of less than sixty (60˚) degrees. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of at least twenty (20') feet. When the smallest angle of street intersection is less than seventy-five (75˚) degrees, the City Council may require curb radii of greater length. Wherever necessary to permit the construction of curb having a desirable radius without reducing the sidewalk at street corner to less than normal width, the property line at such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such curb construction. No lot or other parcel of land which abuts on and has access to either a collector or a minor street shall have a service drive, curb cut, or other means of access to an arterial street within fifty (50') feet of the right-of-way of any street which intersects such arterial street on, the side on which such lot or parcel is located.

(6) Horizontal and Vertical Street Curves. A tangent at least one hundred (100') feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. Where there is a deflection angle of more than ten (10˚) degrees in the alignment of a street, a curve with a radius adequate to insure safe sight distance shall be made. The minimum radii of curves provided shall be required. Every change in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve constructed so as to afford a minimum sight distance of two hundred (200') feet, said sight distance being measured from a driver's eyes, which are assumed to be four and one-half (4-1/2') feet above the pavement surface, to an object four (4”) inches high on the pavement. Profiles of all streets showing natural or finished grades, drawn to an approved scale, may be required by the City.

(7) Street Grades and Elevations. All streets shall be designed so as to provide for the discharge of surface water from the pavement and from the right-of-way by grading and drainage. For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade shall not be less than one-half of one percent (1/2 of l%). The City shall not approve streets which will be subject to inundation or flooding. All streets must be located at elevations which will make them flood-free in order that portions of the subdivision will not be isolated by floods. Where flood conditions exist, the City shall require profiles or elevations of streets in order to determine the advisability of permitting the proposed subdivision activity. Fill may be used in areas subject to flooding in order to provide flood-free streets if such fill does not increase flood heights. Drainage openings shall be designed so as not to restrict the flow of water and thereby increase flood height.

(8) Widths and Grades. Right-of-way widths, pavement widths, and grades shall be:

Street Classification	Minimum Right-of-way (ft.)	Minimum Pavement Width (ft.)	Maximum Grade (%)
Arterial
80	32	7
Collector 
50	32	7
Local
50	30	10
Cul-de-sac and Loop
60	100' diameter	10
Marginal Access (Frontage Road No Parking)
50	32	10
Alleys
20	16	10
Provided on-street parking is allowed only on one side of street; thirty-two feet required if parking allowed on both sides of street.

(9) Marginal Access Streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the City may require access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.

(a) Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon or contains an existing or proposed arterial street or highway or local traffic volumes and vehicular speeds warrant special safety considerations, the City may require that marginal access streets be provided in order that no lots front on such existing or proposed arterial street or highway.

(b) Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railway right of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the City may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.

(10) Street Jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five feet shall be prohibited. Cul-de-sacs, minor terminal or dead end streets or courts which are designed so as to have one end permanently closed shall not be longer than five hundred feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a radius at the outside of the right-of-way of at least sixty feet.

(11) Street Names. Proposed streets which are in alignment with other already existing and named streets shall bear the names of such existing streets. The name of a proposed street which is not in alignment with an existing street shall not duplicate the name of any existing street, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, lane, road, pike, highway, parkway or similar suffix. Whenever a street alignment changes direction more than forty-five degrees without a return to the original alignment within a distance of five hundred feet, then the name of the street shall be changed at the point of curvature. Whenever a cul-de-sac street serves not more than three lots, the name of the intersecting street shall apply to the cul-de-sac. To avoid duplication and confusion, the proposed names of all streets shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to such names being assigned or used.

(12) Private Streets and Reserve Strips. There shall be no private streets platted within a subdivision. There shall be no reserve strips in a subdivision except where their control is definitely vested in the City or County under conditions approved by the Council as authorized herein.

(13) Grading Specification. All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full widths by the subdivider, so that street pavements and sidewalks can be constructed on the same level plane. Deviation from this standard due co special topographical conditions will be allowed only with the approval of the City Council. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be first cleared of all tree stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials and of all trees not intended for preservation. The subgrade shall be properly shaped, rolled and uniformly compacted to conform with the accepted cross-section and grades. In cuts and fills, all tree stumps, boulders, organic material, soft clay, spongy material and other objectionable materials shall be removed to a depth of at least two feet below the graded surface. This objectionable matter, as well as similar matter from cuts, shall be removed from the right-of-way area and disposed of in such a manner that it will not become incorporated in fills or hinder proper operation of the drainage system.

(14) Minimum Pavement Widths. Pavement widths shall be measured between curb backs. Minimum pavement or surface widths shall be provided according to the code of the City of Crete.

(15) Street Surfacing. The streets in the proposed subdivision shall be paved, including curbs and gutters, and street surfacing shall be of concrete or any other suitable surface as recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council. Requirements for paving, including curb and gutter, may be waived at the request of the subdivider in the case of a subdivision wherein ail of the lots in the subdivision have a minimum frontage width of three hundred feet or more or an average lot width of three hundred feet, subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Streets in such subdivision shall have a crushed rock or gravel surface which meets the specifications of the City.

(16) Curb and Gutter. Curb and gutter shall be provided as required by the City Engineer. In areas of notable flash flooding or heavy rain run-off, curbs shall be required on all streets designed for areas where the existing or anticipated residential density of the areas surrounding the proposed subdivision equals or exceeds three dwelling units per net acre. In commercial developments, or where other similar intensive urban uses exist or are anticipated, curbs shall be required. Where curbs exist on abutting properties, their extension shall be required throughout the proposed subdivision. All curb and gutter shall be constructed in conformance with the minimum standards of the City and as approved by the City Engineer.

(17) Street Name Signs. Street name signs, of a type in use throughout the City, shall be erected by the subdivider at all intersections.

(18) Alleys. Alleys shall be provided to give access to the rear of all lots used for commercial and industrial purposes. Minimum width of an alley shall be twenty feet. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate facilities at the dead end, as determined by the City Council. Alleys need not be provided in residential areas where the subdivider produces evidence of easements which are satisfactory to the City Council.

(19) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by existing City ordinances and shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete or other acceptable materials as approved by the City Council. Sidewalk thickness shall be not less than four inches and sidewalk width not less than four feet.

(20) Driveways. Driveways shall have a maximum grade of ten percent (10%). Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three feet from the side lot lines. Curb cuts for straight curbs and the flare for rolled curbs shall be three feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side.

(21) Street and Walkway Lighting. The subdivider shall install street lights as required by the City Council. Such lights shall be located at each street and walkway entrance to the subdivision. In addition, whenever the distance between two adjacent street or walkway lights would exceed three hundred feet, then additional street lights shall be installed in such manner that proper light intensity shall be provided and maintained. New subdivision street and walkway lighting may be installed with all associated wiring underground, if required by the Public Works Director of the City.



11-308 Utility And Drainage Facilities
(1) General. Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water distribution lines shall be installed within the unpaved portions of the street when practical. Sanitary sewer lines will normally be placed on the east portion of the right-of-way on north-south streets, and on the south portion of the right-ofway on east-west streets. Water distribution lines will normally be located in the west portion of the right-of-way on northsouth streets, and on the north portion of the right-of-way of east-west streets. Natural gas lines will normally be placed on the same side of the street as water lines. Storm sewer lines will normally be placed on the same side as the sanitary sewer lines. All the described lines shall be placed in the unpaved areas of the street right-of-way where practical. Electric, telephone and other communication lines will be placed at the rear of platted lots in dedicated alleys where possible. If alleys are not provided, then these lines shall normally be placed in rear lot easements. The width of the easement shall not be part on one lot and part on an abutting lot, but shall be entirely upon one lot. All such utility lines, including service connections shall be completely installed, and inspected and approved by the City Engineer, following the grading of the street and prior to the application of any pavement base. Where sanitary and storm sewer lines are to be installed in the unpaved portion of the street right-of-way, the installation of service connections may be delayed, provided service connections that will pass under surfaces to be paved will be properly installed by the subdivider prior to the paving of the street, Pavement cuts will not be permitted for installation of service connections following paving. Where rock or other obstacles are known to exist beneath the pavement area at such depth as to interfere with the installation of electric, water, natural gas, communications or other service connections, the complete installation of service connections shall be required prior to the application of any pavement base.

(2) Water Supply Improvements. Where a public water supply is reasonably accessible or required because of pollution problems, in the determination of the City Council, the subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution system, including a connection for each lot and appropriately spaced fire hydrants. Public water distribution and public well systems shall meet the requirements of the City and State Health Departments. Where public water supply is not available or not required, the subdivider shall supply acceptable evidence of the avail ability of water. The subdivider may be required to make one (1) or more test wells in the area to be platted, if such evidence is deemed not acceptable. Copies of well logs which are obtained shall include the name and address of the well-driller and shall be submitted with the plat to the City. Where public water is not available or otherwise not provided in the subdivision, the minimum lot size shall conform to the minimum lot size specified in the zoning regulations, provided that in no case shall said minimum lot be less than one (1) acre in area.

(3) Sanitary Sewer Improvements. The following requirements shall govern sanitary sewer improvements:

(a) Where an adequate public sanitary sewer system is reasonably accessible in the determination of the City Council, public sanitary sewers shall be installed to adequately serve all lots, including lateral connections to the public system. Public sewer system extensions shall meet the requirements of the City standards and the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the Department of Health. Combinations of sanitary sewers and storm sewers shall be prohibited.

(b) Where a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible, the subdivider may provide:

(i) A central treatment plant, provided that such central treatment plant is installed in accordance with the City and State Department of Environmental Quality and Department of Health requirements, or

(ii) Lots may be served by individual disposal systems, if provisions of this subsection are met.

(c) Where the installation of individual disposal systems is considered, the suitability of the soil for individual systems, the absorptive ability of the soil, surface drainage, ground water level, and topography shall be the criteria for determining whether or not the installation of individual systems is permissible. Criteria shall be in accordance with the requirements of the City and the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and Department of Health.

(i) Each lot so served shall be of a size and shape to accommodate the necessary length of tile field at a safe distance from and at a lower elevation than the proposed buildings. Such lot size and shape shall conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which they are located, provided that in no case shall said minimum lot be less than one acre in area where there is a public water supply available at the lot, and two and one-half (2-1/2) acres where there is no public water supply available.

(ii) At least one percolation test shall be made for each lot area being platted, and each test shall be located in close proximity to the proposed individual sewage disposal unit be numbered and its location shown on the preliminary plat. All percolation tests shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the City Council and the City Board of Health.

(4) Drainage Improvements. An adequate system for the drainage of all surface water within the area being subdivided, including ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, and other structures, shall be constructed by the developer. Such drains shall comply as to size with such requirements, conformable to good engineering practice, as the Crete City Council shall prescribe; provided that such drains in no event shall be less than twelve inches in diameter. Cross drains shall be constructed to accommodate all natural water flow, be built on a straight line and grade, be laid on a firm base but not on rock and be of sufficient length to permit construction of streets and alleys to their required width and grades.

(a) Surface drainage pipes shall be laid with the spigot end pointed in the direction of the flow, and all ends shall be fitted and matched to provide tight joints and a smooth uniform invert. Such pipes shall be placed at a depth below the road bed that is sufficient to avoid dangerous pressure from impact, and the top, in no event, shall be less than one foot below the surface of the road bed.

(b) A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The Crete City Engineer shall determine the necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development permitted by the Zoning Regulations.

(c) The City Engineer shall also study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development or the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility or flood existing development upstream, the Crete Planning Commission may withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has Crete made for the improvement of said potential condition in such sum as the Planning Commission shall determine. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility.

(d) Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development be required to assure that (a) all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, (b) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, (c) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards so as to assure that all building sites are reasonably safe from flood hazards.

(e) Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot into areas not designed to handle flood waters. Lot drainage plans shall conform to the drainage study required for submittal approval.

(5) Storm Sewers and Storm Water Drainage. Where an adequate public storm sewer system is available at the plat boundary, the subdivider shall construct a storm sewer system and connect with such storm sewer line. If such a storm sewer system is not accessible, natural drainage channels with easement of adequate width shall be provided, as determined by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council. Paved gutters or storm sewers shall be required if velocities are greater than specified in these regulations or cause destructive erosion. Storm drainage, including drain tile around basements, shall not be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer facility, but shall connect to an adequate drainage outlet.

(6) Culverts and Bridges. Where natural drainage channels intersect any street right-of-way, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to have satisfactory bridges or culverts constructed. Where culverts are required, minimum requirements shall be observed as follows:

(a) All culverts shall extend across the entire right-of-way width of the proposed street. The cover over the culvert and its capacity shall be determined by the City Engineer. The minimum diameter of a culvert pipe shall be eighteen inches. Depending on existing drainage conditions, head walls may be required.

(b) Driveway culverts shall have a minimum length of twenty feet and a minimum diameter of eighteen inches. The driveway culverts shall be laid so as to maintain the flow lines of the ditch or gutter. Head walls may be required.

(7) Erosion Control. The subdivider shall be required to provide for the control of erosion of areas of the subdivision which are disturbed by grading operations by constructing temporary terraces on slopes, temporary silting basins, sod swales and spillways, and whatever may be necessary to prevent erosion and damage to adjacent properties from surface drainage as approved by the City and the City Engineer.

(8) Fire Protection. Fire hydrants shall be provided by the subdivider in all subdivisions with public water supplies. The hydrants shall be located between property lines and curbs with all outlets facing or parallel to the street. Hydrants shall be placed at the corners of all blocks and mid-block for blocks exceeding eight hundred feet in length. Hydrants shall also be required at the entrance and end of all cul-de-sacs exceeding four hundred feet in length. The type of hydrant and control valves and the location of the hydrant shall be approved by the Fire Chief. The minimum size of any water line serving any hydrant shall not be less than six inches in diameter and should be circulating water lines. The size and location of water lines shall be approved by the City Engineer and the Fire Chief, or his/her designee.

(9) Electric, Gas and Telephone Improvements. Electric service and telephone service shall be provided within each subdivision. Gas service may be required where reasonably accessible. Whenever such facilities are reasonably accessible and available, they may be required to be installed within the area prior to the approval of the final plat. Telephone, electric, street lighting, and communications conductors may be installed underground at the option of the Public Works Director.

(a) Overhead secondary utility lines, where permitted shall be located at the rear of all lots.

(b) Whenever a sanitary sewer line and electric or telephone line is each placed under ground in the same utility easement, the following provisions shall be applicable:

(i) the total easement width shall not be less than fifteen feet, and

(ii) the sanitary sewer line shall be installed within three feet of the easement, and the electric or telephone line shall be installed within three feet of the opposite side of the easement.

(10) Solar Access. In order to promote the conservation of energy through the use of both passive and active solar systems, streets in residential subdivisions should, where possible, have an east-west alignment. Lots intended for detached dwellings should be of sufficient width to allow the structure to be built with its longest axis running east-west.

(a) In order to allow the orientations of structures on the site so as to maximize potential solar gain, side lot lines should run as near to north-south as possible providing that the angle between the side of lot line and the street right-of-way line on a straight street or the tangent to a curved street shall not be less then eighty (80) degrees.

(b) Any property owner or developer may grant or establish a solar sky-space easement to protect solar energy systems from shade. The easements shall be created in writing and shall be recorded separately or should be contained on the face of the plat. The easements shall run with the land.


Source: Ord. 1945 (2015)



11-309 Shared Improvement Costs
(1) Over-size and Off-site Improvements. The utilities, pavement, and other land improvements required for the proposed subdivision shall be designed of over-size or with extensions provided to serve nearby land which is an integral part of the neighborhood service or drainage area as determined by the City and the City Engineer.

(2) Cost of Over-size Improvements. Minimum street pavement widths shall conform to the standards set by the City Council. Where pavement widths greater than said standards are deemed necessary by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council, the City shall bear the extra cost of providing a greater than minimum pavement width required by said standards. The subdivider shall be required to pay for only that part of the construction Costs for the arterial streets, trunk sewers, or water lines which are serving the proposed subdivision as determined by the City and the City Engineer. The City shall pay the difference between the cost of required improvements for the proposed subdivision and improvements required to service the surrounding areas as specified in the first paragraph of this section.

(3) Extensions to Boundaries. The subdivider may be required to extend the necessary improvements to the boundary of the proposed subdivision to serve adjoining unsubdivided land, as determined by the City Council.

(4) Off-site Extensions. If street or utilities are not available at the boundary of a proposed subdivision, and if the council finds the extensions across undeveloped areas would not be warranted as a special assessment to the intervening properties or as a Municipal expense until some future time, the subdivider may be required, prior approval of the final plat, to obtain necessary easements or rights-of-way and construct and pay for such extensions. Such improvements shall be available for connections by subdividers of adjoining land.



11-310 Subdivision
Completion of Improvement. Prior to final plat approval, the subdivider shall complete, in a manner satisfactory to the City Council and the City Engineer, all improvements required herein specified in the final subdivision plat, and as approved by the City Council, and shall dedicate same to the City in accordance with the following sections. Final plat approval shall not be granted until the dedication of said improvements has been accepted by the City.
Inspection and Certification. The City Engineer, or other designated City Official, shall regularly inspect for defects in the construction of required improvements. Upon completion of these improvements, the City Engineer shall file with the City Council a statement either certifying that the improvements have been completed in the specific manner or listing the defects in these improvements. Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider shall file with the Council a statement stipulating the following:
That all required improvements are complete,
That these improvements are in compliance with the minimum standards specified by the Council for their construction.
That the subdivider knows of no defects from any cause in those improvements.
That these improvements are free and clear of any encumbrance or lien, and
A one (1) year guarantee from the date of acceptance by City Council.
The subdivider shall also file with the City an agreement dedicating said improvements to the City. If the City Engineer has certified that the contracted improvements are complete, then, upon receipt of the other statements and agreements detailed above, the City shall accept the dedication of those improvements. The City may, at its discretion, accept the dedication of any portion of the required of the required improvements, provided that all statements and agreements specified above have been received for that portion of the improvements.

In lieu of requiring the completion of all improvements prior to final plat approval, the City may, at its discretion, enter into a contract with the subdivider whereby the subdivider shall guarantee to complete all improvements required by this Article, or otherwise specified by the City Council, in a manner satisfactory to the Council. To secure this contract, the subdivider shall provide, subject to the approval of the Council, one of the following guarantees.
Performance Bond. The subdivider shall obtain a security bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska. The bond shall be payable to the City of Crete and shall be in an amount to cover the entire cost, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the City Engineer of installing all contracted improvements. The duration of the bond shall be until such time as the improvements are accepted by the City.
Escrow Account. The subdivider shall deposit cash, or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the City or in escrow with a bank. The use of any instrument other than cash, and in the case of an escrow account, the bank with which the funds are to be deposited shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. The amount of the deposit shall be at least equal to the cost, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the City Engineer, of installing all required improvements.
Security Agreement. The subdivider shall provide a Security Agreement guaranteeing the installation of all required improvements. The Security Agreement must be approved by the City Attorney and in an amount sufficient to guarantee the installation of all improvements.

In the case of an escrow account, the subdivider shall file with the City Council an agreement between the financial bank and himself/herself guaranteeing the following:
That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the City Council and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider as security in any other matter during that period; and
That in the case of a failure on the part of the subdivider to complete said improvements, then the bank shall immediately make the funds in said account available to the City for use in the completion of those improvements.
Sequential Approval of Subdivision Segments Without Guarantee. Where a subdivision is to be developed in several sections, the City Council may, at its discretion, waive the use of a guarantee on the initial sections, provided that such sections may not be larger than twenty-five (25) lots, or fifty (50%) percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision, whichever is less. The City Council shall grant final plat approval for each succeeding section being contingent upon completion of all contracted improvements in each preceding section, and acceptance of those improvements in accordance with this section.

Completion of improvements in the final section of the subdivision, which shall include at least twenty-five (25) lots, or fifty (50%) percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision, whichever is less, must be guaranteed through the use of one (1) of the other methods detailed under this section of this Article.
Special Assessment. The City may, at its discretion, enter into an agreement with the subdivider to pay the cost of the required improvements through the use of a special assessment. The City shall make such arrangements for actual construction and interim financing as it deems appropriate, provided that construction of improvements in any section of the subdivision shall be completed in a time period not longer than would be allowed if another form of improvement guarantee were used.
Time Limits. Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the subdivider and the City Council shall agree upon a deadline for the completion of all required improvements, such deadline not to exceed two (2) years from the date of final plat approval. The City Council shall have the power to extend the deadline for one (1) additional year where the subdivider can present substantial reason for doing so.
Failure to Complete Improvements. If any portion of the required improvements shall fail to be accepted for dedication in compliance with this Article within the allocated time period, either for reason of incompletion or for reason of substandard construction, then the City Council shall take one (1) of the following actions:
Where improvements have been guaranteed under this Article, preliminary plat approval shall be revoked.
Where improvements have been guaranteed under this section of this Article, the City Council shall declare whatever security has been pledged as a guarantee to be forfeited. Where the City Council is not already in possession of said guarantee, it shall immediately take the actions necessary to obtain it. Upon receipt of these securities, the City Council shall use them, or receipts from their sale if that be necessary, to finance the completion of contracted improvements or the rebuilding of such improvements to the proper specifications. Unused portions of these securities shall be returned to the subdivider, bonding company, or crediting institution, as is appropriate.
Inspection and Certification. The City Engineer or other authorized person shall regularly inspect construction of required improvements for defects. Upon completion of the improvements, the City Engineer or other authorized person shall file with the City Council a statement either certifying that the improvements have been completed in the specified manner or listing defects in those improvements which do not meet the requirements of the approved improvement plans and specifications.

Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider shall file with the City Council a statement stipulating the following:
That all required improvements are complete.
That these improvements are in compliance with the minimum standards specified by the Planning Commission and City Council.
That the subdivider knows of no defects from any cause in the improvements.
That these improvements are free and clear of any encumbrance or lien.
If the City Engineer or other authorized person has certified that the improvements are complete and free from defect, the City Council shall accept any dedication of improvements. The City Council may, at its discretion, accept the dedication of any portion of the improvements provided that all statements and agreements specified above have been received by the City of Crete for that portion of the improvements.
Reduction of Guarantees. In those cases where improvement guarantees have been made under this section of this Article, the amount of the guarantee may be reduced upon this section of this Article, the amount of the guarantee may be reduced upon acceptance in compliance with this section of the dedication of a portion of the required improvements.
Release of Guarantee. After final approval and prior to the expiration of one (1) year after the date of final approval, or such longer period of time as may be prescribed by law or by the terms of any applicable special guarantee required by the contract documents, if any work is found to be defective, the subdivider will promptly, without cost to the City and in accordance with the City's written instructions, either correct such defective work, or if any work has been rejected by the City, remove it from the site and replace it with non-defective work. It shall be the duty of the subdivider to notify the City Council in writing within thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the one (1) year period to make the final inspection of the work. Unless the subdivider shall furnish such notices, the obligation to maintain the work shall continue in force until such notices have been furnished, the work inspected, and any required corrections made.
(Amended Ord. 1945, 9/15/15)

11-311 Operation And Maintenance
It is the intention of the City to provide no services other than planning and zoning administration to its area of planning and zoning jurisdiction beyond the corporate boundaries of the City. It will be the obligation of the subdivider to present the City Council a precise approach for the provisions of these services. Said approach may include the formation of districts, homeowners organizations or other methods to operate and provide for long term maintenance and service. Said approach shall be made binding on the subdivider in a form, agreement or contract in a manner which is accepted by the City Attorney.

11-312 Dedication Of Public Land
Dedication.
At the time of final plat approval by the City Council, the owners shall be required to dedicate to the public use all streets, alleys, easements, and buffer strips as required by the City Council and these Regulations. Acceptance of dedicated land shall be recorded in the minutes of the City Council.
Subdividers of "Commercial" type subdivisions may be required to dedicate land for off-street parking as determined necessary by the City Council.
(Amended Ord. 1945, 9/15/15)

11-313 Annexation And Recording Of Plat
Subdivision Annexation of Adjoining or Contiguous Properties. All subdivisions or additions laid out adjoining or contiguous to the corporate limits shall be included within the same and become a part of the municipality for all purposes whatsoever, upon approval of and acceptance by Resolution of the City Council. (Ref § 19-916)
Subdivision Annexation: Petition for Annexation. Any subdivision in which there are lands dedicated to the City or any subdivision serviced by public utilities shall be annexed to the City. Before approval for the final plat is given, the Municipal Body shall receive a Petition for annexation from the owners of the subdivided properties.
Subdivision Annexation: Adoption Plan by Resolution. The City Council desiring to annex land under the authority of this section shall first adopt both a resolution stating that the City is considering the annexation of the land and a plan for extending City services to the land. The resolution shall state:
The time, date and location of the public hearing required below;
A description of the boundaries of the land proposed for annexation; and
That the plan of the City for extension of City services to the land proposed for annexation is available for inspection during regular business hours in the office of the City Clerk.
The plan adopted by the City Council shall contain sufficient detail to provide reasonable persons with a full and complete understanding of the intentions of the City for extending City services to the land proposed for annexation. The plan shall:
State the estimated cost impact of providing the services to such land.
State the method by which the City plans to finance the extension of services to the land and how any services already provided to the land will be maintained.
Include a timetable for extending service to the land proposed for annexation, and
Include a map drawn to scale clearly delineating the land proposed for annexation, the current boundaries of the City, the proposed boundaries of the City after annexation and the general land-use pattern in the land proposed for annexation.
A public hearing on the proposed annexation shall be held within sixty (60) days following the adoption of the resolution to allow the City Council to receive testimony from interested persons. The City Council may recess the hearing, for good case, to a time and date specified at the hearing.

A copy of the resolution providing for the public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper or the City at least once not less than ten days preceding the date of the public hearing. A map drawn to scale delineating the land proposed for annexation shall be published with the resolution. A copy of the resolution providing for the public hearing shall be sent by first-class mail, following its passage, to the school board of any school district in the land proposed for annexation.
(Amended Ord. 1945, 9/15/15)

11-314 Variances
Granting of Variances; Conditions. The City Council may grant variances from the provisions herein, but only after determining that:
There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting the property,
The variance is necessary for the reasonable and acceptable development of the property in question,
The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the adjacent property.
Recording of Plat. In no case shall the requirement of filing and recording a plat for subdivision be waived.
Planned Development. The Council may also grant reasonable variances, if the subdivider concurrently submits an application for, and obtains approval of, a planned development. The subdivider shall indicate where the plans vary from the requirements of Article and shall present sufficient evidence to support the request, indicating why the request will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
(Amended Ord. 1945, 9/15/15)

11-315 Public Sites And Open Spaces
Recreation Standards. The Crete Planning Commission may require that land be dedicated for parks and playgrounds or other recreation purposes. Such areas shall be shown and marked on both the preliminary and final plat, as "Dedicated for Park and/or Recreation Purpose." The developer shall dedicate all such recreation areas to the City of Crete as a condition of final subdivision plat approval. The Commission may require that the recreation area be located at a suitable place on the edge of the subdivision so that additional land may be added at such time as the adjacent land is subdivided. In no case shall an area of less than one (1) acre be reserved for recreation purposes if it will be impractical or impossible to secure additional lands in order to increase its area.
Recreation Sites. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a character and location suitable for use as a playground, playfield, or for other recreation purposes; and shall be improved by the developer to the standards required by the Planning Commission, which improvements shall be included in the performance bond.

A recreation site shall have a total frontage on one (1) or more streets of at least one hundred (100) feet, and no other dimension of the site shall be less than one hundred (100) feet unless it is for a designated linear park. The Planning Commission may refer any subdivision proposed to contain a dedicated park to the Crete Park Board for a recommendation. All land to be reserved for dedication to the City of Crete for park purposes shall have prior approval of the City Council and shall be shown marked on the plat "Dedicated for Park."
(Amended Ord. 1945, 9/15/15)

11-316 Waiver For Small Subdivisions
The subdivider may make application for, and the Council may grant, a waiver of some or all of the requirements provided for herein for small residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions where the following conditions exist:

The subdivision contains no more than four (4) lots, which total area of said lots shall not exceed one-half (1/2) acre, and conform to existing zoning ordinances.
All lots of the proposed subdivisions shall be platted on existing streets,
Surfaces of all streets serving the subdivision meet, or exceed, street surface standards of the City,
Public water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer system facilities are available to all lots in the subdivision,
The development of the subdivision will not increase erosion or flooding potential, and
The subdivider demonstrates to the Council that said development is in conformity with the potential development of abutting property.

A subdivider requesting a waiver hereunder shall submit said request in writing to the Council prior to the submission of a preliminary plat. The request for a waiver shall include a list of all requirements for which a waiver is sought by reference to code numbers and descriptive headings.
(Amended Ord. 1945, 9/15/15)

11-317 Plans, Plats, And The Like; Municipal Officials; Duty
A municipal official charged with the duty or responsibility of accepting or approving plans, specifications, plats, and reports shall not accept or approve plans, specifications, plats, or reports which have not been prepared in accordance with the Engineers and Architects Regulation Act. (Neb. RS 81-3447)
A municipal official charged with the duty or responsibility of accepting or approving plans, specifications, geological maps, and reports shall not accept or approve plans, specifications, geological maps, or reports which have not been prepared in accordance with the Geologists Regulation Act. (Neb. RS 81-3538)
Statutory reference:
Geologist license not required for certain municipal work and other specified activities, see Neb. RS 81-3541 Similar exemptions under the Engineers and Architects Regulation Act, see Neb. RS 81-3449 and 81-3453.

(Ord. No. 1456, 08/03/99; 1945, 9/15/15)

11-318 Amendments
Any provision herein from time to time may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the Governing Body according to law; Provided, however, that such amendments, supplements, changes, modifications or repealed provisions shall not become effective until after study and report and recommendations of the Planning Commission.

(Amended Ord. 1945, 9/15/15)

Article 4 Flood Plain Districts
11-401 Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact And Purposes
11-402 General Provisions
11-403 Development Permit
11-404 Establishment Of Zoning Districts
11-405 Standards For Floodplain Development
11-406 Flood Fringe Overlay District - (Including AO And AH Zones)
11-407 Floodway Overlay District
11-408 Variance Procedures
11-409 Nonconforming Use
11-410 Penalties For Violation
11-411 Amendments
11-412 Definitions

11-401 Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact And Purposes
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION: The Legislature of the State of Nebraska has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt zoning regulations designed to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. The Legislature, in Sections 31-1001 to 31-1022, R.R.S. 1943, has further assigned the responsibility to adopt, administer, and enforce floodplain management regulations to the county, city or village with zoning jurisdiction over the flood-prone area. Therefore, the City Council of Crete, Nebraska, ordains as follows:
FINDINGS OF FACT
Flood Losses Resulting from Periodic Inundation
The flood hazard areas of Crete, Nebraska, are subject to inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
General Causes of the Flood Losses
These flood losses are caused by: (1) The cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, (2) The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to others, which are inadequately elevated or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards
This ordinance uses a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series of interrelated steps.
Selection of a regulatory flood which is based upon engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The base flood is selected for this ordinance. It is representative of large floods which are reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this ordinance. It is in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any one year, as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administration's Flood Insurance Study, and illustrative materials dated November 4, 2010 as amended, and any future revisions thereto.
Calculation of water surface profiles based on a hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the base flood.
Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than 1 foot at any point.
Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no obstruction is permitted which would cause any water surface increase along the floodway profile.
Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but which still is subject to inundation by the base flood.
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE: It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in Section 401 B 1 by applying the provisions of this ordinance to:

1.31 Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities.

1.32 Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction.

1.33 Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazard.

1.34 Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Amended by Ordinance 1768, 10/05/2010)

11-402 General Provisions
LANDS TO WHICH ORDINANCE APPLIES: This ordinance shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Crete, Nebraska identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated November 4, 2010 any revisions hereto, as numbered and unnumbered A Zones (including AE, AO and AH Zones) and within the Zoning Districts FW and FF established in Section 11-404 of this ordinance. In all areas covered by this ordinance no development shall be permitted except upon the issuance of a floodplain permit to develop, granted by the city council or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the city council or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community and where specifically noted in Sections 11-405, 11-406 and 11-407.
THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The building inspector of the community is hereby designated as the community's duly designated Enforcement Officer under this Ordinance.
RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES: The boundaries of the floodway and flood fringe overlay districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map or Floodway Map. Where interpretation is needed to the exact location of the boundaries of the districts as shown on the official zoning map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the Enforcement Officer shall make the necessary interpretation. In such cases where the interpretation is contested, the Board of Adjustment will resolve the dispute. The regulatory flood elevation for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating the district boundary on the land. The person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the Board of Adjustment and to submit his own technical evidence, if he so desires.
COMPLIANCE: Within identified special flood hazard areas of this community, no development shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS: It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate or impair any existent easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this ordinance shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
INTERPRETATION: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY: The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This ordinance does not imply that areas outside floodway and flood fringe district boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damage. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Crete or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
SEVERABILITY: If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
APPEAL: Where a request for a permit to develop or a variance is denied by the building inspector the applicant may apply for such permit or variance directly to the Board of Adjustment.
(Amended by Ordinance 1769, 10/05/2010)

11-403 Development Permit
PERMIT REQUIRED: No person, firm or corporation shall initiate any floodplain development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for development as defined in Section 11-412.
ADMINISTRATION
The building inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance.
Duties of the building inspector shall include, but not be limited to:
Review all development permit applications to assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
Review applications for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding.
Notify adjacent communities and the Nebraska Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
Verify, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures in special flood hazard areas.
Verify, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure the building inspector shall be presented certification from a registered professional engineer or architect.
APPLICATION FOR PERMIT: To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall:
Identify and describe the development to be covered by the floodplain development permit.
Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be done by lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or development.
Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed development is intended.
Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction.
Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the building inspector.
11-404 Establishment Of Zoning Districts
Along watercourses where a floodway has been established, the mapped floodplain areas are hereby divided into the two following districts: A floodway overlay district (FW) and a flood fringe overlay district (FF) as identified in the Flood Insurance Study [and accompanying map(s)]. Within these districts all uses not meeting the standards of this ordinance and those standards of the underlying zoning district shall be prohibited.

11-405 Standards For Floodplain Development
No permit for development shall be granted for new construction, substantial improvements and other development(s) including the placement of manufactured homes within all numbered and unnumbered A zones (including AE, AO, and AH zones) unless the conditions of this Section are satisfied.
All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the FIRM are subject to inundation of the base flood; however, the water surface elevation was not provided. The unnumbered A zones shall be subject to all development provisions of Section 11-406. If Flood Insurance Study data is not available, the community shall utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from Federal, State or other sources.
Until a floodway has been designated, no development or substantial improvement may be permitted within special flood hazard areas unless the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed development or substantial improvement, when combined with all other existing and reasonably anticipated developments or substantial improvements, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any location as shown on the Flood Insurance Study.
New construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvements, prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes and other developments shall require:
Design or anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and onsite waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination.
Construction with materials resistant to flood damage, utilizing methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
All utility and sanitary facilities be elevated or floodproofed up to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
Storage of Material and Equipment
The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.
Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, be required to assure that (a) all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, (b) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, (c) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and (d) proposals for development (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivision) of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals the base flood elevation.
11-406 Flood Fringe Overlay District - (Including AO And AH Zones)
PERMITTED USES: Any use permitted in Section 11-407 shall be permitted in the Flood Fringe Overlay District. No use shall be permitted in the district unless the standards of Section 11-405 are met.
STANDARDS FOR THE FLOOD FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT
Require new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures to have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
Require new construction or substantial improvements of non-residential structures to have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to be floodproofed so that below that level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the building inspector as set forth in Section 11-403.B,2(g).
Require for all new construction and substantial improvements that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Within AH zones adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
Manufactured Homes
All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in accordance with local building codes or FEMA guidelines. In the event that over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:
Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side;
Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side;
All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and
Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.
Require that all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within special flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM on sites:
Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,
In a new manufactured Home Park or subdivision,
In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or
In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of Section 11-406 E,1.
Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within special flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of Section 11-406 E,2 be elevated so that either:
The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or
The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that is no less than 36 inches in height above grade; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of Section 11-406 E,1.
Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the special flood hazard areas on the community's official map shall either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" of this ordinance. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 11-402 A are areas designated as AO Zones. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply within AO Zones:
All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall:
Have the lowest floor elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or
Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 11-403 B.2 (g).
Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
11-407 Floodway Overlay District
PERMITTED USES: Only uses having a low flood-damage potential and not obstructing flood flows shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance. The following are recommended uses for the Floodway District:
Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, nurseries, forestry.
Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and play areas.
Non-residential areas such as loading areas, parking and airport landing strips.
Public and private recreational uses such as golf courses, archery ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves.
STANDARDS FOR THE FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT: New structures for human habitation are prohibited. All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development must be prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that the development shall not result in any increase in water surface elevations along the floodway profile during occurrence of the base flood discharge. These uses are subject to the standards of Section 11-405 and 11-406. In Zone A unnumbered, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any flood elevation and floodway data available through Federal, State or other sources or Section 11-405 F (d) of this ordinance, in meeting the standards of this section.
11-408 Variance Procedures
The Board of Adjustment as established by the City Council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.
The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as provided in Section 19-912, R.R.S. 1943.
In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and:
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and,
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES
Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (E2-E6 below) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels along the floodway profile during the base flood discharge would result.
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
Variances shall only be issued upon
a showing of good and sufficient cause,
a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
This application shall be given a written notice over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this ordinance.
11-409 Nonconforming Use
A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of the ordinance, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance may be continued subject to the following conditions:
If such use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this ordinance. The Department of Public Works shall notify the building inspector in writing of instances of nonconforming uses where utility services have been discontinued for a period of 12 months.
Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred except that if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued designation.
(Amended by Ordinance 1770, 10/05/2010)

11-410 Penalties For Violation
Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action is as necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

11-411 Amendments
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Crete. At least 10 days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulations of this ordinance are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations as published in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations and the 1983 Nebraska Flood Plain Management Act.

11-412 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application:

"Appeal" means a request for a review of the building inspector's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.

"Area of Shallow Flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

"Base Flood” means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

"Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

"Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

"Existing Construction” means (for the purposes of determining rates) structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM's effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."

"Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

"Flood" or "Flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The usual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
"Flood Fringe" is that area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway, that on the average is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of flood occurrence in any one year).

"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means an official map of a community, on which the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the Flood Hazard Boundaries and the zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the community.

"Flood Insurance Study” is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

"Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").

"Floodway" or "Regulatory Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

"Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.

"Highest Adjacent Grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

"Historic Structure" means any structure that is:

Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
"Lowest Floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this ordinance.

"Manufactured Home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".

"Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

"New Construction" For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

"Overlay District" is a district in which additional requirements act in conjunction with the underlying zoning district(s). The original zoning district designation does not change.

"Principally Above Ground” means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure is above ground.

"Recreational Vehicle” means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

"Special Flood Hazard Area” is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

"Start of Construction" [for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)] includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

"Substantial Damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

"Substantial Improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."

"Variances" is a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.

“Violation” means a failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.

“100-Year Flood” The base flood having a one percent (1%) chance of annual occurrence.

(Amended by Ord. Nos. 1029, 3/17/87; 1163, 04/07/92; 1164, 04/07/92; 1597, 12/16/03)

Article 5 Supplementary District Regulations
11-501 Visibility At Intersections In Residential Districts
11-502 Fences, Walls, And Hedges
11-503 Accessory Buildings
11-504 Erection Of More Than One Principal Structure Per Lot
11-505 Height Regulations; Exceptions
11-506 Yard Requirements Exceptions
11-507 Structures To Have Access
11-508 Off-Street Parking And Loading Requirements
11-509 Off-Street Parking And Loading; Building Permits
11-510 Off-Street Parking; Multiple-Dwelling Units
11-511 Parking Lots
11-512 Home Occupations
11-513 [Repealed]
11-514 [Repealed]
11-515 Mobile Home Parks
11-516 Community Unit Plan
11-517 Patio Decks And Slabs
11-518 Zoning Regulations; Manufactured Homes; Standards
11-518.01 Manufactured/Moved Structures; Permanent Foundation; Time Of Construction
11-519 [Repealed]
11-520 Storage Or Carport Structures; Metal Or Fabric Materials; Permanent Structure
11-521 Residential Design Standards
11-522 Commercial Design Standards
11-523 Neighborhood Design Standards
11-524 Salvage Or Junk Yard
11-525 Landfills And Sanitary Landfills
11-526 Small And Commercial Wind Energy Conversion Systems
11-527 Small Wind Energy Conversion System
11-528 Commercial Wind Energy Conversion System - (CWECS)
11-529 Communication Towers
11-530 Solar Panels
11-531 Adult Establishments
11-532 Outdoor Storage Containers

11-501 Visibility At Intersections In Residential Districts
On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such manner as materially to impede vision between height of two and a half (0.76 meters) and ten feet (3.05 meters) above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street lines fifty feet (15.24 meters) from the point of the intersection.

(Ord. 1142 (1991))

11-502 Fences, Walls, And Hedges
(1) Notwithstanding other sections or provisions of the City Code, fences, walls, and hedges are permitted in any required yard, provided that no fence, wall, or hedge along the sides or front edge of any front yard shall be erected over four feet in height and all fences in the front yard must be of an open weave or see-through design. Hedges and walls up to four feet in height will be allowed in the front yard only upon application for a special permit and approval by the City.

(2) The following regulations shall apply to the construction of all fences:

(a) All fences constructed in the City of Crete shall comply with this section and a building permit must be obtained.

(b) All fences shall conform to the construction standards of the Building Code and all other applicable ordinances and resolutions.

(c) No fence shall be constructed closer to the street than the property line, and no fence shall be closer than eighteen inches to the sidewalk. The good side of the fence shall face the outside of the property.

(d) No fence erected in a required front yard shall materially obstruct public view. Permitted types of fences for use in front yards shall include split rail, chain link, or other similar open-spaced or see-through material. No component of a front yard fence shall exceed four feet in height, nor shall any structural member exceed three feet in cross-sectional area.

(e) No fence shall be constructed which will constitute a traffic hazard as identified in the site triangle of a corner lot.

(f) No fence shall be constructed in such a manner or be of such design as to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or animals by intent of its construction or by inadequate maintenance.

(g) No fence shall be constructed within a designated floodway.

(h) No component of a fence within Residential Districts, except fences erected upon public or parochial school grounds or in public parks and playgrounds, shall be constructed of a height greater than six feet.

(i) In Commercial and Industrial Districts, the maximum height of fences shall be eight feet;. however, when industry standards for certain types of businesses recommend fences of greater heights, the City may allow greater heights upon application for and approval of a special permit.


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1261 (1995); Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 2106, § 5 (2020)

11-503 Accessory Buildings
Accessory buildings, structures, and parts of buildings or structures located within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Crete must comply with the following provisions:

(1) An accessory building or structure shall not be located on a premises unless a principal building or structure is also located on that same premises.

(2) No construction permit shall be issued for the construction of an accessory building or structure prior to the issuance of a construction permit for the construction of the principal building or structure upon the same premises. If construction of the principal building or structure does not precede or coincide with the construction of the accessory building or structure, the City shall revoke the construction permit for the accessory building or structure until construction of the principal building or structure has been substantially completed.

(3) Any accessory building or structure attached to a principal building shall be considered part of the principal building for the purpose of height, distance, and yard requirements, and the total building or structure shall adhere to the yard requirements for the zoning district in which it is located.

(4) The design of accessory buildings and structures shall be consistent with the character of the neighborhood and the exterior materials shall match those of the principal building or structure as much as possible.

(5) The minimum distance between an accessory building or structure and any other buildings or structures on the same premises shall be five feet.

(6) The cumulative total square footage for all accessory buildings or structures shall not exceed the total square footage of the first floor of the principal building.

(7) The maximum height of any detached accessory building or structure is fifteen feet.

(8) Detached accessory buildings or structures, except for signs, may only be erected in the rear yard and shall be set back from side and rear lot lines by a minimum of five feet, except that, if erected on a corner lot, any detached accessory building or structure shall be set back from the side street to comply with the setback line applying to the principal building for that side street.

(a) Notwithstanding the above, if the access to a detached accessory building or structure used as a garage, carport, or similar structure is from an alley, then it shall be set back from the property line adjacent to the alley a minimum of fifteen feet.

(b) The cumulative total square footage of all detached accessory buildings or structures shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the required rear yard.

(9) Accessory buildings or structures on corner lots shall not be located closer to the side property line than the front yard required on the adjacent premises.


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1926 (2015)

11-504 Erection Of More Than One Principal Structure Per Lot
Where a lot or tract is used for business, commercial or industrial use, more than one main building may be located upon the lot or tract, provided that yard and other requirements of this Article shall be met for each building. In the event a lot is to be occupied by a group of two or more buildings to be used as a unit for any combination of two-family dwellings or multiple family dwellings, there may be more than one main building on the lot, provided the open space between buildings shall have a minimum distance of ten feet (3.05 meters) and yard and other requirements of this Article shall be met for each building.

(Ord. 1142 (1991))

11-505 Height Regulations; Exceptions
The height limitations contained in the Schedule of District Regulations shall apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, electrical generators, wind propelled devices, and/or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy, except as provided for herein. Application for special exception use, under Crete City Ordinance §11-230, and approval of the City Council, shall be required before any such structure is constructed that will exceed the height limitations established by the Schedule of District Regulations, zoning regulation and/or Crete City Ordinance, regardless of whether the structure to be constructed is attached to another structure or is free standing.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the placement of direct broadcast satellite, broadband radio service, and/or television broadcast antennas, without permit, as allowed under the “Over-the-Air Reception Devices” (OTARD), Federal Communications Commission Rule (47 C.F.R. Section 1.4000) as now exists or as may be amended.
(Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1757 (2010))

11-506 Yard Requirements Exceptions
For the purposes of computing yard dimensions, the following architectural features shall be disregarded: cornices, canopies, eaves extending not more than three feet (0.91 meters); fire escapes or uncovered outside stairs extending not more than three feet (0.91 meters); landing planes and uncovered porches having floor levels not higher than the entrance floors of the respective buildings and extending not more than six feet (1.83 meters) into a front or rear yard, nor more than three feet (0.91 meters) high around such landings or porches and fences.
FRONT YARDS. The front yards heretofore established shall be adjusted in the following cases:
Where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed and the buildings on this side of a block have observed a front yard greater in depth than herein required, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the street than the average front yard so established by the existing buildings provided that no building shall be required to have a front yard setback of more than fifty (50) feet.
Where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have a front yard less than the required, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the street than the nearest building on the block.
(Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1926 (2015))

11-507 Structures To Have Access
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking.

(Ord. 1142 (1991))

11-508 Off-Street Parking And Loading Requirements
(1) The following off-street parking requirements and spaces are hereby established and required for all new construction for which building permits are required for new structures of the City of Crete, Nebraska. Such requirements shall be and constitutes the minimum off-street parking or loading requirements and shall not prevent the City Council from requiring additional parking spaces for new structures if the minimum off-street parking requirements are insufficient to provide adequate parking of vehicles.


Uses and Structures
Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
(Applicable in all zoning districts to the uses or structures indicated)
Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements
(Applicable in all districts to the uses or structures indicated)
Residential Structures
(including mobile home dwellings and multiple-family dwellings)

2 spaces per single-family dwelling; 2 spaces per dwelling unit for multiple-family dwellings.

(A garage stall is considered a parking space, but the driveway in front of the garage stall is not considered a parking space.)

None required.
Mobile Home Park
2 spaces per dwelling unit.
None required.
Lodging and Boarding Houses
1 space per each rental unit. 
None required.
Nursery and Primary Educational Services
Parking spaces equal to 20% of capacity of students.
2 spaces per structure.
All other Educational Services
Parking spaces equal to 40% of capacity of students.
2 spaces per structure.
Libraries
1 space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area.
1 space per structure.
Hospitals
1 space per 2 beds. 
3 spaces per structure.
Medical Clinics
5 spaces per staff doctor or dentist.
None required.
Veterinary Establishments
3 spaces per staff doctor. 
None required.
Sanitariums, Convalescent and Rest Home Services
1 space per 3 beds plus 1 space per employee.
1 space per establishment.
Funeral Homes and Chapels
8 spaces per reposing room.
2 spaces per establishment.
Churches, Synagogues, and Temples
1 space per 4 seats in main unit of worship.
None required.
Private Clubs and Lodges
1 space per 3 seats. 
1 space per establishment.
Hotels
1 space per each rental unit. 
1 space per establishment.
Motels
1 space per each rental unit. 
None required.
Retail Sales Establishments
1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
1 space per establishment.
Service Establishment
(including office buildings)
1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
1 space per establishment.
Eating and Drinking Establishments
Parking spaces equal to 30% of capacity in persons.
2 spaces per establishment.
Theaters, Auditoriums, and Places of Assembly
1 space per 3 people in designed capacity.
1 space per establishment.
Bowling Alleys
4 spaces per alley.
1 space per establishment.
Roadside Stands
4 spaces per establishment. 
None required.
Wholesaling and Distribution Operations
1 space per 2 employees on largest shift.
2 spaces per establishment.
Uses permitted by virtue of complying with the industrial performance standards
1 space per 2 employees on largest shift.
2 spaces per establishment.
Bed and Breakfast Guest Home
1 space per 2 rental guest rooms.
None required.
Child Care Centers
1 space per employee.
1 space per 10 children.
Child Care Homes
1 space in addition to residential requirements.
1 space.
Domestic Shelters
1 space for every 4 residents plus 1 space per 2 employees.
None required.
(2) General Conditions. The following general conditions shall apply, except as otherwise noted in this Chapter:

(a) Parking spaces are permitted in the required front or rear yards of all districts upon gravel or hard surfaced driveways, and not upon grass or dirt areas within the yards.

(b) Front yard parking spaces on lots less than 60 feet in width shall not exceed a combined width of 20 feet and parking spaces on lots greater than or equal to 60 feet in width shall not exceed 35% of the front yard width.

(c) No parking space is permitted in the required side yard.

(d) All required parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the use for which they are required.

(e) Any parking requirement resulting in a partial parking space shall be rounded up to the next whole number.


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1813 (2011); Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 2027 (2017)



11-509 Off-Street Parking And Loading; Building Permits
(1) No building permit for new structures shall be granted unless the minimum parking and minimum loading requirements as set forth in Section 11-508 are met and provided for in the plan or plans and specifications for the construction of the structure for which the building permit is applied. 

(2) The Council may require additional parking and loading requirements set forth are insufficient for the structure for which the building permit is applied for and may require that the plan or plans and specifications for each new structure provide for such additional off-street parking and loading requirements set forth in Section 11-508. All parking spaces shall conform to the City of Crete parking lot design standards.


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991)



11-510 Off-Street Parking; Multiple-Dwelling Units
Multiple-dwelling units containing three family units or more constructed within the C-1 Central Commercial District may be granted a parking variance with City approval. The Council may require additional parking requirements if the minimum off-street parking requirement is insufficient for the structure for which the building permit is applied.


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991)



11-511 Parking Lots
(1) Parking lots consisting of six or more parking spaces located in any zoning district, except for nonpermanent lots that are allowed for no more than a period of two years and lots for the purpose of sale, resale, or servicing of vehicles, shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

(a) All parking lots authorized by this chapter shall be constructed pursuant to and in conformance with the design standards adopted by the City and on file with the Building Inspector.

(b) The location and design of all entrances and exits shall be subject to the approval of the City.

(c) If lighting is used to illuminate parking lots, it shall be so arranged as to reflect lighting away from the adjacent properties and public streets.

(d) Only one sign, not to exceed three square feet in area and not located on the public right-of-way, is permitted at each entrance or exit designating that entrance or exit and may state conditions of use of the parking lot. No other signs except as otherwise permitted in the zoning district shall be permitted except for signs for parking spaces for the handicapped.

(2) Upon application to the City Council, the owner of a parking lot may be relieved of the surfacing requirements of this section if the Council finds:

(a) The parking lot is (i) to be used in conjunction with nonprofit, religious, educational or philanthropic institution; (ii) in excess of the parking required by the provisions of this ordinance and not paid parking; or (iii) used for employee parking and located wholly within an industrial district;

(b) Alternative materials or techniques shall be utilized which provide reasonable control of dust, runoffs and safe circulation; and,

(c) The location of the parking lot is a sufficient distance from surrounding uses that it will not adversely affect the surrounding uses or the frequency of use of the parking lot is so low that compliance with the resurfacing requirement would cause undue hardship upon the owner as compared with minimal impact upon surrounding uses.


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991)



11-512 Home Occupations
(1) Except as provided for in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a home occupation within a lot or premises zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4.

(2) A home occupation may be carried on within a dwelling unit under the following conditions:

(a) No persons other than members of the family residing within the dwelling unit shall be engaged in such home occupation;

(b) The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total square footage of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation;

(c) There shall be no changes in the outside appearance of the building, structure, or premises that contains the dwelling unit or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, that is non-illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building or structure;

(d) No home occupation shall be conducted in accessory buildings or structures, or parts thereof;

(e) No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met by off-street parking in the rear yard;

(f) No equipment, process, or materials shall be used or activity engaged in that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to normal senses outside the dwelling unit. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used that creates visual or audible interference to any radio or television receivers outside of the dwelling unit or that causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises;

(g) There shall be no outdoor storage of any equipment, machinery, parts, materials, or other articles of any nature used in connection with the home occupation; and,

(h) The persons engaged in the home occupation have applied for and received a business license pursuant to sections 10-301 to 10-315.

(3) Welding, vehicle body repair, mechanical repair, rebuilding or dismantling of vehicles, or salvage or junk yards are not permitted as home occupations. The accumulation of automotive parts, scrap metal, or similar materials or the presence of more than four vehicles on a premises shall constitute and create a rebuttable presumption that a home occupation is being engaged in by the residents of the premises in violation of this section.


Source: Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1400 (1998); Ord. 2118 (2021)

11-513 [Repealed]
Repealed. Ordinance 1860 (2013).

11-514 [Repealed]
Repealed. Ordinance 1860 (2013).

11-515 Mobile Home Parks
Mobile home parks may be developed in those districts where this use is permitted. The expansion of an existing mobile home park may be allowed by a Special Exception Permit. Mobile home parks must comply with the following requirements:
The park has a minimum site area of two acres (0.81 hectares).
The park complies with all licensing procedures, health, zoning, plumbing, electrical, building, fire prevention, and all other applicable ordinances and regulations of the City.
A minimum distance of twenty-five feet (25’) shall be maintained between mobile homes in all horizontal directions.
No mobile home shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') to any exterior property line.
The request for this use shall specify the location and legal description of such proposed mobile home park and a plan of the park to include property dimensions, interior roads, proposed mobile home sites, sanitary utility lines, and other improvements.
The park is properly landscaped, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, so as not to constitute a nuisance to other residents.
Individual mobile home lots shall have an area of not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet per single wide mobile home and six thousand (6,000) square feet for double wide mobile homes, and the total number of lots per gross acre shall not exceed six (6).
Mobile homes shall be set back at least fifteen feet (15’) from the nearest service road. Enclosed additions shall be considered a part of the mobile home in measuring required yard distance. The required area for each mobile home space shall not include area required for access or service roads, service buildings, recreation areas, office, and other similar mobile home park needs.
The mobile home park shall have direct access to a public street or highway by a right-of-way at least fifty feet (50’) in width and a minimum length of one hundred feet (100’) to permit the easy entrance and exit from the mobile home park. Service roads shall be provided to each mobile home space. Each service road shall provide for continuous forward movement, shall connect with a street or highway, and shall a minimum clear width of twenty feet (20’) paved with a suitable dustless material.
Walks and Lighting. Walkways not less than four feet (4’) wide shall be provided from mobile home spaces to the service buildings. All walkways within the park shall be hard surfaced and lighted at night with a minimum illumination of twenty-five (25) watt lamps spaced at intervals of not more than one hundred feet (100’).
Off-Street Parking. Two off-street parking spaces for each mobile home space shall be provided at each mobile home space or in group parking. Each off-street parking space shall be at least three hundred (300) square feet.
The area of the mobile home stand shall be improved to provide an adequate and approved foundation for the placement and tie-down of the mobile home, thereby securing the super-structure against uplift, sliding, rotation, or overturning. The mobile home or trailer stand shall be on incombustible materials and shall not shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile home or trailer due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting upon the super-structure. The mobile home or trailer stand may be provided by means of a solid concrete footer block (16" x 16" x 4" minimum) placed on solid uniform soil with at least two (2) standard concrete blocks with cells placed vertically beside each other on the footer block. A solid 4" concrete cap covering the two (2) concrete blocks shall be provided as the bearing area to be positioned directly beneath the steel frame of the mobile home or trailer. Such blocking shall be provided along the full length of the mobile home or trailer unit, spaced not more than ten feet (10’) apart and not more than five feet (5’) from the ends of the unit.
The mobile home or trailer stand shall be provided with anchors and the tie downs such as cast-in-lace concrete, "dead men", eyelets imbedded in concrete foundations or runways, screw augers, arrowhead anchors, or other devices securing the stability of the mobile home or trailer. The tie-down devices shall be compatible with the foundation system provided for the mobile home or trailer such that the tie-downs are designated to resist the action of frost in the same manner as the foundation system.
The skirting of all mobile homes and trailers is required. Such skirting shall not attach a mobile home or trailer permanently to the ground but shall be sufficient to withstand wind load requirements and shall not provide a harborage for junk or rodents, nor create a fire hazard. Such skirting shall be provided with removable access panels sufficient to provide easy access to all utility connection points of the mobile home or trailer and its subsequent connection to the utility raisers if they are located within the skirted area.
Permit the Creation of Mobile Home Parks in Which the Individual Mobile Home Lots Are Available For Sale. Wherever a mobile home park is permitted by this Ordinance to be created through the granting of Special Exception uses, or otherwise, said mobile home park may be designed to permit the sale of the individual mobile home lots within said park. A proposed mobile home park in which the individual mobile home lots will be offered for sale must meet all of the following requirements:
The individual mobile home lots shall, for the district within which such mobile home park is located, meet the minimum lot requirements, minimum yard requirements, maximum lot coverage, and maximum height requirements of such districts.
Each such mobile home lot shall be individually serviced with all utilities and shall be individually metered for all utilities and treated in all respects by the City as a separate user of utilities.
The developer of such mobile home park shall be required to secure a preliminary and final plat as per the subdivision process outlined in the City of Crete Subdivision Regulations.
At the time of an application for a special use permit, or at the time of the application for subdivision in a mobile home park where the lots are to be offered for sale, the developer shall submit all legal documents necessary for the creation of an association having the purpose of maintaining, controlling, and covering all expenses, taxes, and costs incurred on common areas within the mobile home park. Such association shall require that all property owners within the mobile home park be members thereof and pledge the lots owned within the mobile home park as security for the association performing such obligations. Covenants shall be placed on the property by the developer and owners thereof so as to ensure this obligation. These documents shall be submitted by the proper officials to the City Council for its approval and no subdivision permit or special use permit may be issued without the approval of these documents by the City Council.
(Ord. 1142 (1991); Ord. 1926 (2015))

11-516 Community Unit Plan
In order to permit and to encourage the creative design of new living areas, as distinguished from subdivisions of standard lot sizes and standard street systems, and in order to permit safety and general welfare of existing and future residents of surrounding neighborhoods, the owner or owners of any tract of land which is one (1) acre or more in area may submit to the City Council a plan for the use and development thereof for residential purposes or for the repair and alteration of any existing development; provided, however, that the City Council shall apply the following standards in considering all applications for community unit plans upon tracts of land which are one (1) acre (0.40 hectares) or more but less than ten (10) acres (4.05 hectares) in area, including existing public rights-of-way:
A community unit plan shall be permitted on a tract of land which is less than ten (10) acres (4.05 hectares) but more than five (5) acres (2.02 hectares) in area only under circumstances which such tract of land is of such shape or is so topographically unusual that it would present peculiar and unusual problems if normal residential subdivisions would be proposed and where such tract of land is either totally or partially bounded by artificial or natural boundaries such as streams, major roads, railroad tracks, or urban uses of a substantially different nature. The strictness in application of the provisions of this subparagraph shall be proportionally increased with direct relation to the degree of the difference in size of a particular tract from the maximum acreage prescribed herein.
A community unit plan shall be permitted on a tract of land which is not more than five (5) acres (2.02 hectares) but more than one (1) acre (0.40 hectares) in area only where it can be shown that such tract cannot be reasonably developed for the purposes allowed in the zoning district in which the tract is located and in the manner required by the subdivision ordinance. The strictness in application of the provisions of this subparagraph shall be proportionally increased with direct relation to the degree of the difference in size of a particular tract from the maximum acreage prescribed herein.
Notwithstanding the provisions of A,1 and A,2 above, a community unit plan may be permitted on a tract of land having less than ten (10 acres (4.05 hectares) in area where it appears that such tract is bounded on at least two (2) sides by an existing community unit plan, that such tract relates to the adjacent existing community unit plan, that such tract relates to the adjacent existing community unit plan more than it does to adjacent areas being developed under a conventional lot and block subdivision, and that the proposed community unit development on such tract shall otherwise meet all requirements of this Section, except acreage.
An application and plans for development of a community unit plan shall be referred to the City Planning Commission, which shall, within a period of sixty (60) days hold a public hearing upon such application and plans and make a report to the City Council regarding the effect of the proposed community unit plan upon the surrounding neighborhood and other matters pertaining to the public health, safety, and general welfare. No action shall be taken on any application for a community unit plan until and unless a report of the Planning Commission has been filed with the City Council; provided, however, that if no report is received from the Planning Commission within said sixty (60) day period, it shall be presumed that approval of the application has been given by the Commission and the Council may proceed to take action upon the same.
The report of the Planning Commission provided for in subsection B above shall include reasons for recommending approval or denial of any application, and if approval is recommended, shall further include specific evidence and facts showing that the proposed community unit plan meets the following conditions: 
That land surrounding the tract for the proposed community unity plan will not be adversely affected;
That the proposed community unit plan is consistent with the intent and purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare;
That the buildings and land in the proposed community unit plan shall be used only for single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, row houses or multiple-dwellings, and the usual accessory uses, such as garages, storage space, private recreational uses, and any other uses permitted in the zoning district in which the land is located;
That the average lot area per family with the proposed community unit plan will not be less than the area per family required in the zoning district or districts in which the tract for the proposed community unit plan is located.
Upon approval of a community unit plan by the City Council, building permits and certificates of occupancy shall be issued upon compliance with community unit plan as approved regardless of any regulations to the contrary with regard to the height and location of buildings, yard requirements, open space requirements, and the fronting of lots upon public streets set forth elsewhere in this Chapter and applying to the zoning district or districts in which the community plan is to be located.
(Ord. 1142 (1991))

11-517 Patio Decks And Slabs
Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, patio decks and concrete slabs on grade may be permitted in the following required yard areas in all residential zones:

In required side and rear yards, concrete slabs on grade may be extended to property lines.
In required side and rear yards, patio decks may extend into but not exceed two-fifths (2/5) of the required side and/or rear yard.
In required front yards, patio decks, and/or concrete slabs on grade may extend into but not exceed one-third (1/3) of the required front yard.
(Ord. 1260 (1995))

11-518 Zoning Regulations; Manufactured Homes; Standards
A manufactured home may be used as a residential structure in any zone in which residential uses are permitted if such manufactured home bears an appropriate seal which indicates that it was constructed in accordance with the standards of the Uniform Standard Code for Manufactured Home and Recreational Vehicles, the Nebraska Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units Act, or the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Manufactured homes permitted pursuant to this section shall be located and installed according to the following standards which are applicable to site-built, single-family dwellings:
The home shall be located and installed on a permanent perimeter foundation;
The home shall be installed with permanent utility connections;
The home shall comply with all setback and lot requirements of the residential zone in which it is located;
The home shall comply with the minimum square footage requirements of the residential zone in which it is located.
Manufactured homes shall also meet the following standards:
The home shall have no less than nine hundred (900) square feet of floor area;
The home shall have no less than an eighteen foot (18’) exterior width;
The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two and one-half inches (2 1/2") for each twelve inches (12") of horizontal run;
The exterior material shall be of a color, material, and scale comparable with those existing in residential sitebuilt, single-family construction;
The home shall have a non-reflective roof material which is or simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile, or rock; and,
The home shall have wheels, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus removed.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to supersede any valid restrictive covenants of record.
For purposes of this section, manufactured home shall mean (a) a factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation, which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a permanent site, which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles, and which bears a label certifying that it was built in compliance with National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 C.F.R. 3280 et seq., promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development or (2) a modular housing unit as defined in Section 71-1557 RS Neb., bearing the seal in accordance with the Nebraska Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Unit Act.
(Ord. 1286 (1995); Ord. 1455 (1999))

11-518.01 Manufactured/Moved Structures; Permanent Foundation; Time Of Construction
A manufactured home and/or other residential, commercial, and/or different structure of any kind, which is moved onto a site, where it is to be permanently located, after it has been substantially manufactured and/or constructed at another site, shall have a permanent perimeter foundation constructed within thirty (30) days of the structure being moved onto the site where it is to be permanently located. If the foundation is not constructed within the thirty (30) day period, the owner of the structure shall move the structure to a suitable storage location, approved by the City, until the foundation is constructed.

(Ord. 1712 (2008))

11-519 [Repealed]
Repealed. Ordinance 2119 (2021).


11-520 Storage Or Carport Structures; Metal Or Fabric Materials; Permanent Structure
Any storage or carport structure shall be considered a permanent structure, whether fixed or attached to ground or other structure or not, and any such structure shall require a building permit prior to construction or placement and shall comply with all provisions of Crete City Code or City regulation.

11-521 Residential Design Standards
The following design standards shall apply to all Residential Districts (R-1 to R-4):

(1) The primary entrance to the principal building or structure shall face the front lot line.

(2) The cladding of all exterior walls shall use building materials, textures, and colors that match the architectural style of the buildings and structures generally found throughout the neighborhood. Allowable materials are brick, stone, or clapboard siding of wood, metal, or vinyl. Synthetic materials manufactured to replicate the listed materials are also allowable upon review by the City.

(3) No dwelling shall be constructed or converted from a pre-fabricated structure, metal building, pole barn, or other building or structure originally designed or intended for use as an accessory building or structure.

(4) All buildings or structures with a front porch may extend into the required front yard setback up to a maximum of six feet. No portion of a front porch that extends into the required front yard may be enclosed by walls, windows, or screens.


Source: Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 2118 (2021)

11-522 Commercial Design Standards
All buildings and structures located within the core of downtown Crete, defined as the area between Norman and Linden Avenues from 9th Street to 14th Street, shall meet the following design standards:

(1) Compliance with all regulations, resolutions, code sections, and ordinances adopted by the City.

(2) Materials used for street facing facades shall be similar to those used on adjacent buildings or structures. Primary construction materials historically used in downtown areas shall be used for all alterations, construction, or reconstruction as follows:

(a) Brick in matching colors, sizes, and textures exhibited in existing buildings or structures.

(b) Wood may only be utilized for architectural elements such as pilasters, cornices, or decorative raised panels and trim. The use of wood as a general siding material is prohibited.

(c) Concrete block may only be utilized in combination with other materials such as brick or stone. The use of concrete block as the only building material is prohibited.

(d) Metal, painted or exposed, may only be utilized as architectural elements such as “pressed tin” cornices and moldings.

(e) Exposed structural pre-formed steel may only be used for aesthetic purposes at lintels and columns in a manner similar to existing historic structures.

(f) Stucco and any materials similar in texture and perception may only be used as an accent element to a facade.

(3) All other areas in the C-1 District that are not located within the core of downtown Crete, as specified above, shall have at a minimum a three and one-half (3½) foot high base comprised of non-reflective exterior siding that is or simulates wood, stucco, or masonry. Non-reflective exterior siding comprised of metal, aluminum, or vinyl siding or preformed panels can be utilized above the base on the exterior of street facing facades. If used, metal siding shall utilize concealed fasteners to install the siding to the building or structure.


Source: Ord. 1926 (2015); Ord. 2118 (2021)


11-523 Neighborhood Design Standards
The following design standards shall apply to the alteration, construction, or reconstruction of all buildings or structures in Residential or Commercial Districts (R-1 to R-4; C-1 to C-3):

(1) Buildings or structures shall utilize a roof type and pitch commonly found within the same and facing block front.

(2) Buildings or structures shall share similar design features, such as orientation to the street, structure width, and the location and number of entrances and windows, on the principal façade facing the front lot line that match the pattern of half or more of the buildings or structures on the same and facing block fronts, if such a pattern exists.

(3) Front porches are required when half or more of the buildings or structures on the same and facing block fronts or on adjacent blocks have front porches. Front porches shall match the width and depth most commonly found on said nearby buildings or structures.

(4) Exterior stairs serving units on upper floors are not allowed on the principal façade facing the front lot line.

(5) The elevation of the first floor level shall generally match the pattern of half or more of the buildings or structures on the same and facing block fronts.

(6) The height of buildings or structures shall be similar to that of existing buildings or structures on the same and facing block fronts. No building or structure shall be taller than the tallest building or structure, nor shorter than the shortest building or structure, provided that:

(a) taller buildings or structures may be approved by the City on a case-by-case basis if the design of the building or structure matches the overall design of the neighborhood and it will not negatively impact city infrastructure or utility capabilities in the area or the general welfare of neighboring property owners and occupants, and,

(b) if the height permitted under this subsection would exceed that currently permitted in the underlying district, the building or structure shall be no taller than an existing, adjacent building or structure.

(7) The width of buildings or structures shall be similar to that of existing buildings or structures on the same and facing block fronts. No building or structure shall be wider than the widest building or structure, nor narrower than the narrowest building or structure, provided that:

(a) the yard requirements of the district may be adjusted by the City on a case-by-case basis if the design of the building or structure matches the overall design of the neighborhood and it will not negatively impact lot density or crowding in the area or the general welfare of neighboring property owners and occupants.

(8) Accessory buildings or structures shall follow the pattern of half or more of the premises on the same and facing block front, such as:

(a) if the pattern in an area is that accessory buildings or structures, including attached and detached garages, are located behind the house, a pattern of rear accessory buildings or structures shall be followed;

(b) if the pattern in an area is that accessory buildings or structures, including attached and detached garages, face the front lot line, the size of the accessory building or structure and the number and size of doors shall follow the pattern of half or more of the premises on the same and facing block front, and such doors shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the length of the principal façade facing the front lot line;

(c) if there is no pattern shared by at least half of the premises on the same and facing block front, accessory buildings or structures may be attached and face the front lot line provided the accessory building or structure is set back from the front of the principal building or structure at least fifteen feet.


Source: Ord. 2118 (2021)

11-524 Salvage Or Junk Yard
(1) Salvage or junkyard operations and related facilities shall only be allowed by special permit in the A-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts under the following conditions:

(a) Located on a tract of land at least one-fourth (1/4) mile from a residential or agricultural farm residence.

(b) The operation shall be conducted wholly within a noncombustible building or within an area completely surrounded on all sides by a visual obscuring fence, wall, or hedge. The fence, wall, or hedge shall be of uniform height, at least eight feet high, and uniform texture and color shall be so maintained by the proprietor as to insure maximum safety to the public and preserve the general welfare of the neighborhood. The fence, wall, or hedge shall be installed in such a manner as to retain all scrap, junk, or other material within the yard and no scrap, junk, or other material shall protrude above the fence.

(c) No junk shall be loaded, unloaded, or otherwise placed, either temporarily or permanently, outside the enclosed building, hedge, fence, or wall or within the public right-of-way.

(d) Any other requirement deemed appropriate and necessary by the City Council for the protection of the general health and welfare.

(2) In making any decision granting a special use permit, the City Council shall impose such restrictions, terms, time limitations, landscaping, improvement of off-street parking lots, and other appropriate safeguards as required protecting adjoining property.


Source: Ord. 1926 (2015)


11-525 Landfills And Sanitary Landfills
(1) Private landfill operations shall only be allowed by special permit in the A-1 Agriculture District upon prior approval of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services System and with conformance to the following conditions:

(a) Located on a tract of land at least one-quarter (¼) mile from a residential or agricultural farm residence.

(b) The operation shall be conducted wholly within an area completely surrounded on all sides by a fence, wall, or hedge. The fence, wall, or hedge shall be of uniform height, at least eight feet high, and uniform texture and color shall be so maintained by the proprietor as to insure maximum safety to the public and preserve the general welfare of the neighborhood. The fence, wall, or hedge shall be installed in such a manner as to retain all material within the yard and no material shall protrude above the fence.

(c) No material shall be loaded, unloaded, or otherwise placed, either temporarily or permanently, outside the enclosed building, hedge, fence, or wall or within the public right-of-way.

(d) Any other requirement deemed appropriate and necessary by the City Council for the protection of the general health and welfare.

(2) Special use permits granted under this section shall be subject to annual review and renewal by the City Council.

(3) In making any decision granting a special use permit, the City Council shall impose such restrictions, terms, time limitations, landscaping, improvement of off-street parking lots, and other appropriate safeguards as required protecting adjoining property.


Source: Ord. 1926 (2015)


11-526 Small And Commercial Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Intent: In order to balance the need for clean, renewable energy resources with the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Crete, Nebraska, finds these regulations are necessary in order to ensure that all wind energy conversion systems (CWECS) are appropriately designed, sited, and installed.

These regulations pertaining to all wind energy conversion systems are intended to respond to equipment available at the time of adoption. The City of Crete recognizes that this is an emerging technology and that new means of collecting wind energy, including but not limited to vertical axis wind turbine generators are under development. Accordingly, these standards will be reviewed and may be amended as technology advances.

Types of Wind Energy Systems:

Small Wind Energy Conversion System - (SWECS) – A wind energy conversion system which has a rated capacity of up to Twenty-Five (25) kilowatts and which is incidental and subordinated to another use of the same parcel. A system is considered a small wind energy system only if it supplies electrical power for site use, except that when a parcel on which the system is installed also received electrical power supplied by a utility company, access electrical power generated and not presently needed for onsite use may be sold back to the utility company. (25 Kilowatt limit approved by the Crete Planning Commission to increase to a maximum of 100 Kilowatts with Nebraska State Legislature authorization by future amendment) 
Commercial Wind Energy Conversion System – (CWECS). A wind energy conversion system under common or aggregated ownership or operating control that includes substations, MET towers, cables/wires and other building accessories, who’s main purpose is to supply electricity to off-site customers.
Definitions:

Aggregated Project – Those projects that are developed and operated in a coordinated fashion, but which have multiple entities separately owning one or more of the individual CWECS within a larger project. Associated infrastructure such as power lines and transformers that service the facility may be owned by a separate entity but are also included as part of the aggregated project.
Fall Zone – The area, defined as the furthest distance from the tower base, in which a tower will collapse in the event of a structural failure.
Feeder Line – Any power line that carries electrical power from one or more wind turbines or individual transformers associated with individual wind turbines to the point of interconnection with the electric power grid, in the case of interconnection with the high voltage transmission systems the point of the interconnection shall be the substation serving the WECS.
Height, hub – The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, including the generation unit, measured to the hub or center point of the rotor blade diameter.
Height, total system – The height above grade of the system, including the generating unit and measured the highest vertical extension of any rotor blades or rotors.
Meteorological Tower – For the purposes of wind energy conversion systems, meteorological towers are those which are erected primarily to measure wind speed and direction plus other data relevant to locating a CWECS. Meteorological towers do not include towers and equipment used by airports, the Nebraska Department of Transportation or other similar applications to monitor weather conditions.
Rotor Diameter – The diameter of the circle created by the outer most point of the rotor blades of the windmill. (See Diagram #1)


Shadow flicker – Strobe effect that occurs when sun is horizontal to rotor blades, which causes repetitive intermittent shadows that can affect people on adjacent or near-by properties.
Substations – Any electrical facility utilized to convert electricity produced by a Commercial Wind Energy Conversion System for interconnection with high voltage transmission lines.
Tower – The vertical component of a wind energy conversion system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.
Transmission Line – The electrical power lines that are High Voltage Transmission Lines carrying electricity over medium to long distances rather than directly interconnecting and supplying electric energy to retail customers.
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS) – An aggregation of parts including the base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, and configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical or electrical energy, e.g. wind charger, windmill, or wind turbine.
Wind Turbine Generator – The component of a wind energy system that transforms mechanical energy from the wind into electrical energy.
(Ord. 1926, 05/19/2015)

11-527 Small Wind Energy Conversion System
A Small Wind Energy Conversion System (SWECS) is a facility used for the production of a maximum of Twenty-Five (25) kilowatts of electrical energy supplied by the wind. The facility may include wind turbine(s) with total height(s) of one hundred (100) feet or less and any transmission lines. The SWECS is primarily used to generate energy for use by its owner. A small wind energy facility shall be sited and designed to minimize adverse visual impacts on neighboring properties. To be used in conformance with Nebraska State Statutes 70-2001 through 70-2005, regarding Net Metering. (25 Kilowatt limit approved by the Crete Planning Commission to increase to a maximum of 100 Kilowatts with Nebraska State Legislature authorization by future amendment)

General Site and Design Standards
Located on a lot or parcel of at least three (3) acres.
Shall be permitted by an approved Special Exception Use Permit to be issued in the “A-1”, “R-1 to R-4”, “C1 to C-3”, and “I-1 to I-2” Zoning Districts.
SWECS shall maintain a minimum setback distance from any property line of one point one (1.1) times the total system height of the windmill for nonparticipating property owners. Adjoining property owners (second or third additional farm/ranch single dwelling units for the purpose of housing relatives or permanent agriculture workers) participating in the same or Aggregated Project shall have no setback requirements between adjoining properties.
SWECS shall maintain a minimum setback distance from any public road, or highway of at least one point one (1.1) times the total system height of the windmill from the public road or highway right-of-way.
In no case shall a WECS be located within any required setback or in any front yard area.
Turbines and towers shall be of tubular design and if painted or coated, shall be of a non-reflective white, grey, or other neutral color and shall not be used to display advertising.
SWECS shall not be artificially lighted unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
All electrical wires associated with a small wind energy system other than the wires necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires shall be located underground.
The minimum distance between the ground and any part of the rotor blade system shall be thirty (30) feet.
All ground mounted electrical and control equipment must be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access. A tower may not have step bolts or a ladder within eight (8) feet of the ground that is readily accessible to the public.
The owner of a small wind energy facility shall minimize or mitigate any interference with electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone or television signals caused by the facility.
Construction access must be re-graded and re-vegetated to minimize environmental impacts.
A SWECS application must include an agreement that addresses decommissioning and abandonment of the facility. The agreement must at a minimum provide for reuse or dismantlement of the facility at the owner’s expense.
Application Requirements
A survey map at an appropriate scale identifying:
Site boundary;
Adjacent public right-of-ways;
Existing structures;
Proposed small wind energy system and accessory structures;
Adjacent ownership and existing residences;
Any overhead utility lines.
A report from a licensed engineer containing:
Small wind system specifications including manufacturer and model; rotor diameter, tower height, tower type (freestanding or guyed).
Documentation to establish that the tower has sufficient structural integrity for the proposed use at the proposed location.
Certification that the small wind energy system complies with all applicable state construction and electrical codes and the National Electrical Code.
Compliance with FAA Regulations, including any Documentation required by the FAA certifying approval of proposed location when located within the three (3) mile Planning Jurisdiction of any airport.
Signed letter of Notification from the Electrical Supplier/Purchaser to the property owner, notarized copies submitted to the Saline County Assessor’s Office, and City of Crete Zoning Administrator, signifying Net Metering service is approved.
Require proof of insurance on application.
(Ord. 1926, 05/19/2015)

11-528 Commercial Wind Energy Conversion System - (CWECS)
A wind energy conversion system under common or aggregated ownership or operating control that includes substations, MET towers, cables/wires and other building accessories, whose main purpose is to supply electricity to off-site customers.

Commercial Wind Energy Conversion Systems may be included as an aggregated project. Such as those projects that are developed and operated in a coordinated fashion, but which have multiple entities separately owning one or more of the CWECS within a larger project. Associated infrastructure such as power lines and transformers that service the facility may be owned by a separate entity, but are also part of the aggregated project. All individual wind turbine towers of an aggregated project shall be in conformance with Section 11-527 A items one through 15.

General Site and Design Standards:
Located on a lot or parcel of at least ten (10) acres in size.
The entire aggregated project shall be permitted by a Special Exception Use Permit in an A-1 District.
If an aggregated project, setbacks from multiple entities (turbines) shall be one and one-tenth (1.1) times the height of the total system.
Each CWECS location must have a 911 address.
CWECS shall be designed and placed in such a manner as to minimize to the greatest extent feasible, adverse visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas. This shall include documentation of:
Noise levels conforming to the International Electromechanical Commission (IEC) Standard 61400-11 part 11; and
Projections of the “shadow flicker” on any existing structures located off the property on which the CWECS will be constructed and the extent and duration of the shadow flicker on these existing structures.
CWECS shall maintain a minimum setback distance from any property line of one and one-half (1.5) times the total system height of the windmill for nonparticipating property owners. Adjoining property owners participating in the same Aggregated Project shall have no setback requirements between adjoining properties.
CWECS shall maintain a minimum setback distance from any public road, or highway of at least one point one (1.1) times the total system height of the windmill from the public road or highway right-of-way.
In no case shall a WECS be located within any required setback or in any front yard area.
Structures for wind turbines shall be self-supporting tubular towers, if painted or coated shall be of a non-reflective neutral color such as white or pale gray. No lattice structure shall be used. No logos or advertisements are allowed on these structures. Each turbine shall be marked with a visible identification number located no higher than fifteen (15) feet above ground level.
 Colors and surface treatment of the CWECS and supporting structures shall, to the greatest extent possible, minimize disruption of the natural characteristics of the site.
Reasonable measures shall be taken to mitigate specific adverse visual impacts such as reflections, shadow flicker, and blade glint affecting residences within or immediately adjacent to the project area.
CWECS shall be equipped with air traffic warning lights or other marking lights only if so required by the Federal Aviation Administration and in which event, such light should be positioned or shielded to avoid visual impact on neighboring properties, and shall be a white flashing light from daylight till twilight and a steady red light night time. Light system must be maintained and working at all times.
The applicant shall minimize or mitigate any interference with electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone or television signals caused by any wind energy facility.
A Meteorological Tower is permitted by a Special Exception Use Permit for the purposes of the Aggregated Project. Meteorological towers shall meet the same setback requirements of those established for an Aggregated Project. If the tower is nonfunctional, it shall be removed after a period of two (2) years.
CWECS shall have a minimum setback of one-quarter (1/4) mile from any adjacent residence not owned by the owner of the CWECS. However, no setback is required between the adjacent residences of an owner participating in the same Aggregated Project.
Application Requirements. The applicant for a Special Exception use permit for construction of a CWECS shall file an application with the City of Crete Zoning Administrator The application shall include the name(s) of the project applicant(s), the name of the project owner(s), and the legal description and address for the project. The application shall also include the following documents:
A survey map illustrating the following:
Property lines, dimension, acreage and contours with appropriate intervals for site evaluation.
Location and elevation of all components of the proposed CWECS.
Location and dimensions of all existing structures and uses on property within three hundred (300) feet of the system.
Height of any structures over thirty-five (35) feet within a five hundred (500) foot radius on site or offsite of the proposed CWECS.
Location of any overhead utility lines on the property.
Location of all known communications towers within two (2) miles of the proposed CWECS.
Access roads.
Adjacent ownership, land uses, existing residences, schools, churches, hospitals, public libraries, federal, state, county or local parks, recognized historic or heritage sites, identified wildlife preserves, or habitat areas to a distance of 2,640 feet (one-half mile).
Provide a copy of the Easement Deed from the Saline County Register of Deeds Office for each property involved in the CWECS.
Provide a map illustrating all transmission lines connecting to the Substation.
Copy of Agreement or Notification of Compliance Letter between the Crete Airport Authority and the Applicant.
Applicant shall identify potential effects in terms of constraints or benefits the wind energy facility may place on current or future use of the land within the project site and the surrounding area. The extent of any limitations due to public health and safety risks shall be specifically addressed, and the effects on the following activities shall also be addressed:
Existing or proposed tourist or recreation activities;
Residential activities;
Industrial activities;
Agricultural activities;
Commercial activities
Soil erosion, sediment control, and storm water runoff plan shall address what types of erosion control measures will be used during each phase of the project. It shall identify plans for:
Grading;
Construction and drainage of access roads and turbine pads;
Design features to control dust;
Design features to maintain downstream water quality;
Re-vegetation to ensure slope stability;
Restoring the site after temporary project activities;
Disposal or storage of excavated materials;
Protecting exposed soil;
Stabilizing restored material and removal of silt fences or barriers when the area is stabilized; and
Maintenance of erosion controls throughout the life of the project.
Applicant shall provide information regarding flora and fauna of the proposed project area including:
Officially listed threatened or endangered species;
Critical habitat and habitat conditions;
An avian study based on the US Fish and Wildlife Services “Interim Guidelines to Avoid and Minimize Wildlife Impacts from Wind Turbines”
Standard drawings of the structural components of the CWECS, including structures, tower, base, and footings.
Certification by a registered engineer that:
There is a substantial need for the proposed use or CWECS, one hundred (100) kW or greater;
All applicable local, state, and federal building, structural and electrical codes have been followed;
The site is feasible for a CWECS; the CWECS can be successfully operated in the climate conditions found in Saline County;
The rotor and over speed control have been designed for the proposed use on the proposed site;
The design and safety of the proposed tower to withstand winds of ninety (90) miles per hour; and
If the wind turbine were to fall, no building or structure, existing or potential, would be damaged.
Construction and Operations
All public roads to be used for the purpose of transporting CWECS, substation parts, cement or equipment for construction, operation, or maintenance of the CWECS shall be identified and applicable weight and size permits from the impacted road authority(ies) shall be obtained prior to construction.

A pre-construction survey must be conducted with the appropriate jurisdictions to determine existing road conditions. Those included are Applicant(s); Land Owner(s); CWECS Owner(s); Township Representative(s), Highway Superintendent and/or Zoning Administrator. The survey shall include photographs and a written agreement to document the conditions of the public roads and facilities. All expenses of the survey shall be the Applicant’s responsibility.
The CWECS owner shall be responsible for immediate repair of damage to public roads and drainage systems stemming from construction, operation, or maintenance of the CWECS.
Solid and hazardous wastes, including but not limited to crates, packaging materials, damaged or worn parts, as well as used oils and lubricants shall be removed from the site promptly and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
Safety Measures
Each CWECS shall be equipped with both manual and automatic controls to limit the rotational speed of the rotor blade so it does not exceed the design limits of the rotor.
The Planning Commission shall determine the height, color, and type of fencing, if needed, for the CWECS installation. CWECS shall include no sign or advertising of any kind, except for one sign not to exceed two (2) square feet posted at the base of the tower, electrical equipment, and entrances. The sign shall contain the following information:
Warning – high voltage
Manufacturer’s name
Operator’s name
Emergency phone number
Emergency shutdown procedures
Each CWECS shall be properly grounded to safely sustain natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National Electric Code.
Any CWECS facility shall be equipped with anti-climbing devices. Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within fifteen (15) feet of the ground. Where the tower is capable of being climbed, a locked, protective fence at least six (6) feet high shall enclose the tower.
The CWECS operator shall maintain a current insurance policy which will cover liability, installation, operation, and any possible damage or injury that might result from the failure of a tower or towers or any other part or parts of the generation and transmission facility. The amount of said policy shall be established as a condition of approval. The CWECS shall be warranted against any system failures reasonably expected in severe weather operation conditions.
Discontinuation and Decommissioning.
CWECS shall be considered a discontinued use after one (1) year without energy production, unless a plan is developed and submitted to the City of Crete Zoning Administrator outlining the steps and schedule for returning the CWECS to service. All CWECS and accessory facilities shall be removed four (4) feet below ground level within ninety (90) days of the discontinuation of use. This period may be extended by the Zoning Administrator following a written request by an agent of the owner of the CWECS.
Each CWECS shall have a decommissioning plan outlining the anticipated means and costs of removing CWECS at the end of the serviceable life or upon becoming a discontinued use. The cost estimates shall be made by a competent party, such as a profession engineer, a contractor capable of decommissioning, or a person with suitable expertise or experience with decommissioning.
At the end of the aggregated project’s useful life, the entire site shall be restored in accordance with the requirements of this condition within eighteen (18) months.
Noise. No CWECS shall exceed 60 dBA at the nearest structure occupied by humans. In the event of periods of severe weather, as defined by the United State Weather Service, a CWECS may exceed 60 dBA.
(Ord. 1926, 05/19/2015)

11-529 Communication Towers
Tower, Communication: Shall mean any structure that is designed, constructed or used for the primary purpose of supporting one or more cellular antennas, including selfsupporting lattice towers, guyed towers, monopole towers, or towers designed and intended to visually obscure or conceal the cellular antennas and/or tower. The term encompasses personal wireless service facilities including microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers or personal communications services towers and alternative tower structures.
Communication towers are best suited to be located within rural agricultural areas, beyond the Corporate Limits, within the Two-Mile Planning Jurisdiction of the City, but not in areas that would prohibit, residential, commercial and/or industrial development/growth and/or placement of pertinent public uses. Communication towers are recommended to be included in A-1 Agricultural District as a Special Exception Use. This will provide the Planning Commission and City Council the ability to review and discuss the various issues associated with the potential Communication Tower and, in turn, set specific restrictions for such development.
The following are minimum standards for consideration of approving the Special Exception Use in the A-1 Agricultural District and to guide the potential installation of the Communication tower:
The maximum height of the tower is limited by the Zoning District in which the tower is located.
The tower shall be setback from the property line 1.1 times the total height of the communication tower. This will prevent the tower from falling or collapsing on structures located on adjacent property, or within the right-of-way of an adjacent street, county road or highway.
Sites for communication towers shall not be located in areas with predominantly residential uses, environmentally sensitive areas, entryway corridors, landmarks or landmark districts, properties listed or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the Airport Environs and approach paths of run-ways, and other sensitive areas.
In any zoning district, a Special Exception Permit may be issued to co-locate additional antennas on an existing communication tower, camouflaged facility, water tower or rooftop facility, or facility subject to the following, if the application does not exceed the permitted height in the district, and will have minimal adverse effect on the surrounding property, entryway corridors to the City, landmarks or designated landmark districts, or properties listed or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
(Ord. 1926, 05/19/2015)

11-530 Solar Panels
No solar panel shall be constructed within the residential zoning jurisdiction of the City of Crete unless a permit therefore is approved and issued by the building inspector and is constructed in conformance with the following requirements. For those devices that include electrical, plumbing and heating constructions, the applicable permits shall also be obtained. Solar panels shall meet the following requirements.

Lot and Height Requirements: Solar panels shall conform to the required front, side, street side, and rear lot setback requirements except as provided herein:
A solar panel which is attached to an integral part of the principal building may project three feet into the front yard and street side yard; six feet into the rear yard; and two feet into the side yard.
A solar panel which is freestanding may be located only in the required rear yard provided it does not exceed six feet in height and is located not less than five feet from the rear lot line and not closer than one foot to any existing easement as measured from the closest point of the structure including its foundation and anchorage’s, nor shall the solar panel be located in the required side yard, front yard or street side yard.
Structural Requirements: The physical structure and connections to existing structures shall conform to the applicable Crete building codes.
Plot Plan: The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale showing property lines, existing structures on the lot, proposed solar panel location with respect to property lines, and dimensions of the proposed solar panel.
Permit Fee: A permit fee is required. This permit fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the building permit. The amount of the fee shall be as established in the Master Fee Schedule.
Pre-existing Solar Panels: Notwithstanding noncompliance with the requirements of this section, a solar panel erected prior to January 1, 2015, pursuant to a valid building permit issued by the City, may continue to be utilized so long as it is maintained in operational condition.
(Ord. No. 2030, 11/7/17)

11-531 Adult Establishments
Purpose and Intent: It is the purpose of this section to regulate Adult Establishments to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of Adult Establishments within the city’s jurisdiction. The provisions of these regulations have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of these regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of these regulations to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
Findings and Rationale: Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); Sewell v. Georgia, 435 U.S. 982 (1978); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); City of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 19 (1989); and Farkas v. Miller, 151 F.3d 900 (8th Cir. 1998); Jakes, Ltd. v. City of Coates, 284 F.3d 884 (8th Cir. 2002); BZAPS, Inc. v. City of Mankato, 268 F.3d 603 (8th Cir. 2001); SOB, Inc. v. County of Benton, 317 F.3d 856 (8th Cir. 2003); Scope Pictures v. City of Kansas City, 140 F.3d 1201 (8th Cir. 1998); ILQ Invs. v. City of Rochester, 25 F.3d 1413 (8th Cir. 1994); City of Lincoln v. ABC Books, Inc., 470 N.W.2d 760 (Neb. 1991); Xiong v. City of Moorhead, 2009 WL 322217 (D. Minn. Feb. 2, 2009); Entm’t Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 721 F.3d 729 (6th Cir. 2013); Lund v. City of Fall River, 714 F.3d 65 (1st Cir. 2013); Imaginary Images, Inc. v. Evans, 612 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 2010); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Ocello v. Koster, 354 S.W.3d 187 (Mo. 2011); 84 Video/Newsstand, Inc. v. Sartini, 2011 WL 3904097 (6th Cir. Sept. 7, 2011); Plaza Group Properties, LLC v. Spencer County Plan Commission, 877 N.E.2d 877 (Ind. Ct. App. 2007); Flanigan’s Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County, 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010); East Brooks Books, Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 360 (6th Cir. 2009); Entm’t Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 372 (6th Cir. 2009); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir. 2008); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben’s Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); Peek-a-Boo Lounge v. Manatee County, 630 F.3d 1346 (11th Cir. 2011); Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); Heideman v. South Salt Lake City, 348 F.3d 1182 (10th Cir. 2003); Williams v. Morgan, 478 F.3d 1316 (11th Cir. 2007); Jacksonville Property Rights Ass’n, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 635 F.3d 1266 (11th Cir. 2011); H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); Fantasy Ranch, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 459 F.3d 546 (5th Cir. 2006); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall, 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir. 2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph, 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Knox County, 555 F.3d 512 (6th Cir. 2009); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales, Inc. v. Montgomery County, 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols, 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); DCR, Inc. v. Pierce County, 964 P.2d 380 (Wash. Ct. App. 1998); City of New York v. Hommes, 724 N.E.2d 368 (N.Y. 1999); Taylor v. State, No. 01-01-00505-CR, 2002 WL 1722154 (Tex. App. July 25, 2002); Fantasyland Video, Inc. v. County of San Diego, 505 F.3d 996 (9th Cir. 2007); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. v. City of Littleton, Civil Action No. 99-N-1696, Memorandum Decision and Order (D. Colo. March 31, 2001); People ex rel. Deters v. The Lion’s Den, Inc., Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order (Ill. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale, No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); Major Liquors, Inc. v. City of Omaha, 188 Neb. 628 (1972); DLH Inc. v. Nebraska Liquor Control Commission, 266 Neb. 361(2003); Village of Winslow v Sheets, 261 Neb.203 (2001), and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around adult establishments, including, but not limited to, “Correlates of Current Transactional Sex among a Sample of Female Exotic Dancers in Baltimore, MD,” Journal of Urban Health (2011); “Does the Presence of Sexually Oriented Businesses Relate to Increased Levels of Crime? An Examination Using Spatial Analysis,” Crime & Delinquency (2012) (Louisville, KY); Metropolis, Illinois – 2011-12; Manatee County, Florida – 2007; Hillsborough County, Florida – 2006; Clarksville, Indiana – 2009; El Paso, Texas – 2008; Memphis, Tennessee – 2006; New Albany, Indiana – 2009; Louisville, Kentucky – 2004; Fulton County, GA – 2001; Chattanooga, Tennessee – 1999-2003; Jackson County, Missouri – 2008; Ft. Worth, Texas – 2004; Kennedale, Texas – 2005; Greensboro, North Carolina – 2003; Dallas, Texas – 1997; Houston, Texas – 1997, 1983; Phoenix, Arizona – 1995-98, 1979; Tucson, Arizona – 1990; Spokane, Washington – 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota – 1994; Austin, Texas – 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana – 1984; Garden Grove, California – 1991; Los Angeles, California – 1977; Whittier, California – 1978; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma – 1986; New York, New York Times Square – 1994; the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Adult establishments, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); Dallas, Texas – 2007; “Rural Hotspots: The Case of Adult Businesses,” 19 Criminal Justice Policy Review 153 (2008); “Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence,” by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota; “Adult establishments: An Insider’s View,” by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000; Sex Store Statistics and Articles; and Law Enforcement and Private Investigator Affidavits (Adult Cabarets in Forest Park, GA and Sandy Springs, GA), McCleary and Weinstein; Do “Off-Site Adult Businesses Have Secondary Effects? Legal Doctrine, Social Theory and Empirical Evidence, Law and Policy, Vol. 31, No. 2 (April 2009), Adult Business Study: Town and Village of Ellicottville, Cattaraugus County, New York (January 1998), the city finds:
Adult Establishments, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. Alcohol consumption impairs judgment and lowers inhibitions, thereby increasing the risk of adverse secondary effects.
Adult Establishments should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other adult establishments, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of adult establishments in one area.
Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. Additionally, the city’s interest in regulating Adult Establishments extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future adult establishments that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this resolution are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 

The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of adult establishments, including the judicial opinions and reports related to such secondary effects.
Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:

Adult Arcade: shall mean a commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited that maintains booths or rooms smaller than 100 square feet, wherein image-producing devices are regularly maintained, where a fee is charged to access the booths or rooms, and where minors are excluded from the booths or rooms by reason of age.

Adult Bookstore: shall mean a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” A “principal business activity” exists where the commercial establishment meets any one or more of the following criteria:
At least 35% of the establishment’s displayed merchandise consists of said items, or
At least 35% of the establishment’s revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of said items, or
The establishment maintains at least 35% of its floor area for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items; or
The establishment maintains at least seven hundred fifty square feet (750 sq. ft.) of its floor area for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items.
Adult Establishment: shall mean an “adult arcade,” an “adult bookstore,” an “adult motion picture theater,” a “semi-nude lounge,” or a “sex paraphernalia store.”

Adult Motion Picture Theater: shall mean a commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited that maintains viewing rooms that are 100 square feet or larger wherein films or videos characterized by their emphasis upon “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” are regularly shown.

Characterized By: shall mean describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied to adult establishments, no business shall be classified as an adult establishment by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America.

Employee of an Adult Establishment: shall mean any person who works on the premises of an adult establishment, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, lessee, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.

Nudity or Nude Conduct: shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola.

Operator of Adult Establishment: shall mean any person on the premises of an adult establishment who manages, supervises, or controls the business or a portion thereof. A person may be found to be an operator regardless of whether such person is an owner or part owner, of the business.

Semi-Nude or Semi-Nudity: shall mean the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.

Semi-Nude Lounge: shall mean a nightclub, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, massage parlor, or similar commercial establishment that regularly offers live seminude conduct. No establishment shall avoid classification as a semi-nude lounge by offering nude conduct.

Sexual Device: shall mean any three (3) dimensional object designed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, buttocks, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices commonly known as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, cock rings, anal beads, butt plugs, nipple clamps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.

Sex Paraphernalia Store: shall mean a commercial establishment where more than 100 sexual devices are regularly made available for sale or rental. This definition shall not be construed to include any establishment located within an enclosed regional shopping mall or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical products.

Specified Anatomical Areas: shall mean less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and/or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.

Specified Sexual Activities: shall mean intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy.

Viewing Room: shall mean the room or booth where a patron of an adult establishment would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, digital video disc, or other video on an image-producing device.
Regulations
No person shall establish, operate, or cause to be operated an adult establishment in Crete’s jurisdiction within:
1,000 feet of another adult establishment;
500 feet of a business licensed to sell alcohol at the premises; or
1,000 feet of a residential district, residential use, residence, church, educational institution, park, or recreational facility.
For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest part of the structure containing the adult establishment to the closest point on a property boundary of another adult establishment, a business licensed to sell alcohol at the premises, a residential district, a residential use, a residence, a church, an educational institution, park, or a recreational facility.
No adult establishment shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day.
No patron, employee of an adult establishment, or any other person shall knowingly or intentionally, in an adult establishment, appear in a state of nudity or engage in a specified sexual activity.
No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in an adult establishment, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee of an adult establishment who, while semi-nude, remains at least six (6) feet from all patrons and on a stage at least eighteen (18) inches from the floor in a room of at least six hundred (600) square feet.
No employee of an adult establishment who appears semi-nude in an adult establishment shall knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of an adult establishment. No customer shall knowingly or intentionally touch such an employee of an adult establishment or the clothing of such an employee of an adult establishment on the premises of an adult establishment.
No person shall possess alcoholic beverages on the premises of an adult establishment.
No person shall knowingly or recklessly allow a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain on the premises of an adult establishment.
No operator of an adult establishment shall knowingly or recklessly allow a room in the adult establishment to be simultaneously occupied by any patron and any other employee of an adult establishment who is semi-nude or who appears seminude on the premises of the adult establishment, unless an operator of the adult establishment is present in the same room.
A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult establishment which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements.
The operator of the adult establishment shall, within one week of opening the adult establishment for business, submit to the City Zoning Officer a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator’s stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, video cassettes, digital video discs, or other video reproductions. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
It shall be the duty of the operator of the adult establishment, and of any employees of the adult establishment present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment, and of any employees of an adult establishment present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business.
It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment, and of any employees of an adult establishment present on the premises, to ensure that no specified sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises.
It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following:
That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than 150 square feet is limited to one person.
That specified sexual activity on the premises is prohibited.
That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited.
That violators will be required to leave the premises.
That violations of these regulations are unlawful.
It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to enforce the regulations articulated in e.i. though e.v. above.
The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from an operator of the adult establishment’s station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator’s station shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. If the premises has two (2) or more operator’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the operator’s stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator’s station. It is the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to ensure that at least one employee of an adult establishment is on duty and situated in each operator’s station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment, and it shall also be the duty of any employees of an adult establishment present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises.
It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to ensure that no porous materials are used for any wall, floor, or seat in any booth or viewing room.
It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under subsections D,9,a through D,9,h above to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty.
No patron shall knowingly or recklessly enter or remain in a viewing room less than 150 square feet in area that is occupied by any other patron.
No patron shall knowingly or recklessly be or remain within one foot of any other patron while in a viewing room that is 150 square feet or larger in area.
No person shall knowingly or recklessly make any hole or opening between viewing rooms.
It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to ensure that the interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot candles as measured at the floor level and the illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer is present in or on the premises.
Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a reckless mental state shall be sufficient to establish a violation of a provision of this section 8.17.03.
(Ord. No. 2029, 11/7/17)

11-532 Outdoor Storage Containers
Outdoor storage containers are limited conditionally to the Agriculture, Public and Industrial Districts.
Location: Containers shall be located to the rear 50 percent of the site. Containers shall not be located in any required setback or yard area, required landscape area, required drive aisle, driveway, or parking area. Containers shall not encroach upon spaces necessary to satisfy the minimum parking requirement, nor shall they block, impede, or divert traffic in or access to emergency, snow removal, circulation and fire lanes. Containers shall not be stacked upon one another and shall be located an appropriate distance from all structures, in accordance with the Fire Code.
Condition: The exterior of the storage containers shall be kept free of rust, holes, dents, or other corrosion and shall be painted or otherwise maintained such that they are consistent with the character of adjacent buildings, and secured at all times.
Use: At no time shall an outdoor storage container be used as a place of business or residence, nor shall a container house, store, or contain goods, products, or materials other than those that are accessory and essential to daily on-site use and operation of the principal building or business requesting the conditional use permit.
Exemptions: The temporary use of construction trailers, containers at a building site up to one year, or moving containers up to 60 days are exempt from this requirement.
(Ord. No. 2030, 11/7/17)

Article 6 Airport Hazard Area
11-601 Airport Hazard Area Description
11-602 The Airport Hazard Area Consists Of Operation Zones, Approach Zones, Turning Zones, And Transition Zones
11-603 Height Restriction
11-604 Airport Zoning Map And Location
11-605 Permit Requirements And Exceptions
11-606 Non-Conforming Structures
11-607 Marking Of Non-Conforming Structures
11-608 Administrative Agency; Enforcement
11-609 Board Of Adjustment

11-601 Airport Hazard Area Description
In accordance with Neb. Rev. Stat. § 3-303, the City has an airport hazard area within the area of its zoning jurisdiction, and must adopt, administer, and enforce the regulations in this section for such airport hazard area.

(Ord. No. 1795, 08/02/11; 1935, 06/16/2015)

11-602 The Airport Hazard Area Consists Of Operation Zones, Approach Zones, Turning Zones, And Transition Zones
The Operation Zones are longitudinally centered on each existing or proposed runway:
Length. For existing and proposed paved runways, the operation zones begin and end 200 feet beyond the end of each runway. For existing and proposed turf runways, the operation zones begin and end at the runway ends.
Width. For existing and proposed instrument runways, the operation zones are 1,000 feet wide.
Height. The height limit of the operation zones is the same as the nearest point on an existing or proposed runway or the surface of the ground, whichever is higher.
The Approach Zones extend from the end of each operation zone and are centered along the extended runway centerlines. The zones' dimensions are:
Length and Width. The approach zones extend from the operation zone a distance of ten (10) miles, measured along the extended runway centerline. The approach zones are 1,000 feet wide at the end nearest the runway and expand uniformly so that at a point on the extended runway centerline ten (10) miles from the operation zone, the approach zone is 16,840 feet wide.
Height Limit. The height limit of the approach zones begins at the elevation of the turning zone and rises one (1) foot vertically for 50 feet horizontally (50:1) up to a maximum of 889.2 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.
The Transition Zones extend outward at right angles to the runway centerline and upward at a rate of one (1) foot vertically for every seven (7) feet horizontally (7:1). The height limit of these zones begins at the height limit of the adjacent operation zones or approach zones. The transition zones end at a height of 150 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.
The Turning Zones extend three (3) miles from the existing or planned airport property line, excluding the operation zones, approach zones, or transition zones. The height limit of the turning zones is 150 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.
(Ord. No. 1795, 08/02/11; 1935, 06/16/2015)

11-603 Height Restriction
No building, transmission line, pole, tower, chimney, wires, or other structure or appurtenance of any kind or character shall hereafter be erected, constructed, repaired, or established, nor shall any tree or other object of natural growth be allowed to grow, above the heights described in § 11-602 above.

(Ord. No. 1795, 08/02/11; 1935, 06/16/2015)

11-604 Airport Zoning Map And Location
The boundaries, operation zones, approach zones, transition zones, and turning zones of the Crete Municipal Airport are indicated on the Airport Zoning Map, which is attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference. A copy of the Airport Zoning and Airport Zoning Map shall at all times be on file in the office of the City Clerk.

(Ord. No. 1795, 08/02/11; 1935, 06/16/2015)

11-605 Permit Requirements And Exceptions
Anyone wishing to erect, construct, reconstruct, repair, or establish any building, transmission line, pole, tower, chimney, wires, or any other structure or appurtenance; or to plant or replant any tree or other object of natural growth; within the Hazard Area must first obtain a permit from the appropriate local Zoning Board, and, if Neb. Rev. Stat. § 3-403 is applicable, from the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics.

Ref. 3-311 RS Neb. (Ord. No. 1795, 08/02/11)

11-606 Non-Conforming Structures
Within the hazard area, no non-conforming building, transmission line, pole, tower, chimney, wires, or other structure or appurtenance of any kind or character or object of natural growth shall hereafter be replaced, substantially reconstructed, repaired, altered, replanted, or allowed to grow to a height above the heights permitted by these regulations. If such structures or objects of natural growth have been torn down, destroyed, have deteriorated or decayed to an extent of Fifty Percent (50%) or more of their original condition, or abandoned for a period of twelve (12) months or more. Transmission lines and other communication lines shall be interpreted as all poles, wires, guys and all other equipment necessary for the operation and maintenance of same within the regulated zone.

Ref. 3-311 RS Neb. (Ord. No. 1795, 08/02/11; 1935, 06/16/2015)

11-607 Marking Of Non-Conforming Structures
Whenever the City Zoning Administrator determines that a specific structure or object exceeds the height restrictions and existed prior to the promulgation of these regulations, the owner(s) and/or the lessor(s) of the premises on which the structure or object is located shall be notified in writing by the City Zoning Administrator. The owner(s) and lessor(s) shall, within a reasonable time, permit the marking and lighting of the structure or object. The appropriate local Zoning Board shall specify the required marking and lighting, consistent with Chapter 3 of Nebraska Administrative Code Title 17 entitled "Marking and Lighting of Structures". The cost of marking or lighting shall not be assessed against the owner or lessor of said premises.

Ref. 3-313 RS Neb. (Ord. No. 1795, 08/02/11; 1935, 06/16/2015)

11-608 Administrative Agency; Enforcement
The City Building Inspector, serving as the Zoning Administrator, shall administer and enforce these regulations and shall be the administrative agency provided for in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 3-319 (Reissue 2007), and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the administrative agency as provided in the Airport Zoning Act.

(Ord. No. 1795, 08/02/11; 1935, 06/16/2015)

11-609 Board Of Adjustment
The City Board of Adjustment shall be the Board of Adjustment with respect to these regulations. Said Board shall have and exercise the powers conferred by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 3-320 (Reissue 2013) and such other powers and duties as are conferred and imposed by law.

(Ord. No. 1795, 08/02/11; 1935, 06/16/2015)

Article 7 Penal Provision
11-701 Violation; Penalty

11-701 Violation; Penalty
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Chapter and no specific penalty is provided for such breach, any violation of such section or provision shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any one offense, recoverable with costs. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every twenty-four hours of such failure to comply.


Source: Ord. 1815 (2011)




Article 8 Sign Regulations
11-801 Regulations, How Cited; Conflicts.
11-802 Definitions.
11-803 Regulations, Applicability; Prohibited Signs; General Requirements.
11-804 Permit Required; Procedure; Fees.
11-805 Permitted Sign Types By Zoning District.
11-806 Maximum Number Of Signs; Height Limits.
11-807 Maximum Size; Maximum Total Sign Area; Method Of Measurement.
11-808 Vision Clearance Zone.
11-809 Awnings; Awning Signs.
11-810 Banners.
11-811 Business Center Identification Signs.
11-812 Directional Signs.
11-813 Electronic Signs.
11-814 Illuminated Signs.
11-815 Marquees; Marquee Signs.
11-816 Outdoor Advertising Signs.
11-817 Pole Signs.
11-818 Portable Signs.
11-819 Projecting Signs.
11-820 Temporary Signs.
11-821 Wall Signs.
11-822 Nonconforming Signs.
11-823 Violations; Penalty.

11-801 Regulations, How Cited; Conflicts.
(1) The provisions of this article shall be known and may be cited as the Sign Regulations.

(2) In the case of conflicts between local, state, or federal laws and regulations, the most restrictive regulation shall apply. In the case of conflicts within the Sign Regulations, the more specific regulation shall apply.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)

 

11-802 Definitions.
For purposes of the Sign Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply:

(1) “Abandoned sign” means a sign, including the sign face and supporting structure, that refers to a discontinued use, business, profession, commodity, service, or other activity formerly occupying the premises or contains no sign copy on all sign faces for a continuous period of six months.

(2) “Attached sign” means a sign that is structurally connected to a building or depends upon a building for support.

(3) “Awning” means a rigid frame covered with a flexible fabric cover intended to provide signage, shade, or shelter for pedestrians or occupants of a building.

(4) “Banner” means a sign made of flexible material with a printed message or graphic that can be secured or mounted to a structure in such a way as to allow wind movement.

(5) “Building marker” means a historic or commemorative plaque or a building name or cornerstone carved into a masonry surface.

(6) “Business center identification sign” means a sign that identifies a commercial building or structure that shares parking and access.

(7) “Canopy” means a roof-like structure that is freestanding and has no walls beneath the roof or that projects out from the façade of a building or structure and whose structural support is an integral part of the main building. This includes any sign that is attached to or made an integral part of a canopy.

(8) “Detached sign” means a sign built on a self-supporting, independent structure.

(9) “Directional sign” means a sign that is intended to provide direction or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic to an area or place.

(10) “Double-faced sign” means a sign consisting of no more than two parallel or near parallel faces supported by a single structure. If not parallel, the angle created by the two faces shall not exceed fifteen degrees.

(11) “Electronic sign” means a sign that contains electrical wiring and uses an array of electrically illuminated lights to display information or supporting graphics. Signs illuminated by an exterior light source that is not an integral part of the sign are not electronic signs.

(12) “Façade” means a separate exterior face of a building or structure, including parapet walls and omitted wall lines, that extends vertically from the grade up and horizontally across the side of the building or structure. A façade may extend above the roof line, and separate faces oriented in the same direction or within forty-five degrees of one another are considered part of the same façade.

(13) “Flag sign” means a sign that is emblazoned on a nonrigid material and is intended to be displayed in a free-flowing manner.

(14) “Flashing sign” means a sign that has a lighting source or lighting element that periodically illuminates or that is not stationary or constant in intensity or color.

(15) “Ground sign” means a detached sign that has its top edge five feet or less above grade.

(16) “Illuminated sign” means a sign that is directly illuminated by an internal or external light source.

(17) “Marquee” means a protective shelter or overhang that projects more than twenty-four inches from the façade of a building or structure.

(18) “Monument sign” means a ground sign that has a solid base or the appearance of a solid base.

(19) “Moving sign” means a sign that conveys a message through rotating, changing, or animated elements. Clocks are not considered moving signs.

(20) “Mural” means an artistic image or design painted or affixed to the exterior surface of a structure that does not contain commercial text, messages, graphics, or images.

(21) “Off-premises sign” means any sign that serves to advertise a product, service, or activity not conducted on the premises on which the sign is located.

(22) “Outdoor advertising sign” means a sign that displays information relating to a business, product, event, or other subject of advertising or publicity.

(23) “Pole sign” means a detached sign that has its top edge more than five feet above grade.

(24) “Portable sign” means a ground sign supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to bases that are not permanently attached to the ground or a structure.

(25) “Premises identification sign” means a sign that provides identification or information about the use of the premises, the owner or operator of that use, the type of business being conducted, or the principal brand name of the goods sold on the premises.

(26) “Projecting sign” means a sign other than a wall sign that is attached to and that projects at an angle of between forty-five and one hundred thirty-five degrees from the façade of a building or structure.

(27) “Residential sign” means a sign located on a residential building, structure, or premises that conveys a non-commercial message communicated by the resident and includes premises identification signs for home occupations.

(28) “Roof sign” means a sign attached to a building or structure above the eave line.

(29) “Roof sign, above-peak” means a roof sign that has its top edge above the highest point on a roof.

(30) “Roof sign, integral” means a roof sign that wholly fits between the eave line and the highest point on a roof and that is substantially parallel to the façade of a building or structure.

(31) “Sign” means any structure, fixture, graphics, illustration, statue, or other device visible from off the premises that is designed or intended to identify, attract attention to, advertise, or convey information regarding any use, good, product, service, business, location, institution, activity, person, solicitation, issue, or campaign, with the exception of merchandise window displays, national, state, or other governmental subdivision or educational institution flags, and sculpture.

(32) “Temporary sign” means a sign that is not permanently affixed and that is intended to be removed or replaced within a period of six months or less.

(33) “Wall sign” means a sign painted on or attached to and parallel with the façade of a building or structure and that projects no more than eighteen inches from the façade.

(34) “Window sign” means a sign painted on a window or installed inside a window display area of a building or structure.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)

 

11-803 Regulations, Applicability; Prohibited Signs; General Requirements.
(1) The Sign Regulations apply to all signs as defined in the regulations, except:

(a) Signs advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises or a part of the premises on which the signs are displayed that conform with the following: (i) one non-illuminated sign, not to exceed six square feet in residential districts and thirty-two square feet in commercial or industrial districts, shall be permitted on each premises; (ii) such signs shall not extend higher than three feet above grade level in residential districts; and, (iii) such signs shall be removed within seven days after the disposition of the premises.

(b) Signs identifying the architect, engineer, contractor, or other individuals involved in the construction of a building, announcing the future building enterprise, or explaining purpose for which the building is intended that conform with the following: (i) one non-illuminated sign not to exceed fifty square feet shall be permitted per street frontage; (ii) such signs shall not extend higher than ten feet above grade level and meet any front yard requirements unless located on a protective barricade surrounding the construction; and, (iii) such signs shall be removed within one week following completion of construction.

(c) Signs of a political nature, expressing pertinent political issues, or announcing candidates seeking public office that are erected or maintained for a period beginning sixty days prior to the date of and ending seven days following the election to which they pertain.

(d) Signs advertising public events that have been approved by the City.

(e) Signs pertaining to recognized national holidays and national observances that are erected or maintained for a period beginning thirty days prior to the date of and ending seven days following the event to which they pertain.

(f) Signs erected by or upon the order of a public official in the performance of their public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs, no trespassing signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest, signs designating hospitals, libraries, schools, and other institutions or places of public interest or concern, and other similar signs.

(g) Building markers or other historical, memorial, or commemorative signs that depict the names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets, and other similar information when carved into stone, concrete, or other building material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the structure to which they are attached.

(h) Window signs; provided, however, that illuminated or electronic window signs, including neon signs, shall be permitted only in those districts where illuminated or electronic signs are permitted.

(i) Murals or other works of graphic art painted or applied to windows or building walls that contain no advertising or business identification message.

(j) Neighborhood or subdivision identification signs under fifty square feet in size.

(k) Signs that are not visible from a public right-of-way, private way, or court or from a property other than that on which the sign is installed.

(l) Directional signs that:

(i) Do not exceed four square feet in maximum size or three feet in maximum height, and

(ii) Are limited to one sign at each driveway or access point with a public street and one sign at any critical decision point internal to a development.

(2) Any sign, canopy, or awning that does not comply with all applicable regulations or that is not expressly permitted shall be prohibited. In addition, the following signs, parts of signs, or objects are specifically prohibited in all zoning districts:

(a) Abandoned signs;

(b) Above-peak roof signs;

(c) Balloons, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, or other similarly moving objects when not part of any sign;

(d) Flashing, blinking, or rotating lights;

(e) Off-premises signs on public property;

(f) Off-premises signs painted on building walls unless specifically approved as an element of a Historic Neighborhood;

(g) Signs that contain obscene or offensive content in violation of any local, state, or federal law or regulation;

(h) Signs, structures, objects, or parts of signs, structures, or objects located within a vision clearance zone;

(i) Signs or awnings that create a traffic or safety hazard for pedestrians or vehicles or that obscure official signs or signals; and,

(j) Signs, sign structures, or parts of signs that resemble, imitate, simulate, or conflict with traffic control signs or devices, that could mislead or confuse persons traveling on public streets, or that violate any of the provisions of the Nebraska Rules of the Road or any other applicable law or regulation.

(3) All signs shall be maintained in a good state of repair, including, but not limited to, the structural components, the lighting, the portion attaching to the ground or structure, and the surface features.

(4) All detached signs must be spaced at least fifty feet apart, and all signs shall be at least fifty feet from the border of a residential zoning district.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-804 Permit Required; Procedure; Fees.
(1) A sign permit issued by the City shall be required prior to the erection, construction, alteration, placing, or locating of any sign to which the Sign Regulations apply. A sign permit shall not be required for any minor maintenance, including minor, nonstructural repairs and repainting where permanent wording, composition, or colors will remain unchanged.

(2) A copy of plans and specifications shall be submitted to the City for each proposed sign. Such plans must show sufficient details about the size, composition, and planned location of the sign and any other information as may be required to determine compliance with the Sign Regulations.

(a) If requested by the City, the applicant shall furnish a certification of the structural integrity of the sign and its installation by a registered professional engineer with a specialization in structural engineering.

(b) For projects with an overall site area in excess of six acres, the applicant must submit a master plan that details the sizes, locations, and designs of all signs on the site. The master plan may adjust the strict requirements of the Sign Regulations upon approval by the City. All master plans must be approved by the City Council after the plan has been reviewed by the Planning Commission.

(3) Each application for a sign permit must be accompanied by all applicable fees set by the City. Additional fees may be assessed for sign permits applied for after the fact or when the application requires substantial review and input by the City.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-805 Permitted Sign Types By Zoning District.
(1) No sign is permitted in a zoning district except as provided in the table below:


Sign Types

A-1	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	C-1	C-2	C-3	I-1	I-2
Awning	P	S	S	S	S	P	P	P	P	P
Banner	C	



C	C	C	C	C
Business Center Identification	P	S	S	S	S	P	P	P	P	P
Canopy	P	S	S	S	S	P	P	P	P	P
Directional	P	C	C	C	C	P	P	P	P	P
Electronic	P	



P	P	P	P	P
Flag	P	



P	P	P	P	P
Ground	P	



P	P	P	P	P
Illuminated	P	



P	P	P	P	P
Marquee	P	



P	P	P	P	P
Outdoor Advertising	P	



S	S	S	S	S
Pole	P	



P	P	P	P	P
Portable	C	



C	C	C	C	C
Premises Identification	P	C	C	C	C	P	P	P	P	P
Projecting	P	



P	P	P	P	P
Residential	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	S	S
Roof, Integral	P	S	S	S	S	P	P	P	P	P
Temporary	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C
Wall	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Window	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
P: Permitted          C: Conditionally permitted         S: Allowed by Special Exception 


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-806 Maximum Number Of Signs; Height Limits.
(1) The maximum permitted number of signs on a premises shall be:

(a) In A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, C-1, and C-2 Districts, one detached sign per premises.

(b) In C-3 Districts, one detached sign per two hundred linear feet of frontage.

(c) In I-1 and I-2 Districts, one detached sign per three hundred linear feet of frontage.

(d) There is no limit on the maximum number of attached signs a premises may have.

(2) Except as otherwise provided, the maximum permitted height of any sign on a premises, measured from the average grade level below the sign to the highest point of the sign or sign structure, shall not exceed:

(a) In A-1 Districts, twenty-five feet;

(b) In R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts, six feet;

(c) In C-1 and C-2 Districts, twenty feet;

(d) In C-3, I-1, and I-2 Districts, thirty-five feet.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-807 Maximum Size; Maximum Total Sign Area; Method Of Measurement.
(1) Except as otherwise provided, the maximum permitted size of any sign shall not exceed:

(a) In A-1 Districts, one hundred square feet;

(b) In R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts, six square feet;

(c) In C-1 Districts, one hundred square feet;

(d) In C-2 Districts, one hundred fifty square feet;

(e) In C-3, I-1, and I-2 Districts, three hundred square feet.

(2) The maximum permitted total sign area for all signs on a premises, excluding business center identification and directional signs, shall not exceed:

(a) In A-1 Districts, two hundred square feet for nonresidential signs and three square feet for residential signs.

(b) In R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts, thirty-two square feet for nonresidential signs, including premises identification signs for multi-family or mobile home developments, and three square feet for residential signs.

(c) In C-1 Districts, the lesser of one square foot of signage area per linear foot of frontage or three hundred square feet on a premises whose primary use is nonresidential; fifty square feet for premises identification signs for multi-family developments; and, six square feet for residential signs.

(d) In C-2 Districts, the lesser of one and one-half square feet of signage area per linear foot of frontage or four hundred square feet.

(e) In C-3 Districts, the lesser of three square feet of signage area per linear foot of frontage or eight hundred square feet.

(f) In I-1 and I-2 Districts, the lesser of two square feet of signage area per linear foot of frontage or eight hundred square feet.

(3) Total sign area includes the entire area within the perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the sign, excluding any structure essential for support or service of the sign or architectural elements of the building.

(a) The total sign area for ground signs, monument signs, and architectural sign bands is calculated as the area enclosing the extreme limits of the copy area only.

(b) In the case of individual letters mounted to a wall, only the total area of the letters themselves is included within the total sign area.

(c) The area of double-faced signs is calculated on the largest face only.

(4) For properties with frontage on more than one street or private drive, the total frontage shall be calculated as the longest frontage plus one-half the length of all additional frontages.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-808 Vision Clearance Zone.
(1) No sign, structure, or other obstruction to view shall be erected, placed, or maintained within a triangle formed by intersecting street, road, alley, or railroad rights-of-way or non-residential drives.

(2) The lengths of the sides of the triangle shall be:

(a) Twenty feet from the intersection along the right-of-way edges of alleys;

(b) Twenty-five feet from the intersection along a local street or non-residential drive;

(c) Forty feet from the intersection along a collector street;

(d) Fifty-five feet from the intersection along arterial roadways or highways.




Dimensions of Vision Clearance Triangle
Street/Road Classification	Length of Triangle Side
Alley	20 feet
Non-residential drive	25 feet
Local	25 feet
Collector	40 feet
Arterial	55 feet









Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-809 Awnings; Awning Signs.
(1) The copy area of an awning sign shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the total face area of the awning. The combined area of all front-facing awning panels shall not exceed thirty-five percent of the total wall area.

(2) Awnings shall not extend above the eave or parapet of the building façade and shall be a minimum of seven feet six inches above the sidewalk or grade, whichever is higher. Awnings shall not extend over any area utilized by motor vehicles.

(3) Awnings may project no more than nine feet from the façade of the wall to which they are mounted. Any extension beyond six feet shall have plans stamped by a licensed architect or professional engineer, certifying the ability of the wall and associated structures to carry all imposed loads.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-810 Banners.
(1) A banner projecting from or attached to a building may not exceed the wall height of the building and must be located eight feet or more above grade if the banner projects more than six inches from the building. The maximum projection for any banner is five feet from the building.

(2) Banners may extend over public property or across a public street upon permission of the City and shall be subject to such conditions as the City may determine. When extended over a public street, banners shall maintain a minimum clearance of twenty feet.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-811 Business Center Identification Signs.
(1) In addition to its total permitted sign area, each premises used for a business or commercial center may have one detached business center identification sign, subject to the following conditions:

(a) The maximum size of the business center identification sign shall be one hundred square feet.

(b) No business center identification sign shall be within three hundred linear feet of any other business center identification sign or within one hundred fifty feet of any other detached sign.

(c) The business center identification sign shall display no more than the name and address of the business or commercial center and the names of the businesses found therein.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-812 Directional Signs.
(1) Only a location, business name, or logo is permitted on a directional sign.

(2) In I-1 and I-2 Districts, one non-illuminated directional sign with a maximum of twelve square feet is permitted at each major entrance to an industrial development or complex. Such sign shall be a ground sign.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-813 Electronic Signs.
(1) Electronic signs are subject to the following general regulations:

(a) Electronic signs or the parts of signs that are electronic shall not exceed eighty square feet.

(b) Electronic signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any curb line.

(c) No electronic sign shall be located within fifty feet of another electronic sign, measured from the points of the two signs nearest each other.

(d) No electronic sign shall be programmed in a way that suggests or resembles a traffic control device, such as a traffic signal.

(e) Electronic signs shall be equipped with a sensor, timer, or other device to automatically adjust the day and night intensity levels so that the brightness of the sign matches ambient light levels.

(2) Electronic signs shall be at least one hundred feet from the border of a residential zoning district.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-814 Illuminated Signs.
(1) Lighting must be positioned in such a manner that light is not directed onto adjoining property or a public street or highway.

(2) Illuminated signs shall be at least one hundred feet from the border of a residential zoning district.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-815 Marquees; Marquee Signs.
(1) Marquees are subject to the maximum projection and clearance regulations of awnings.

(2) Signs placed on, attached to, or constructed on a marquee are subject to the maximum projection and clearance regulations of projecting signs. Such signs shall not exceed three feet in height or the height or vertical thickness of the marquee, whichever is greater.

(3) Marquees shall be designed to minimize visible support structures, including guy wires, cables, turnbuckles, angle iron, or other similar external support structures.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-816 Outdoor Advertising Signs.
(1) Outdoor advertising signs are only allowed on eligible properties by special exception permit. To be eligible, properties must be located within A-1, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, or I-2 Districts and must abut Nebraska Highway 33 or Nebraska Highway 103.

(2) Outdoor advertising signs count as detached signs for the purpose of calculating the total number of permitted signs. Outdoor advertising signs may exceed the general height limits up to a maximum of thirty-five feet.

(3) Outdoor advertising signs may exceed the general size limits up to a maximum of five hundred square feet. Placing an outdoor advertising sign does not entitle a premises to additional total sign area, and the area of the sign counts against the total sign area allowed on the premises.

(4) Where permitted, outdoor advertising signs shall be at least six hundred feet from any other outdoor advertising sign and at least three hundred feet from any other detached sign. Outdoor advertising signs in excess of the general size limit for the zoning district shall be at least two thousand feet away from any other outdoor advertising sign and at least two hundred feet from the border of a residential zoning district.

(5) Stacked signs or other installations of two signs facing the same direction on a single structure are prohibited.

(6) The radius of ten feet around the base of an outdoor advertising sign shall be maintained by the sign or property owner in clean condition. A radius of five feet around the base of the sign shall be landscaped with ornamental plants.

(7) Nothing in this section shall be taken to limit the ability of a property owner to devote a sign that is fully consistent with all provisions of the Sign Regulations for an advertising message related to the use of the premises.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-817 Pole Signs.
(1) Pole signs are subject to the following general regulations:

(a) Each pole sign must maintain at least the following vertical clearances:

(i) Eight feet six inches over grade when over sidewalks.

(ii) Ten feet over grade when outside of but within three feet of parking areas, driveways, or streets or within fifty feet of the right-of-way lines formed by a street intersection.

(iii) Fourteen feet over grade when over parking lots.

(iv) Eighteen feet over grade when over driveways or streets.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-818 Portable Signs.
(1) Portable signs are subject to the following general regulations:

(a) A permit is required for all portable signs.

(b) Portable signs are only allowed for a maximum of sixty days per year, thirty continuous days at a time.

(c) All portable signs must meet the location and size requirements for temporary signs.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-819 Projecting Signs.
(1) Projecting signs are subject to the following general regulations:

(a) The maximum projection of any projecting sign shall be as follows:

(i) Three feet over public sidewalks less than twelve feet wide.

(ii) Five feet over private property or over public sidewalks twelve feet wide or more.

(b) Within the C-1 District, a projecting sign may come within five feet of the vertical place of the inside curb line.

(c) Each projecting sign must maintain at least the following vertical clearances:

(i) Eight feet six inches over grade when over sidewalks; except that a canopy may reduce its vertical clearance to seven feet six inches.

(ii) Ten feet over grade when outside of but within three feet of parking areas, driveways, or streets or within fifty feet of the right-of-way lines formed by a street intersection.

(iii) Fourteen feet over grade when over parking lots.

(iv) Eighteen feet over grade when over driveways or streets.

(d) Projecting signs may not exceed one hundred square feet in sign area.

(2) No projecting sign extending three feet or more from a property line may be located within twenty-five feet of any other projecting sign extending three feet or more from a property line.

(3) Projecting signs must minimize visible support structures, including guy wires, cables, turnbuckles, angle iron, or other similar external support structures.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-820 Temporary Signs.
(1) A temporary sign permit is required prior to the repair, alteration, relocation, or maintenance of any temporary sign. A temporary sign permit may be in effect for a period of thirty days on two separate occasions from the date of issuance, as designated on the application. The two thirty-day periods may be contiguous, but not separated by more than one year.

(2) The location of all temporary signs shall comply with the following:

(a) A temporary sign shall not be attached to any sign, light, or public utility pole or tree.

(b) Temporary signs are prohibited on any public property, including rights-of-way, streets, sidewalks, parks, and public facilities.

(c) Temporary signs may not interfere with any driveway, access way, or means of ingress and egress to any building or structure.

(d) A temporary sign may be attached and, if so, shall be attached only to vertical façades of the principal building or structure and not to roofs, roof extensions, cornices, overhangs, or other building or structural extensions or features.

(3) The size of all temporary signs shall comply with the following:

(a) The total amount of temporary signage permitted on any premises shall be the smallest of five percent of all façades or one hundred square feet.

(b) The maximum size of detached temporary signs shall be fifty square feet in area.

(4) All temporary signs shall be maintained in sound condition.

(5) The City may order the removal of any temporary sign not in compliance with this section. If the owner of the premises on which such sign is located or the owner of the sign fails to remove such sign, the City shall remove the sign at the owner’s cost. Such costs may be assessed to the property. Any such removal shall result in the immediate cancellation of any outstanding temporary sign permit.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-821 Wall Signs.
(1) Wall signs are subject to the following general regulations:

(a) A wall sign may not extend beyond the corner of the wall to which it is attached, except where attached to another wall sign.

(b) A wall sign may not extend beyond a building’s roof line.

(c) In commercial districts, a wall sign attached to a building on its front property line may encroach on a public right-of-way by no more than eighteen inches. Such a wall sign shall provide minimum clearance of eight feet six inches. This encroachment is not permitted along state or federal highways in commercial districts.

(d) For the purpose of calculating permitted sign areas, signs painted on the walls of buildings shall be considered wall signs.

(e) Where permitted, canopy signs are counted as wall signs when calculating total permitted sign area.

(2) The total square footage of all wall signs on a façade shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the total square footage of the façade.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-822 Nonconforming Signs.
(1) If a sign exists prior to the effective date of the Sign Regulations or any amendment thereto and becomes unlawful due to changes to the Sign Regulations, such sign may remain and continue in use so long as it remains otherwise lawful and in compliance with the following:

(a) The sign may not be enlarged, altered, or reconstructed, except for minor, reasonable repairs or alterations approved by the City.

(b) The sign may not be replaced if destroyed. A sign is deemed destroyed if the cost to repair would be sixty percent or more of its present value.

(2) All signs shall comply fully with the Sign Regulations and any amendments thereto within seven years after the effective date of any changes.

(a) This subsection shall not apply to outdoor advertising signs that remain in continuous use.

(b) Any nonconforming outdoor advertising sign that remains unused for a period of one hundred eighty days shall forfeit its right to continue as a nonconforming use.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)



11-823 Violations; Penalty.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, repair, maintain, convert, reconstruct, or remove any sign, canopy, or awning within the City of Crete and its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction except in compliance with the provisions of the Sign Regulations, all building codes, and the Crete Municipal Code.

(2) Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a Class IV misdemeanor.

(a) In addition to the usual judgment of conviction, the county judge may order the person to remove any sign, canopy, or awning that violates the Sign Regulations and, in the event the person shall fail to do so, may allow the City to enter the person’s property and remove and dispose of said sign, canopy, or awning. The cost of such removal and disposal shall be borne by the convicted person.

(b) Each day that a violation of this section continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. The penalties herein provided shall be cumulative and in addition to any other penalty or forfeiture provided by law.


Source: Ord. 2119 (2021)




		


