
Cozad, NE Code of Ordinances


COZAD, NEBRASKA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




Current through Local Legislation Ord. No. 1478, passed 2-19-2018
State legislation current through 2017




 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Section histories; statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances shall be designated as the City of
Cozad Code of Ordinances and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Cozad,
Nebraska.



      CITY COUNCIL or GOVERNING BODY. The legislative body of the city.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      COUNTY. The County of Dawson, Nebraska.



      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath and, in such cases, the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer,
office, employee, commission or department of the city unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON. Includes bodies politic and corporate, societies,
communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships, limited
liability companies, joint-stock companies and associations.



(Neb. RS 49-801(16))



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



      STATE. The State of Nebraska.



      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether
by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the Mayor and City Council or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   ANDorOR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or”, if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, the requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever a section refers to another section hereof, that reference
shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended,
revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is materially
altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the
misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to
express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the
spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.



   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within the city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME
OR NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   (1)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.



      (2)   If the last day is Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code contains all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining
to the subjects enumerated and embraced in this code. All prior ordinances
pertaining to the subjects treated by this code are repealed, except that
nothing shall affect any rights acquired under, actions involving, or fines,
penalties, forfeitures or liabilities incurred pursuant to those ordinances
prior to repeal.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code, including
ordinances specified in this section, shall remain in full force and effect
unless repealed expressly or by necessary implication:



   (A)   Vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, alleys or other
public places;



   (B)   Annexing or detaching territory;



   (C)   Granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land
to public use;



   (D)   Providing for the acquisition or conveyance of real or
personal property;



   (E)   Authorizing or directing public improvements to be made;



   (F)   Levying taxes or special assessments;



   (G)   Appropriating money;



   (H)   Granting franchises or special licenses; or



   (I)   Providing for the issuance of bonds or other instruments of
indebtedness.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance is repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance
thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of
the ordinance repealing or modifying it to give effect thereto.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, liability, fine, forfeiture or
penalty instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance
previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged,
but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force, unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision is itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.



Statutory reference:



   Requirements for amendments and revisions, see Neb. RS 17-614



§ 10.16  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the
text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example:
(Neb. RS 18-132)



   (B)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to
that statute for further information. Example:



      § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



         This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



      Statutory reference:



         Inspection of public records, see Neb. RS 84-712 et seq.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this city
code, unless otherwise specifically provided herein, shall be deemed guilty
of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not
exceeding $500. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every
24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this code.



   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists, as defined in Title IX of
this code, the city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the
same, in the manner provided by law.



      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720 and 18-1722



   Authority to impose fines, see Neb. RS 17-505



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS



      31.   ORGANIZATIONS



      32.   ORDINANCES, INITIATIVES AND REFERENDUMS



      33.   ELECTIONS



      34.   PUBLIC SAFETY



      35.   FINANCE AND REVENUE



CHAPTER 30:  ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS



Section




General Provisions




   30.001   Bonds; requirements; oath of office



   30.002   Official corporate seal



   30.003   Compensation




Meetings




   30.015   Definitions



   30.016   Public meetings; notices; publication



   30.017   Closed sessions



   30.018   Emergency meetings



   30.019   Minutes



   30.020   Votes



   30.021   Notice to news media



   30.022   Public participation



   30.023   Regular meetings



   30.024   Order of business



   30.025   Change in office



   30.026   Organization




City Council




   30.040   Acting President



   30.041   Selection and duties



   30.042   Organization




Elected Officials




   30.055   City Mayor



   30.056   Vacancy



   30.057   Qualifications; holding other elected office




Appointed Officials




   30.070   Appointment; terms; removal; powers and duties



   30.071   Merger of offices



   30.072   Clerk-Treasurer



   30.073   City Clerk



   30.074   City Treasurer



   30.075   Municipal Attorney



   30.076   Municipal Physician



   30.077   Municipal Police Chief



   30.078   Municipal police officers



   30.079   Municipal Fire Chief



   30.080   Municipal Rescue Squad Chief



   30.081   Municipal Engineer



   30.082   Special Engineer



   30.083   Water-Sewer Commissioner



   30.084   Municipal Water Commissioner



   30.085   Municipal Sewer Commissioner



   30.086   Municipal Light Commissioner



   30.087   Municipal Landfill Superintendent



   30.088   Municipal Street Commissioner



   30.089   Municipal Utilities Superintendent



   30.090   Municipal Plumbing Inspector



   30.091   City Administrator



   30.092   Deputy Municipal Clerk




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 30.001  BONDS; REQUIREMENTS; OATH OF OFFICE.



   (A)   (1)   The city may enact ordinances or bylaws to require
from all officers and servants, elected or appointed, bonds and security or
evidence of equivalent insurance for the faithful performance of their
duties. The city may pay the premium for such bonds or insurance coverage.



      (2)   (a)   All official bonds of officers of the city
shall be in form, joint and several, and made payable to the city in such
penalty as the City Council may fix.



         (b)   In place of the individual bonds required to be
furnished by municipal officers, a schedule, position, blanket bond or
undertaking, or evidence of equivalent insurance may be given by municipal
officers, or a single corporate surety, fidelity, schedule, position or
blanket bond or undertaking, or evidence of insurance coverage covering all
the officers, including officers required by law to furnish an individual
bond or undertaking, may be furnished. The municipality may pay the premium
for the bond or insurance coverage. The bond or insurance coverage shall be,
at a minimum, an aggregate of the amounts fixed by law or by the City
Council, and with such terms and conditions as may be required.



         (c)   The penalty amount on any bond shall not fall
below the legal minimum, when one has been set by the state, for each
particular official.



      (3)   (a)   Official bonds, with the oath endorsed thereon,
shall be filed in the City Clerk’s office within the following time:



            1.   Of all officers elected at any general
election, following receipt of their election certificate and not later than
ten days before the first Thursday after the first Tuesday in January next
succeeding the election;



            2.   Of all appointed officers, within 30 days
after their appointment; and



            3.   Of officers elected at any special election
and city officers, within 30 days after the canvass of the votes of the
election at which they were chosen.



         (b)   The filing of the bond with the oath endorsed
thereon does not authorize a person to take any official action prior to the
beginning of his or her term of office pursuant to Art. XVII, § 5, of the
Constitution of the state.



      (4)   All official bonds of city officers shall be executed by
the principal named in such bonds and by at least two sufficient sureties who
shall be freeholders of the county in which such bonds are given, or any
official bond of a city officer may be executed by the officer as principal
and by a guaranty, surety, fidelity or bonding company as surety, or by two
or more such companies. Only such companies as are legally authorized to
transact business in the state shall be eligible to suretyship on the bond of
a city officer.



      (5)   The City Clerk shall carefully record and preserve the
bonds in his or her office and shall give certified copies thereof, when
required, under the seal of his or her office, and shall be entitled to
receive for the same the usual fee allowed by law for certified copies of
records in other cases.



      (6)   (a)   The approval of each official bond shall be
endorsed upon such bond by the officer approving the same and no bond shall
be filed and recorded until so approved.



         (b)   No bond shall be deemed to be given or complete
until the approval of the City Council and all sureties are endorsed in
writing on the instrument by the Mayor and City Clerk pursuant to the
approval of the City Council.



      (7)   All official bonds shall obligate the principal and
sureties for the faithful discharge of all duties required by law of such
principal and shall inure to the benefit of any persons injured by a reach of
the conditions of such bonds.



      (8)   No official bond shall be rendered void by reason of any
informality or irregularity in its execution or approval.



      (9)   No city official shall be taken as security on the bond
of any administrator, executor or other officer from whom by law bond is or
may be required.



      (10)   If any person elected or appointed to any office
neglects to have his or her official bond executed and approved as provided
by law and filed for record within the time limited by this section, the city
shall immediately issue an order to such person to show cause why he or she
has failed to properly file such bond and why his or her office should not be
declared vacant. If such person properly files the official bond within ten
days of the issuance of the show cause order for appointed officials or
before the date for taking office for elected officials, such filing shall be
deemed to be in compliance with this section. If such person does not file
the bond within ten days of the issuance of such order for appointed
officials or before the date for taking office for elected officials and
sufficient cause is not shown within that time, his or her office shall
thereupon ipso facto become vacant and such vacancy shall, thereupon,
immediately be filled by election or appointment as the law may direct in
other cases of vacancy in the same office.



      (11)   Any person appointed to fill a vacancy, before entering
upon the duties of the office, must give a bond corresponding in substance
and form with the bond required of the officer originally elected or
appointed, as herein provided.



      (12)   When the incumbent of an office is reelected or
reappointed, he or she shall qualify by taking the oath and giving the bond
as above directed, but when such officer has had public funds or property in
his or her control, his or her bond shall not be approved until he or she has
produced and fully accounted for such funds and property. When it is
ascertained that the incumbent of an office holds over by reason of the
non-election or non-appointment of a successor or of the neglect or refusal
of the successor to qualify, he or she shall qualify anew within ten days
from the time at which his or her successor, if elected, should have
qualified.



      (13)   No person shall be surety for the same officer for more
than two successive terms of the same office, but this provision shall not
apply to incorporated surety companies.



      (14)   If the sureties on the official bond of any appointed
officer of the city, in the opinion of the City Council, become insufficient,
the Council may, by resolution, fix a reasonable time within which the
officer may give a new bond or additional sureties as directed. If the
officer fails, refuses or neglects to give a new bond or additional sureties
to the satisfaction and approval of the Council, the office shall, by such
failure, refusal or neglect, become vacant and it shall be the duty of the
Council to appoint a competent and qualified person to fill the office.



(1976 Code, § 1-301)



   (B)   All officials of the municipality, whether elected or
appointed, except when a different oath is specifically provided herein,
shall, before entering upon their respective duties, take and subscribe the
following oath which shall be endorsed upon their respective bonds:



“I,                                                
                        , do solemnly swear that I will support
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Nebraska, against all enemies foreign and domestic; that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, and
without mental reservation, or for the purpose of evasion; and that I will
faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the office of          
                , according to law, and to the best of my ability.
And I do further swear that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of this State by force, or violence; and
that during such time as I am in this position I will not advocate, nor
become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence. So help me God.”



(1976 Code, § 1-302)



(Ord. 1401, passed 1-7-2008; Ord. 1437, passed 12-23-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Bonds, see Neb. RS 11-104, 11-105, 11-109 through 11-118, 17-604



   Oath of office, see Neb. RS 11-101



§ 30.002  OFFICIAL CORPORATE SEAL.



   (A)   The official corporate seal of the municipality shall be kept
in the office of the Municipal Clerk, and shall bear the following
inscription, “Seal, City of Cozad, Nebraska”.



   (B)   The Municipal Clerk shall affix an impression of the said
official seal to all warrants, licenses, permits, ordinances and all other
official papers issued by order of the governing body and countersigned by
the Municipal Clerk.



(1976 Code, § 1-401)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-502



§ 30.003  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Municipal officials.



      (1)   The compensation of any elective official of the
municipality shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which
he or she shall have been elected, except when there has been a merger of
offices; provided, the compensation of the members of the governing body, a
board or commission may be increased or diminished at the beginning of the
full term of any member whether or not the terms of one or more members
commence and end at different times. No elected official may be rehired at a
greater salary if he or she resigns and desires to be rehired during the
unexpired term of office. He or she may be rehired after the term of office
during which he or she resigned at a greater salary.



      (2)   All salaries shall be set by ordinance of the governing
body and will be available for public inspection at the office of the
Municipal Clerk.



(1976 Code, § 1-901)



   (B)   Conflict of interest.



      (1)   No officer of the municipality shall be permitted to
benefit from any contract to which the municipality is a party when the
consideration of the said contract is in an amount in excess of $10,000 in
any one year, and no contract may be divided for the purpose of evading the
requirements of this section.



      (2)   Any such interest in a contract shall void any
obligation on the part of the municipality, and such officer of the
municipality shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor; provided, the
receiving of deposits, cashing of checks and buying and selling of the
warrants and bonds of the municipality shall not be considered a contract
under the provisions of this section.



      (3)   No official shall receive any pay or compensation from
the municipality other than his or her salary.



      (4)   The governing body shall not pay or appropriate any
money or other valuable thing to pay a person who is not an officer for the
performance of any act, service or duty which shall come within the proper
scope of the duties of any officer of the municipality; provided that,
ownership of less than 1% of the outstanding stock of any class in a
corporation shall not constitute an interest within the meaning of this
section.



(1976 Code, § 1-902)



   (C)   Salaries of officials and employees. The salaries of officials
and employees shall be set by City Council.



(1976 Code, § 1-903)



(Ord. 627, passed 9-6-1979; Ord. 691, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 966, passed
12-5-1988; Ord. 1025, passed 1-21-1991; Ord. 1040, passed 8-5-1991; Ord.
1047, passed 11-20-1991; Ord. 1056, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 1062, passed
7-20-1992; Ord. 1092, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 1095, passed 8-9-1993)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-108.02, 17-611, 17-612, 18-301
through 18-312




MEETINGS




§ 30.015  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MEETINGS. All regular, special or called meetings, formal or informal,
of a public body for the purposes of briefing, discussion of public business,
formation of tentative policy or the taking of any action.



(1976 Code, § 1-501)



   PUBLIC BODY.



      (1)   The governing body of the municipality;



      (2)   All independent boards, commissions, bureaus,
committees, councils, subunits or other bodies, now or hereafter created by
constitution, statute, ordinance or otherwise pursuant to law; and



      (3)   Advisory committees of the bodies listed above. This
subchapter shall not apply to subcommittees of such bodies unless a quorum of
the PUBLIC BODY attends a subcommittee meeting or unless such subcommittees
are holding hearings, making policy or taking formal action on behalf of
their parent body.



(1976 Code, § 1-502)



(Ord. 727, passed 9-1-1983; Ord. 1076, passed 3-8-1993)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1409(1), 84-1409(2)



§ 30.016  PUBLIC MEETINGS; NOTICES; PUBLICATION.



   (A)   All public meetings, as defined by law, shall be held in a
municipal public building which shall be open to attendance by the public.
All meetings shall be held in the public building in which the governing body
usually holds such meetings unless the publicized notice hereinafter required
shall designate some other public building or other specified place. The
advance publicized notice of all public convened meetings shall be
simultaneously transmitted to all members of the governing body and to the
public by a method designated by the governing body or by the Mayor if the
governing body has not designated a method. Such notice shall contain the
time and specific place for each meeting and either an enumeration of the
agenda subjects known at the time of the notice, or a statement that such an
agenda kept continually current shall be readily available for public
inspection at the office of the Municipal Clerk. Except for items of an
emergency nature, the agenda shall not be enlarged later than 24 hours before
the scheduled commencement of the meeting. The governing body shall have the
right to modify the agenda to include items of an emergency nature only, at
such public meetings. The minutes of the Municipal Clerk shall include the
record of the manner and advance time by which the advance publicized notice
was given, a statement of how the availability of an agenda of the then known
subjects was communicated, the time and specific place of the meetings, and
the names of each member of the governing body present or absent at each
convened meeting. The minutes of the governing body shall be a public record
open to inspection by the public upon request at any reasonable time at the
office of the Municipal Clerk. Minutes shall be written and available for
inspection within ten working days or prior to the next convened meeting,
whichever occurs earlier; except that, the city may have an additional ten
working days if the employee responsible for writing the minutes is absent
due to a serious illness or emergency. Any official action on any question or
motion duly moved and seconded shall be taken only by roll call vote of the
governing body in open session. The record of the Municipal Clerk shall show
how each member voted or that the member was absent and did not vote.



(1976 Code, § 1-503)



   (B)   If the municipality is required to publish a notice or
advertisement in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the
municipality, and if there is no legal newspaper in or of general circulation
in the municipality, then the municipality shall publish such notice or
advertisement in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the county
in which the municipality is located. If there is no legal newspaper in or of
general circulation in such county, then the municipality shall publish such
notice or advertisement by posting a written or printed copy thereof in each
of three public places in the municipality for the same period of time the
municipality is required to publish the notice or advertisement in a legal
newspaper.



(Ord. 727, passed 9-1-1983; Ord. 1479, passed 2-5-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1408, 84-1409, 84-1411, 84-1413



§ 30.017  CLOSED SESSIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Any public body may hold a closed session by the
affirmative vote of a majority of its voting members if a closed session is
clearly necessary for the protection of the public interest or for the
prevention of needless injury to the reputation of an individual and if such
individual has not requested a public meeting. Closed sessions may be held
for, but shall not be limited to, such reasons as:



         (a)   Strategy sessions with respect to collective
bargaining, real estate purchases, pending litigation or litigation which is
imminent as evidenced by communication of a claim or threat of litigation to
or by the public body;



         (b)   Discussion regarding deployment of security
personnel or devices;



         (c)   Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of
criminal misconduct; or



         (d)   Evaluation of the job performance of a person when
necessary to prevent needless injury to the reputation of a person and if
such person has not requested a public meeting.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting
for discussion of the appointment or election of a new member to any public
body.



   (B)   (1)   The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in
open session. The vote of each member on the question of holding a closed
session, the reason for the closed session, and the time when the closed
session commenced and concluded shall be recorded in the minutes. The public
body holding such a closed session shall restrict its consideration of
matters during the closed portions to only those purposes set forth in the
minutes as the reason for the closed session. The meeting shall be reconvened
in open session before any formal action may be taken.



      (2)   For purposes of this section, FORMAL ACTION means a
collective decision or a collective commitment or promise to make a decision
on any question, motion, proposal, resolution, order or ordinance or
formation of a position or policy, but shall not include negotiating guidance
given by members of the public body to legal counsel or other negotiators in
closed sessions authorized under division (A)(1)(a) above.



   (C)   (1)   Any member of any public body shall have the right to
challenge the continuation of a closed session if the member determines that
the session has exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a
closed session or if the member contends that the closed session is neither
clearly necessary for:



         (a)   The protection of the public interest; or



         (b)   The prevention of needless injury to the
reputation of an individual.



      (2)   Such challenge shall be overruled only by a majority
vote of the members of the public body. Such challenge and its disposition
shall be recorded in the minutes.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any
meeting be closed to the public.



   (E)   (1)   No person or public body shall fail to invite a
portion of its members to a meeting, and no public body shall designate
itself a subcommittee of the whole body for the purpose of circumventing this
subchapter or the Open Meetings Act, being Neb. RS 84-1407 to 84-1414.



      (2)   No closed session, informal meeting, chance meeting,
social gathering, email, fax or electronic communication shall be used for
the purpose of circumventing the requirements of this subchapter or the Act,
being Neb. RS 84-1407 to 84-1414.



   (F)   This subchapter does not apply to chance meetings or to
attendance at or travel to conventions or workshops of members of a public
body at which there is no meeting of the body then intentionally convened, if
there is no vote or other action taken regarding any matter over which the
public body has supervision, control, jurisdiction or advisory power.



(1976 Code, § 1-504)  (Ord. 727, passed 9-1-1983; Ord. 1077, passed
3-8-1993; Ord. 1148, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1355, passed 11-8-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1410



§ 30.018  EMERGENCY MEETINGS.



   (A)   When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without
reasonable advance public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated
in the minutes and any formal action taken in such meeting shall pertain only
to the emergency. Such emergency meetings may be held by means of electronic
or telecommunication equipment. The provisions of § 30.020 of this chapter
shall be complied with in conducting emergency meetings.



   (B)   Complete minutes of such emergency meetings specifying the
nature of the emergency and any formal action taken at the meeting shall be
made available to the public by no later than the end of the next regular
business day.



(1976 Code, § 1-505)  (Ord. 727, passed 9-1-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1411



§ 30.019  MINUTES.



   (A)   Each public body shall keep minutes of all meetings showing
the time, place, members present and absent and the substance of all matters
discussed.



   (B)   The minutes shall be public records and open to public
inspection during normal business hours.



   (C)   Minutes shall be written and available for inspection within
ten working days, or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever occurs
earlier.



(1976 Code, § 1-506)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1412, 84-1413



§ 30.020  VOTES.



   (A)   Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and
seconded shall be by roll call vote of the public body in open session, and
the record shall state how each member voted or if the member was absent or
not voting.



   (B)   The vote to elect leadership within a public body may be taken
by secret ballot, but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be
recorded in the minutes.



(1976 Code, § 1-507)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-616, 84-1413



§ 30.021  NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA.



   The Municipal Clerk, Secretary or other designee of each public body
shall maintain a list of the news media requesting notification of meetings
and shall make reasonable efforts to provide advance notification to them of
the time and place of each meeting, and the subjects to be discussed at that
meeting.



(1976 Code, § 1-508)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1411



§ 30.022  PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, the public shall
have the right to attend and the right to speak at meetings of public bodies
and all or any part of a meeting of a public body, except for closed meetings
called pursuant to § 30.017 of this chapter may be videotaped, televised,
photographed, broadcast or recorded by any person in attendance by means of a
tape recorder, camera, video equipment or any other means of pictorial or
sonic reproduction or in writing.



   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this section for any public
body to make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the
conduct of persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising,
photographing, broadcasting or recording its meetings. A body is not required
to allow citizens to speak at each meeting, nor may it forbid public
participation at all meetings. No public body shall require members of the
public to identify themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting nor
shall such body require that the name of any member of the public be placed
on the agenda prior to such meeting in order to speak about items on the
agenda. The body may, however, require any member of the public desiring to
address the body to identify himself or herself. No public body shall for the
purpose of circumventing the provisions of this subchapter hold a meeting in
a place known by the body to be too small to accommodate the anticipated
audience. No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it
holds its meeting in its traditional meeting place. The public body shall,
upon request, make a reasonable effort to accommodate the public’s right to
hear the discussion and testimony presented at the meeting. Public bodies
shall make available at the meeting, for examination and copying by members
of the public, at least one copy of all reproducible written material to be
discussed at an open meeting.



(1976 Code, § 1-509)  (Ord. 727, passed 9-1-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1412



§ 30.023  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   The meetings of the City Council shall be held in the meeting
place of the municipality. Regular meetings shall be held on the first and
third of each month at the hour of 7:30 p.m.



   (B)   A majority of all the members elected to the City Council
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, but a fewer
number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent
members. Unless a greater vote is required by law, an affirmative vote of at
least one-half of the elected members shall be required for the transaction
of any business.



(1976 Code, § 1-510)  (Ord. 665, passed 9-17-1981; Ord. 894, passed
4-8-1986; Ord. 1193, passed 1-22-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-105



§ 30.024  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   All meetings of the governing body shall be open to the public.
Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the
members of the governing body, the Municipal Clerk, the Mayor and such other
municipal officials that may be required shall take their regular stations in
the meeting place, and the business of the municipality shall be taken up for
consideration, and disposition in the manner prescribed by the official
agenda on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk.



(1976 Code, § 1-511)



§ 30.025  CHANGE IN OFFICE.



   The change in office shall be made as follows: the Mayor and Council
shall meet on the first regular meeting date in December of each year in
which a municipal election is held and the outgoing officers and the outgoing
members of the Council shall present their reports, and upon the old Council
having completed its business up to the said time, the outgoing members of
the Council shall surrender their offices to the incoming members and the
outgoing officers shall thereupon each surrender to his or her successor in
office all property, records, papers and moneys, belonging to the same.



(1976 Code, § 1-512)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107.02(9)



§ 30.026  ORGANIZATION.



   The newly elected Council shall convene at the regular place of meeting
in the city on the first regular meeting in December of each year in which a
municipal election is held immediately after the prior Council adjourns and
proceed to organize themselves for the ensuing year. The Mayor elected for
the new municipal year shall call the meeting to order. The Council shall
then proceed to examine the credentials of its members and other elective
officers of the city to see that each has been duly and properly elected, and
to see that such oaths and bonds have been given as are required. After
ascertaining that all members are duly qualified, the Council shall then
elect one of its own body who shall be styled as “President of the
Council”. The Mayor shall then nominate his or her candidates for
appointive offices. He or she shall then proceed with the regular order of
business. It is hereby made the duty of each and every member of the Council,
or his or her successor in office, and of each officer elected to any office,
to qualify prior to the first regular meeting in December following his or
her election. All appointive officers shall qualify within two weeks
following their appointments. Qualification for each officer who is not
required to give bond shall consist in his or her subscribing and taking an
oath to support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of
the state, the laws of the municipality and to perform faithfully and
impartially the duties of his or her office, said oath to be filed in the
office of the Municipal Clerk. Each officer who is required to give a bond
shall file the required bond in the office of the Municipal Clerk with
sufficient sureties, conditioned on the faithful discharge of the duties of
his or her office, with the oath endorsed thereon.



(1976 Code, § 1-513)




CITY COUNCIL




§ 30.040  ACTING PRESIDENT.



   The City Council shall elect one of its own body each year who shall be
styled the President of the Council, and who shall preside at all meetings of
the City Council in the absence of the Mayor. In the absence of the Mayor,
and the President of the Council, the City Council shall elect one of its own
body to occupy his or her place temporarily, who shall be styled Acting
President of the Council. Both the President of the Council and the Acting
President of the Council, when occupying the position of the Mayor, shall
have the same privileges as the other members of the City Council, and all
acts of the President of the Council, or Acting President of the Council,
while so acting, shall be as binding upon the City Council, and upon the
municipality as if done by the elected Mayor.



(1976 Code, § 1-102)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-148



§ 30.041  SELECTION AND DUTIES.



   The members of the City Council shall be elected and serve for a
four-year term. The City Council shall be the legislative division of the
municipal government, and shall perform such duties, and have such powers as
may be authorized by law. The City Council shall maintain the peace, regulate
business, protect the public health and safety and assess such taxes and fees
as are necessary and appropriate in the exercise of these functions.



(1976 Code, § 1-103)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-103, 17-104



§ 30.042  ORGANIZATION.



   City Council members of the municipality shall take office, and
commence their duties on the first regular meeting in December following
their election. The newly elected Council member who have qualified as
prescribed by law, together with the members of the City Council holding
over, shall assemble in a regular meeting at the hour and place hereinafter
prescribed and perfect the reorganization of the City Council as herein
provided, and all appointive offices in which the terms of incumbents are
expired shall be filled by appointment. After the said meeting has been
called to order, the Municipal Clerk shall report to the City Council the
names of all City Council members-elect who have qualified for their
respective offices, and this report shall be spread upon the minutes of the
meeting preceding the roll call. Each ward of the municipality shall be
represented by at least two Council members. No person shall be eligible who
is not at the time of his or her election an actual resident of the ward for
which he or she is qualified and should any City Council member move from the
ward from which he or she was elected, his or her office shall thereby become
vacant.



(1976 Code, § 1-104)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-104




ELECTED OFFICIALS




§ 30.055  CITY MAYOR.



   (A)   Powers and duties.



      (1)   The Mayor shall preside at all meeting of the City
Council. The Mayor may vote when his or her vote would provide the additional
vote requited to attain the number of votes equal to a majority of the number
of members elected to the City Council on any pending matter, legislation or
transaction, and the Mayor shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to
be a member of the Council. He or she shall have superintendence and control
of all the officers and affairs of the city, and shall take care that the
ordinances of the city and all laws governing cities of the second class are
complied with.



      (2)   The Mayor shall have the power to veto or sign any
ordinance passed by the City Council and to approve or veto any order, bylaw,
resolution, award of or vote to enter into and contract, or the allowance of
any claim. If the Mayor approves the ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution,
contract or claim, he or she shall sign it, and it shall become effective. If
the Mayor vetoes the ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, contract or any
item or items of appropriations or claims, he or she shall return it to the
City Council stating that the measure is vetoed. The Mayor may issue the veto
at the meeting at which the measure passed or within seven calendar days
after the meeting. If the Mayor issues the veto after the meeting, the Mayor
shall notify the City Clerk of the veto in writing. The Clerk shall notify
the City Council in writing of the Mayor’s veto. Any order, bylaw,
resolution, award of or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of
any claim vetoed by the Mayor may be passed over his or her veto by a vote of
two-thirds of the members of the Council. If the Mayor neglects or refuses to
sign any ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, award of or vote to enter into
any contract, or the allowance of any claim, but fails to veto the measure
within the time required by this section, the measure shall become effective
without his or her signature. The Mayor may veto any item or items of any
appropriation bill, and approve the remainder thereof, and the item or items
vetoed may be passed by the Council over the veto as in other cases.



      (3)   The Mayor shall, from time to time, communicate to the
City Council such information and recommend such measure as, in his or her
opinion, may tend to the improvement of the finances, the police, health,
security, ornament, comfort and general prosperity of the city.



      (4)   The Mayor shall have the power, when he or she deems it
necessary, to require any officer to the city to exhibit his or her accounts
or other papers, and to make reports to the Council, in writing, touching any
subject or matter pertaining to his or her office.



      (5)   The Mayor shall have such jurisdiction as may be vested
in him or her by ordinance, over all places within five miles of the
corporate limits of the city, for the enforcement of any health of quarantine
ordinance and regulation thereof, and shall have jurisdiction in all matters
vested in him or her by ordinance, excepting taxation, within the
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the city.



      (6)   The Mayor shall have the power to remit fines and
forfeitures and to grant reprieves and pardons for all offenses arising under
the ordinances of the city.



      (7)   The Mayor shall hold no other elective or appointive
office or employment with the city.



      (8)   The Mayor shall sign the City Clerk’s minutes of all
meetings of the City Council, and he or she shall sign all resolutions that
have been passed and warrants for the payment of money when ordered by the
City Council.



      (9)   The Mayor shall have such other duties as are reposed in
the Mayor by the laws of the state or as the Council may be resolution confer
upon the Mayor.



(1976 Code, § 1-101)



   (B)   Vacancy.



      (1)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, or in
case of his or her disability or absence, the President of the Council shall
exercise the office of Mayor until such vacancy is filled or such disability
is removed, or in case of temporary absence, until the Mayor returns.



      (2)   When the successful candidate for Mayor shall be
prevented from assuming office, the incumbent Mayor shall not be entitled to
hold over the term, but such office shall automatically become vacant and the
President of the Council shall exercise the office of Mayor until such
vacancy is filled.



      (3)   If the President of the Council shall for any cause
assume the office of Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term, there
shall be a vacancy on the Council which shall be filled as provided in §
30.056 of this chapter.



(1976 Code, § 1-106)



   (C)   Election; qualifications; term.



      (1)   The Mayor shall be elected as provided in the Election
Act, being Neb. RS Ch. 32. The Mayor shall take office on the date of the
first regular meeting of the City Council held in December following the
statewide general election. The Mayor shall be a resident and registered
voter of the city.



      (2)   The Mayor shall serve for a term of four years or until
his or her successor is elected and qualified.



(1976 Code, § 1-108)



(Ord. 765, passed 9-6-1984; Ord. 1426B, passed 12-5-2011; Ord. 1443, passed
12-23–2013; Ord. 1455B, passed 2-9-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107, 17-110, 17-111, 17-112, 17-113,
14-114, 17-115, 17-117, 32-533



   Restrictions on holding other office or employment, see Neb. RS
17-108.02, 32-109, 32-603, 32-604



§ 30.056  VACANCY.



   (A)   Every elective office shall be vacant upon the happening of
any of the events specified in Neb. RS 32-560, except as provided in Neb. RS
32-561.



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C) or (D)
below, vacancies in municipal elected offices shall be filled by the
governing body for the balance of the unexpired term. Notice of a vacancy,
except a vacancy resulting from the death of the incumbent, shall be in
writing and presented to the governing body at a regular or special meeting
and shall appear as a part of the minutes of the meeting. The governing body
shall at once give public notice of the vacancy by causing to be published in
a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality or by posting in
three public places in the municipality the office vacated and the length of
the unexpired term.



      (2)   The Mayor shall call a special meeting of the governing
body or place the issue of filling the vacancy on the agenda at the next
regular meeting at which time the Mayor shall submit the name of a qualified
registered voter to fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term.
The regular or special meeting shall occur upon the death of the incumbent or
within four weeks after the meeting at which such notice of vacancy has been
presented. The governing body shall vote upon the nominee, and if a majority
votes in favor of the nominee, the vacancy shall be declared filled. If the
nominee fails to receive a majority of the votes, the nomination shall be
rejected and the Mayor shall, at the next regular or special meeting, submit
the name of another qualified registered voter to fill the vacancy. If the
subsequent nominee fails to receive a majority of the votes, the Mayor shall
continue at that meeting to submit the names of qualified registered voters
in nomination and the governing body shall continue to vote upon the
nominations at such meeting until the vacancy is filled. All members of the
governing body present shall cast a ballot for or against the nominee. Any
member of the governing body who has been appointed to fill a vacancy on the
governing body shall have the same rights, including voting, as if that
person were elected.



   (C)   The Mayor and governing body may, in lieu of filing a vacancy
in a city elected office as provided in division (B) above, call a special
election to fill the vacancy.



   (D)   If vacancies exist in the offices of one-half or more of the
members of the governing body, the Secretary of State shall conduct a special
municipal election to fill those vacancies.



(1976 Code, § 1-105)  (Ord. 751, passed 1-6-1984; Ord. 1015, passed
1-21-1991; Ord. 1461, passed 2-8-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 32-569



§ 30.057  QUALIFICATIONS; HOLDING OTHER ELECTED OFFICE.



   (A)   Elected officials shall be residents and registered voters of
the city. No person shall be precluded from being elected or appointed to or
holding an elective office for the reason that he or she has been elected or
appointed to or holds another elective office, unless that person is
presently serving as a member of the Legislature or in an elective office
described in Art. IV, § 1, of the Constitution of the state. A legislator or
an Art. IV elected office holder may simultaneously serve in another elective
office, except an election held in conjunction with the annual meeting of a
public body. Whenever an incumbent of the legislature or an Art. IV elected
office holder assumes another elective office, except an elective office
filled at an election held in conjunction with the annual meeting of a public
body, the office first held by the incumbent shall be deemed vacant.



   (B)   Members of the Council shall hold no other employment with the
city; provided, however, that, this prohibition shall not apply to members of
the Volunteer Fire Department. Any Council member who ceases to possess any
of the qualifications required by this section or who has been convicted of a
crime while in office shall forthwith forfeit such office. The Council shall
be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members, subject to
review by the courts.



(1976 Code, § 1-107)  (Ord. 1014, passed 1-21-1991; Ord. 1455A, passed
11-24-2014)




APPOINTED OFFICIALS




§ 30.070  APPOINTMENT; TERMS; REMOVAL; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   (1)   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, may
appoint such officers as shall be required by ordinance or otherwise required
by law. Such officers may be removed from office by the Mayor.



      (2)   The terms of office for all officers, except regular
police officers, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council shall be
established by the City Council by ordinance. The ordinance shall provide
that either:



         (a)   The officers hold the office to which they have
been appointed until the end of the Mayor’s term of office and until their
successors are appointed and qualified unless sooner removed; or



         (b)   The officers hold office for one year unless
sooner removed.



   (B)   (1)   The city may enact ordinances or bylaws to regulate
and prescribe the powers and duties of officers not provided for in state law.



      (2)   If the Mayor and City Council appoint any of the
officials specified in this subchapter or any other officials, the officials
shall have the powers and duties, if any, provided in this subchapter or as
otherwise provided by city ordinances and state law.



(1976 Code, § 1-201)  (Ord. 538, passed 4-21-1977; Ord. 1426B, passed
12-5-2011)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107, 17-604



§ 30.071  MERGER OF OFFICES.



   The governing body may, at its discretion, by ordinance combine and
merge any elective or appointive office or employment or any combination of
duties of any such offices or employments, except Mayor and Council member,
with any other elective or appointive office or employment so that one or
more of such offices or employments or any combination of duties of any such
offices or employments may be held by the same officer or employee at the
same time. The offices or employments so merged and combined shall always be
construed to be separate and the effect of the combination or merger shall be
limited to a consolidation of official duties only. The salary or
compensation of the officer or employee holding the merged or combined
offices or employments or offices and employments shall not be in excess of
the maximum amount provided by law for the salary or compensation of the
office, offices, employment or employments so merged and combined. For
purposes of this section, volunteer firefighters and ambulance drivers shall
not be considered officers.



(1976 Code, § 1-202)  (Ord. 752, passed 9-6-1984; Ord. 1016, passed
1-21-1991)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-108.02



§ 30.072  CLERK-TREASURER.



   (A)   The appointive offices of Municipal Clerk and Municipal
Treasurer are hereby combined and merged, in accordance with the authority
granted to the governing body by § 30.071 of this chapter.



   (B)   The office so merged and combined shall always be construed to
be separate, and the effect of the combination, or merger, shall be limited
to a consolidation of official duties only.



   (C)   The salary of the officer holding the merged offices shall not
be in excess of the maximum amount provided by law for the salary of the
offices so combined.



(1976 Code, § 1-203)



§ 30.073  CITY CLERK.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall have the custody of all laws and
ordinances and shall keep a correct journal of the proceedings of the City
Council. After the period of time specified by the State Records
Administrator pursuant to the Records Management Act, being Neb. RS 84-1201,
the Clerk may transfer the journal of the proceedings of the City Council or
to the State Archives of the Nebraska State Historical Society for permanent
preservation. The Clerk shall also perform such other duties as may be
required by the ordinances of the city.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Clerk to prepare and
publish the official proceedings of the City Council within 30 days after any
meeting of the Council. The publication shall be in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city, shall set forth a statement of the proceedings of
the meeting, and shall also include the amount of each claim allowed, the
purpose of the claim, and the name of the claimant, except that the aggregate
amount of all payroll claims may be included as one item. Between July 15 and
August 15 of each year, the employee job titles and the current annual,
monthly or hourly salaries corresponding to such job titles shall be
published. Each job title published shall be descriptive and indicative of
the duties and functions of the position. The charge for the publication
shall not exceed the rates provided for in Neb. RS 23-122.



      (2)   Publication under division (B)(1) above shall be made in
one legal newspaper of general circulation in the city. If no legal newspaper
is published in the city, then the publication shall be made in one legal
newspaper published or of general circulation within the county in which the
city is located. The cost of publication shall be paid out of the general
funds of the city.



   (C)   The Clerk shall dispose of or destroy city public records when
the records have been determined to be of no further legal, administrative,
fiscal or historical value by the state’s Records Administrator, pursuant
to Neb. RS 84-1201 through 84-1220; provided, the provisions of this division
(C) shall not apply to the minutes of the Clerk and the permanent ordinance
and resolution books, or any other record classified as permanent by the
state’s Records Administrator.



   (D)   (1)   The Clerk shall permit any person to examine and copy
the public records in the Clerk’s custody, and may charge a fee for
providing copies of a public record, as provided in Neb. RS 84-712 through
84-712.09.



      (2)   The Clerk may charge a reasonable fee for certified
copies of any record in his or her office as set by resolution of the City
Council.



   (E)   The Clerk shall permit no records, public papers or other
documents of the city kept and preserved in his or her office to be taken
therefrom, except by such officers of the city as may be entitled to the use
of the same, but only upon their leaving a receipt therefor, and except
pursuant to Neb. RS 84-712(2). He or she shall keep all the records of his or
her office, including a record of all licenses issued by him or her, in a
blank book with a proper index. He or she shall include as part of his or her
records all petitions under which the City Council shall order public work to
be done at the expense of the property fronting thereon, together with
references to all resolutions and ordinances relating to the same. He or she
shall endorse the date and hour of filing upon every paper or document so
filed in his or her office. All such filings made by him or her shall be
properly docketed. Included in his or her records shall be all standard
codes, amendments thereto and other documents incorporated by reference and
arranged in triplicate in a manner convenient for reference. He or she shall
keep an accurate and complete account of the appropriation of the several
funds and draw, sign and attest all warrants ordered for the payment of money
on the particular fund from which the same is payable. At the end of each
month, he or she shall then make a report of the amounts appropriated to the
various funds and the amount of the warrants drawn thereon.



   (F)   The Clerk shall deliver all warrants, ordinances and
resolutions under his or her charge to the Mayor for his or her signature. He
or she shall also deliver to officers, employees and committees all
resolutions and communications which are directed at such officers, employees
or committees. With the seal of the city, he or she shall duly attest the
Mayor’s signature to all ordinances, deeds and papers required to be
attested to when ordered to do so by the City Council.



   (G)   The Clerk shall issue and sign all licenses, permits and
occupation tax receipts authorized by law and required by the city
ordinances. He or she shall collect all occupation taxes and license money,
except where some other city officer is specifically charged with that duty.
He or she shall keep a register of all licenses granted in the city and the
purpose for which they have been issued.



   (H)   (1)   The Clerk shall keep in a book with a proper index,
copies of all notices required to be published or posted by the Clerk by
order of the City Council or under the ordinances of the city.



      (2)   Each of the file copies of the notices shall be attached
the printer’s affidavit of publication, if the notices are required to be
published, or the Clerk’s certificate under seal where the same are
required to be posted only.



   (I)   (1)   The Clerk shall receive all objections to creation of
paving districts and other street improvements.



      (2)   He or she shall receive the claims of any person against
the city, and in the event that the claim is disallowed in part or in whole,
the Clerk shall notify the claimant or his or her agent or attorney by letter
within five days after the disallowance, and the Clerk shall then prepare
transcripts on appeals of any disallowance of a claim in all proper cases.



(1976 Code, § 1-204)  (Ord. 1075, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 1444, passed
12-23-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-605, 18-1701, 19-1102, 19-1103



§ 30.074  CITY TREASURER.



   (A)   (1)   The City Treasurer shall be the custodian of all
money belonging to the city. He or she shall keep a separate account of each
fund or appropriation and the debts and credits belonging thereto. He or she
shall give every person paying money into the Treasury a receipt therefor,
specifying the date of payment and on what account paid. He or she shall also
file copies of such receipts with his or her monthly reports. The Treasurer
shall, at the end of every month, and as often as may be required, render an
account to the City Council, under oath, showing the state of the treasury at
the date of such account and the balance of money in the Treasury. He or she
shall also accompany such accounts with a statement of all receipts and
disbursements, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him or her,
which warrants, with any and all vouchers held by him or her, shall be filed
with his or her account in the City Clerk’s office. If the Treasurer fails
to render his or her account within 20 days after the end of the month, or by
a later date established by the City Council, the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council may use this failure as cause to remove the Treasurer
from office.



      (2)   The Treasurer shall keep a record of all outstanding
bonds against the city, showing the number and amount of each bond, for and
to whom the bonds were issued, and the date upon which any bond is purchased,
paid or cancelled. The Treasurer shall accompany the annual statement
submitted pursuant to Neb. RS 19-1101 with a description of the bonds issued
and sold in that year and the terms of sale, with every item of expense
thereof.



   (B)   (1)   The Treasurer shall prepare and publish annually
within 60 days after the close of the city fiscal year a statement of the
receipts and expenditures of funds of the city for the preceding fiscal year.
The statement shall also include the information required by Neb. RS
16-318(3) or 17-606(2). Not more than the legal rate provided for in Neb. RS
33-141 shall be charged and paid for such publication.



      (2)   Publication shall be made in one legal newspaper of
general circulation in the city. If no legal newspaper is published in the
city, then such publication shall be made in one legal newspaper published or
of general circulation within the county in which the city is located.



   (C)   (1)   All warrants upon the Treasurer shall be paid in the
order of their presentation therefor and as otherwise provided in Neb. RS
77-2201 through 77-2215.



      (2)   The Treasurer shall keep a warrant register, which
register shall show in columns arranged for that purpose the number, the date
and the amount of each warrant presented and registered, the particular fund
upon which the same is drawn, the date of presentation, the name and address
of the person in whose name the warrant is registered, the date of payment,
the amount of interest and the total amount paid thereon, with the date when
notice to the person in whose name such warrant is registered is mailed.



      (3)   The Treasurer shall make duplicate receipts for all sums
which shall be paid into his or her office, which receipts shall show the
source from which such funds are derived, and shall, by distinct lines and
columns, show the amount received to the credit of each separate fund, and
whether the same was paid in cash, in warrants or otherwise. The Treasurer
shall deliver one of the duplicates to the person making the payment and
retain the other in his or her office.



      (4)   The Treasurer shall daily, as money is received, foot
the several columns of the cash book and of the register, and carry the
amounts forward, and at the close of each year, in case the amount of money
received by the Treasurer is insufficient to pay the warrants registered, he
or she shall close the account for that year in the register and shall carry
forward the excess.



      (5)   The cash book, register and retained receipts of the
Treasurer shall at all times be open to the inspection of any person in whose
name any warrants are registered and unpaid.



   (D)   The Treasurer shall permit any person to examine and copy the
public records in the Treasurer’s custody, and may charge a fee for
providing copies of a public record, as provided in Neb. RS 84-712 through
84-712.09.



   (E)   (1)   The Treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the
city separate and distinct from his or her own money.



      (2)   He or she shall cancel all bonds, coupons, warrants and
other evidences of debt against the city, whenever paid by him or her, by
writing or stamping on the face thereof, “Paid by the City Treasurer”,
with the date of payment written or stamped thereon.



      (3)   He or she shall collect all special taxes, allocate
special assessments to the several owners and obtain from the County
Treasurer a monthly report as to the collection of delinquent taxes.



(1976 Code, § 1-205)  (Ord. 1445, passed 12-23-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-606, 19-1101, 19-1103, 77-2201,
77-2202, 77-2209, 77-2210, 77-2212



§ 30.075  MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY.



   The Municipal Attorney is the municipality’s legal advisor and, as
such, he or she shall commence, prosecute and defend all suits on behalf of
the municipality. When requested by the governing body, he or she shall
attend meetings of the governing body and shall advise any municipal official
in all matters of law in which the interests of the municipality may be
involved. He or she shall draft such ordinances, bonds, contracts and other
writings as may be required in the administration of the affairs of the
municipality. He or she shall examine all bonds, contracts and documents on
which the governing body will be required to act, and attach thereto a brief
statement in writing to all such instruments, and documents as to whether, or
not, the document is in legal, and proper form. He or she shall prepare
complaints, attend and prosecute violations of the municipal ordinances when
directed to do so by the governing body. Without direction, he or she shall
appear, and prosecute all cases for violation of the municipal ordinances
that have been appealed to, and are pending in any higher court. He or she
shall also examine, when requested to do so by the governing body, the
ordinance records and advise, and assist the Municipal Clerk as much as may
be necessary to the end that each procedural step will be taken in the
passage of each ordinance to ensure that they will be valid, and subsisting
local laws in so far as their passage, and approval are concerned. The
governing body shall have the right to compensate the Municipal Attorney for
legal services on such terms as the governing body and the Municipal Attorney
may agree and to employ any additional legal assistance as may be necessary
out of the funds of the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 1-208)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-610



§ 30.076  MUNICIPAL PHYSICIAN.



   The Municipal Physician shall be a member of the Board of Health of the
municipality, and perform the duties devolving upon him or her as the medical
advisor of the said Board. In all injuries where a liability may be asserted
against the municipality, the Municipal Physician shall immediately
investigate the said injuries, the extent thereof and the circumstances. He
or she shall then report the results of his or her investigation with the
name of the party injured, and all other persons who may have personal
knowledge of the matter. He or she shall make all physical examinations, and
necessary laboratory tests incident thereto, and issue such health
certificates as are required by ordinance. For the purpose of making
examinations of the sanitary conditions of the property, and the state of
health of the inhabitants therein, he or she shall have the right at all
reasonable hours to go upon, and enter all premises, buildings or other
structures in the municipality. He or she shall perform such other duties as
may be required of him or her by the laws of the state and the ordinances of
the municipality. When ordered to do so by the governing body, he or she
shall disinfect, or fumigate the premises, or persons in or about the
premises, when the premises are quarantined and to call upon indigent sick
persons, and perform other professional services at the direction of the
governing body. The Municipal Physician shall receive as compensation for his
or her services such sum as the governing body may from time to time set. He
or she shall receive no compensation for his or her services as a member of
the Municipal Board of Health.



(1976 Code, § 1-209)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-121



§ 30.077  MUNICIPAL POLICE CHIEF.



   The Municipal Police Chief shall direct the police work of the
municipality and shall be responsible for the maintenance of law and order.
He or she shall act as Health Inspector, except in the event the municipality
appoints another person. He or she shall file the necessary complaints in
cases arising out of violations of municipal ordinances, and shall make all
necessary reports required by the municipal ordinances or the laws of the
state.



(1976 Code, § 1-210)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107, 17-121



§ 30.078  MUNICIPAL POLICE OFFICERS.



   The municipal police, whether regular, or special shall have the power
to arrest all offenders against the laws of the state, or the municipality,
by day or by night, and keep the said offenders in the municipal jail, or
some other place to prevent their escape until trial can be held before the
proper official of the state or the municipality. They shall have full power,
and authority to call on any person whenever necessary to assist them in
performing public duties, and failure, neglect or refusal to render such
assistance shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a
fine. Every municipal police officer shall be expected to be conversant, and
knowledgeable with the municipal and state laws and no law enforcement
official shall have any interest in any establishment having a liquor
license. Municipal police officers shall have the duty to file such
complaints and reports as may be required by the municipal ordinances and the
laws of the state. Any municipal police officer who shall willfully fail,
neglect or refuse to make an arrest, or who purposely, and willfully fails to
make a complaint after an arrest is made shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined. It shall be unlawful for
the governing body to retain any municipal police officer in that position
after he or she shall have been duly convicted of the willful violation of
any law of the United States of America, the state or any ordinance of the
municipality, except minor traffic violations. It shall be the duty of every
municipal police officer making a lawful arrest to search all persons in the
presence of some other person, whenever possible, and shall carefully keep,
and produce to the proper judicial official upon the trial everything found
upon the person of such prisoners. All personal effects so taken from
prisoners aforesaid shall be restored to them upon their release. Suitable
uniforms and badges shall be furnished to the municipal police by the
municipality. Any member who shall lose or destroy the same shall be required
to pay the replacement costs, and in the event that any member shall leave
the force, he or she shall immediately deliver his or her badge to the Police
Chief. The governing body may from time to time provide the municipal police
with such uniforms, equipment and transportation as may be essential in the
performance of their official duties.



(1976 Code, § 1-211)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-213, 17-118, 17-124



§ 30.079  MUNICIPAL FIRE CHIEF.



   (A)   The Municipal Fire Chief shall be elected by the members of
the Fire Department. He or she shall enforce all laws and ordinances covering
the prevention of fires; the storage and use of explosives and flammable
substances; the installation of fire alarm systems; the maintenance of fire
extinguishing equipment; the regulation of fire escapes; and the inspection
of all premises requiring adequate fire escapes.



   (B)   He or she shall, within two days, investigate the cause,
origin and circumstances of fires arising within his or her jurisdiction. He
or she shall, on or before April 1 and October 1 of each year, cause the
Secretary to file with the Municipal Clerk, and the Clerk of the District
Court a certified copy of the rolls of all members in good standing in their
respective companies in order to obtain the exemptions provided by law. He or
she shall have the power during the time of a fire, and for a period of 36
hours thereafter to arrest any suspected arsonist, or any person for
hindering the Department’s efforts, conducting himself or herself in a
noisy and disorderly manner, or who shall refuse to obey any lawful order by
the Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief.



   (C)   The Fire Chief, or his or her assistant in charge of
operations at a fire, may command the services of any person present at any
fire in extinguishing the same or in the removal and protection of property.
Failure to obey such an order shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine.



   (D)   The Fire Chief shall have the right to enter at all reasonable
hours into buildings, and upon all premises within his or her jurisdiction
for the purpose of examining the same for fire hazards and related dangers.



(1976 Code, § 1-212)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-147, 17-505, 35-102, 35-108, 81-506,
81-512



§ 30.080  MUNICIPAL RESCUE SQUAD CHIEF.



   The Municipal Rescue Squad Chief shall be elected by the members of the
rescue squad. He or she shall have the responsibility for the emergency
units, rescue personnel and the transfer squad; shall order all necessary
equipment and authorize repairs to said equipment; and shall be responsible
for maintaining all units and equipment in proper condition for immediate use.



(1976 Code, § 1-212.01)  (Ord. 1113, passed 8-8-1994)



§ 30.081  MUNICIPAL ENGINEER.



   The Municipal Engineer shall make all surveys, estimates and
calculations necessary to be made for the establishment of any public
utilities, and the costs of labor and materials therefor. He or she shall
accurately make all plats, sections and maps as may be necessary under the
direction of the governing body. Upon request, he or she shall make estimates
of the cost of labor and material which may be done or furnished by contract
with the municipality, and make all surveys, estimates and calculations
necessary to be made for the establishment of grades, building of culverts,
sewers, electric light system, waterworks, power plant, public heating
system, bridges, curbing and gutters and the improvement of streets and
erection and repair of buildings, and shall perform such other duties as the
governing body may require. When a municipality has appointed a Board of
Public Works, and the governing body has by ordinance so authorized, the
Board shall have the right to utilize its own engineering staff, and shall
have the right to hire consulting engineers for the design and installation
of extensions and improvements of the works under the jurisdiction of the
Board of Public Works. Whenever the governing body has authorized, the Board
of Public Works shall have the right to purchase material and employ labor
for the enlargement and improvement of the water and electric departments.



(1976 Code, § 1-213)  (Ord. 720, passed 9-1-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-150, 17-405, 17-568.01, 17-919,
81-839



§ 30.082  SPECIAL ENGINEER.



   The governing body may employ a Special Engineer to make or assist the
Municipal Engineer in making any particular estimate, survey or other work.
The Special Engineer shall make a record of the minutes of his or her surveys
and all other work done for the municipality. He or she shall, when directed
by the governing body, accurately make all plats, sections, profiles and maps
as may be necessary in the judgment of the governing body. He or she shall,
upon request of the governing body, make estimates of the costs of labor and
material which may be done or furnished by contract with the municipality and
make all surveys, estimates and calculations necessary for the establishment
of grades, bridges, building of culverts, sewers, electric light system,
waterworks, power plant, public heating system, bridges, curbing and gutters
and the improvement of streets and erection and repair of buildings, and
shall perform such other duties as the governing body may require. All
records of the Special Engineer shall be public records which shall belong to
the municipality, and shall be turned over to his or her successor.



(1976 Code, § 1-214)  (Ord. 721, passed 9-1-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-405, 17-568, 17-568.01, 17-919



§ 30.083  WATER-SEWER COMMISSIONER.



   (A)   The appointive offices of Municipal Water Commissioner and
Municipal Sewer Commissioner are hereby combined and merged, in accordance
with the authority granted the governing body by § 30.071 of this chapter.



   (B)   The office so merged and combined shall always be construed to
be separate and the effect of the combination or merger shall be limited to a
consolidation of official duties only.



   (C)   The salary of the officer holding the merged offices shall not
be in excess of the maximum amount provided by law for the salary of the
offices so combined.



(1976 Code, § 1-215)



§ 30.084  MUNICIPAL WATER COMMISSIONER.



   (A)   The Municipal Water Commissioner shall have general
supervision and control over the municipal water system. Included in the said
water system shall be the water plant, the pump house, all machinery and
appliances used in connection with producing and distributing water to
inhabitants of the municipality. All actions, decisions and procedures of the
Water Commissioner shall be subject to the general directives and control of
the Utilities Superintendent. The Municipal Water Commissioner shall have the
general control and supervisory authority over all employees of the water
system which the governing body may from time to time hire to operate and
maintain the said system. He or she shall make a detailed report to the
Utilities Superintendent at least once every six months, of the condition of
the said water system, of all mains, pipes, hydrants, reservoirs and
machinery and such improvements, repairs and extensions thereof as he may
think proper.



   (B)   The Water Commissioner, who may be removed at any time by the
Mayor, shall provide a bond conditioned upon the faithful discharge of his or
her duties which shall amount to not less than the amount set by resolution
of the governing body and on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk.



   (C)   The Water Commissioner shall perform such additional duties as
may be prescribed by the governing body or Utilities Superintendent.



(1976 Code, § 1-216)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107, 17-541, 17-543, 19-1405



§ 30.085  MUNICIPAL SEWER COMMISSIONER.



   The Sewer Commissioner shall have the immediate control, and
supervision over all the employees, and property that make up the municipal
sewer system, subject to the general control and directives of the Utilities
Superintendent. He or she shall at least every six months, make a detailed
report to the Utilities Superintendent on the condition of the sewer system
and shall direct their attention to such improvements, repairs, extensions,
additions and additional employees as he or she may believe are needed along
with an estimate of the cost thereof. He or she shall have such other duties
as the Utilities Superintendent or governing body may delegate to him or her.
He or she shall issue permits for all connections to the municipal sewer
system and inspect and supervise all repairs made to the said system.



(1976 Code, § 1-217)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107



§ 30.086  MUNICIPAL LIGHT COMMISSIONER.



   The Municipal Light Commissioner shall have the immediate control and
supervision over all employees and property that make up the municipal
electric system, subject to the general control and directives of the
Utilities Superintendent. He or she shall at least every six months, make a
detailed report to the Utilities Superintendent on the condition of the
electrical system and shall direct their attention to such improvements,
repairs, extensions, additions and additional employees as he or she may
believe are needed along with an estimate of the cost thereof. He or she
shall have such other duties as the governing body or Utilities
Superintendent may delegate to him or her. He or she may be removed at any
time by the Mayor.



(1976 Code, § 1-218)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107



§ 30.087  MUNICIPAL LANDFILL SUPERINTENDENT.



   The Municipal Landfill Superintendent shall have the immediate control
and supervision of the municipal landfill, and of all dumping of garbage,
refuse, waste and rubbish thereon, subject to the general control and
directives of the governing body or City Administrator. He or she shall, at
least every six months, make a detailed report to the governing body on the
condition of the landfill and shall direct their attention to such
improvements, additions and additional employees as he or she may believe are
needed along with an estimate of the cost thereof. He or she shall issue
dumping permits if the governing body should require them and shall inspect
and supervise all work done to improve or extend the landfill. He or she
shall have such other duties as the governing body may delegate to him or
her. He or she may be removed at any time by the Mayor.



(1976 Code, § 1-219)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107



§ 30.088  MUNICIPAL STREET COMMISSIONER.



   The Municipal Street Commissioner shall, subject to the orders and
directives of the governing body or City Administrator, have general charge,
direction and control of all work on the streets, sidewalks, culverts and
bridges of the municipality, and shall perform such other duties as the
governing body or City Administrator may require. It shall be his or her
responsibility to see that gutters and drains therein function properly and
that the same are kept in good repair. He or she shall, at the request of the
governing body, make a detailed report to the governing body on the condition
of the streets, sidewalks, culverts, alleys and bridges of the municipality,
and shall direct their attention to such improvements, repairs, extensions,
additions and additional employees as he or she may believe are needed to
maintain a satisfactory street system in the municipality along with an
estimate of the cost thereof. He or she shall issue such permits and assume
such other duties as the governing body or City Administrator may direct.



(1976 Code, § 1-220)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107, 17-119



§ 30.089  MUNICIPAL UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT.



   (A)   A Utilities Superintendent shall be appointed in the event
that there is more than one municipal utility, and the governing body
determines that it is in the best interest of the municipality to appoint one
official to have the immediate control over all the said municipal utilities.
The Utilities Superintendent may be removed at any time by the Mayor. Any
vacancy occurring in the said office by death, resignation or removal may be
filled in the manner hereinbefore provided for the appointment of all
municipal officials.



   (B)   The Utilities Superintendent’s duties over the following
departments shall be as stated herein.



      (1)   Water Department. He or she shall have general
supervision and control over the municipal water system, and shall be
primarily responsible for its economic operation and prudent management. All
actions, decisions and procedures of the Utilities Superintendent shall be
subject to the general directives and control of the Board of Public Works.
The Utilities Superintendent shall have the general control and supervisory
authority over all employees of the water system which the governing body may
from time to time hire to operate and maintain the said system. Unless some
other official is specifically designated, he or she shall collect all money
received by the municipality on account of the said system of waterworks, and
shall faithfully account for, and pay over to the Municipal Treasurer all
such money collected in the name of the municipality and receive a receipt
from the Municipal Treasurer for the depository evidence of his or her
faithful discharge of this duty. This receipt shall then be filed with the
Municipal Clerk and the second copy shall be kept by the Superintendent. He
or she shall make a detailed report to the Board of Public Works, at least
once every six months, of the condition of the said water system, of all
mains, pipes, hydrants, reservoirs and machinery and such improvements,
repairs and extensions thereof as he or she may think proper. The report
shall show the amount of receipts and expenditures on account thereof for the
preceding six months. No money shall be expended for improvements, repairs or
extensions of the said waterworks system, except upon the recommendation of
the Superintendent. The Utilities Superintendent shall provide a bond
conditioned upon the faithful discharge of his or her duties which shall
amount to not less than the amount set by resolution of the governing body
and on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk. He or she shall perform
such additional duties as may be prescribed by the governing body or Board of
Public Works.



      (2)   Sewer Department. The Utilities Superintendent shall
have the immediate control, and supervision over all the employees, and
property that make up the municipal sewer system, subject to the general
control, and directives of the Board or Public Works. He or she shall at
least every six months, make a detailed report to the Board of Public Works
on the condition of the sewer system, and shall direct their attention to
such improvements, repairs, extensions, additions and additional employees as
he or she may believe are needed along with an estimate of the cost thereof.
He or she shall have such other duties as the governing body or Board of
Public Works may delegate to him or her. He or she shall issue permits for
all connections to the municipal sewer system, and inspect and supervise all
repairs made to the said system.



      (3)   Electrical System. The Utilities Superintendent shall
have the immediate control and supervision over all employees and property
that make up the municipal electric system, subject to the general control
and directives of the Board of Public Works. He or she shall, at least every
six months, make a detailed report to the Board of Public Works on the
condition of the electrical system and shall direct their attention to such
improvements, repairs, extensions, additions and additional employees as he
or she may believe are needed, along with an estimate of the cost thereof. He
or she shall have such other duties as the governing body or Board of Public
Works may delegate to him or her.



(1976 Code, § 1-221)



§ 30.090  MUNICIPAL PLUMBING INSPECTOR.



   The Municipal Plumbing Inspector shall enforce all laws relating to the
installation of plumbing and connections thereto. When acting in good faith,
and without malice in the scope of his or her official duties, he or she
shall not, himself or herself, be held personally liable for any damage that
may accrue to persons, or property as the result of any act required by him
or her or by reason of any act, or omission in the discharge of his or her
duties. He or she shall, in the discharge of his or her official duties and,
upon proper identification, have authority to enter into any building,
structure or premises at any reasonable hour. He or she shall perform such
other duties and issue any permits that the governing body may direct. The
Plumbing Inspector may be removed at any time for good and sufficient cause
by the governing body.



(1976 Code, § 1-223)



§ 30.091  CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Office created. There is created the office of the City
Administrator for the city; such officer shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the consent of the City Council. A City Administrator may be removed at
the pleasure of the Mayor. The Administrator shall be appointed on a basis of
merit alone and the Administrator shall devote his or her full time to the
diligent prosecution of the office and shall have no other conflicting or
distracting employment.



   (B)   Purpose of office. The purpose of the office of the City
Administrator is to provide the centralization of the administrative
responsibilities of the city, such Administrator to be the administrative
head of city government under the direction and control of the Mayor and
Council, the City Administrator being responsible thereto for the efficient
conduct of the office.



   (C)   Duties. The duties of the City Administrator shall be
established by the Mayor and City Council and shall, include, but not be
limited to, the following.



      (1)   The City Administrator shall make and keep an up-to-date
an inventory of all property, real and personal, owned by the city. The City
Administrator shall further act as purchasing agent for the purchase of all
supplies, goods, wares and merchandise, material and equipment which may be
required for the various departments, divisions or services of the city.



      (2)   The City Administrator shall keep the Mayor and Council
fully advised as to the financial condition of the city and its needs. The
City Administrator shall be ultimately responsible for the preparation of the
annual estimate of revenues and expenditures, together with the proposed
budget for presentation to the Mayor and Council prior to consideration and
adoption. When a budget has been adopted and an appropriation ordinance
passed, the City Administrator shall be responsible for the control of
budgeted expenditures.



      (3)   The City Administrator shall serve as the public
relations officer of city government and, in such capacity, shall investigate
and adjust all complaints filed against any employee, department, division or
service of the city and cooperate with all community organizations whose aim
and purpose is to advance the best interests of the city and its people, and
shall attend meetings of such organizations, if, such attendance is deemed
necessary and desirable. These public relation responsibilities shall
include, but not be limited to, issuing press releases, public appearances
and representing the city with citizens, community groups and representatives
of these organizations.



      (4)   The City Administrator shall attend all meetings of the
Mayor and Council, with the duty of reporting any matter concerning city
affairs under the supervision or direction of the City Administrator.
Further, the City Administrator shall attend all meetings of the Planning
Commission, Board of Adjustment, Housing Authority and Board of Public Works,
together with any other meetings of city departments, divisions and services
of city government and all employees, to make recommendations to the Mayor
and Council. The City Administrator shall faithfully carry out directives and
recommendations of the Mayor and Council in coordinating the administrative
functions and operations of the various departments.



      (5)   The City Administrator shall procure facts and submit
proposals for long range programs and improvements to the Mayor and Council
including the administration of updating of the city’s comprehensive
development plan. In this regard, the City Administrator shall make
recommendations to the Mayor and Council in any matter believed to be
necessary and expedient.



      (6)   The City Administrator shall recommend to the Mayor and
Council the appointment and/or dismissal of any department heads over which
the City Administrator exercises jurisdiction. Appointment and dismissal of
said department heads will be made upon the recommendation of the Mayor as
confirmed by the city council. The City Administrator may appoint and dismiss
all subordinate employees of the city, as well as provide the transfers of
such employees from one department to another; except that, he or she shall
not discharge those employees covered under the civil service act of the
state. The City Administrator shall have the duty and right to investigate
and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council regarding activities of any
employee of the city covered by the Civil Service Act of the state, including
the filling of vacant positions. In all of these responsibilities in regard
to subordinate employees, the City Administrator will give the deference to
the considerations of the appropriate department head.



      (7)   The City Administrator shall administer and be
responsible for all departments and divisions of city government which are
under the direction of the Mayor and Council, including, but not limited to,
the Water and Sanitation Department, the Electrical Department, the Street,
Park and Recreation Department, the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer, the
office of the Building Inspector, the Library Department, the Housing
Authority and the Police and Fire Departments, except as insofar as such
jurisdiction and administration conflicts with the civil service law
pertaining to Police and Fire Departments.



      (8)   The City Administrator shall prepare and recommend to
the Mayor and Council a classification and compensation plan, keeping and
maintaining appropriate records of the employment status of each employee of
the city.



      (9)   (a)   The City Administrator shall see to the fair
and impartial enforcement of ordinances of the city and the faithful
performance of any contract or obligation in regard to the operation of the
city.



         (b)   In this capacity, the City Administrator will work
with the duly Appointed City Attorney on all legal matters affecting the
operation and administration of city government.



      (10)   The City Administrator shall exercise general
supervision over all public buildings, streets and other properties which are
under control and jurisdiction of the Mayor and Council.



      (11)   The City Administrator shall be responsible for the
preparation and submission to the Mayor and Council at the end of each month
and of the fiscal year of a complete financial report for the city and the
appropriate filing thereof.



      (12)   The City Administrator shall work with all city
department heads in determining strategic and economic forecasts for the city
through the prioritized projects and activities, development and installation
of work procedures and policies, costs control and preparing for the city’s
long and short term improvement plans and recommendations.



      (13)   The City Administrator shall, at the request of the
Mayor and Council, conduct performance evaluations for department heads and
any other employees of the city, making recommendations on appropriate
actions in relation to said evaluations.



      (14)   The City Administrator shall coordinate a variety of
personnel activities including, but not limited to, the application of
personnel policy language, selection procedures, position classification
systems, salary administration, a performance evaluation system, review of
disciplinary acts and the management of the city’s risk management programs.



      (15)   The City Administrator shall coordinate and provide
input in regard to activities promoting economic development within the city,
in conjunction with the Cozad Development Corporation, including the
preparation and administration of grants and intergovernmental funding
activities.



      (16)   The City Administrator shall perform such other duties
and responsibilities and exercise such other powers, as may be delegated by
the Mayor and Council.



   (D)   Compensation. The salary of the City Administrator shall be
fixed by resolution of the Mayor and Council, and shall be payable in the
same manner as other city employees.



(1976 Code, § 1-224)  (Ord. 1320, passed 9-8-2003; Ord. 1472, passed
8-7-2017)



§ 30.092  DEPUTY MUNICIPAL CLERK.



   There is hereby created the position of Deputy Municipal Clerk who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council. The Deputy
Municipal Clerk shall serve under the direct supervision of the Municipal
Clerk and shall assume all duties of the Municipal Clerk in the absence of
the Municipal Clerk. The Deputy Municipal Clerk may be removed from office at
any time by the Mayor. The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be bonded in the same
amount and in the same manner as the Municipal Clerk.



(1976 Code, § 1-225)  (Ord. 732, passed 9-15-1983)



CHAPTER 31:  ORGANIZATIONS



Section



   31.01   Standing committees



   31.02   Library Board



   31.03   Planning Commission



   31.04   Board of Adjustment



   31.05   Board of Health



   31.06   Board of Public Works



   31.07   Board of Park Commissioners



   31.08   Airport Authority Board



   31.09   City Tree Board



   31.10   Housing Agency



   31.11   Community Redevelopment Authority



 



   31.99   Penalty



§ 31.01  STANDING COMMITTEES.



   (A)   At the organizational meeting of the City Council, the Mayor
shall appoint members of such standing committees as the City Council may, by
ordinance or resolution, create. The membership of such standing committees
may be changed at any time by the Mayor. The Mayor shall be a member ex
officio of each standing committee. The members of the standing committees
shall serve a term of office of one year, unless reappointed.



   (B)   The following standing committees shall be appointed or
reappointed each year until changed by the governing body:



      (1)   Finance;



      (2)   Fire;



      (3)   Health;



      (4)   Parks;



      (5)   Police;



      (6)   Sanitation;



      (7)   Streets and Alleys; and



      (8)   Water, Light and Sewer.



(1976 Code, § 2-101)



§ 31.02  LIBRARY BOARD.



   (A)   The Library Board shall be appointed or elected. The governing
body shall, by ordinance, adopt the manner in which the five members of the
Board are to be chosen. If the members are to be chosen by appointment, the
nominated members must receive a majority vote of the governing body. If the
members are to be elected, the usual election procedures of the municipality
shall be followed. The Board shall consist of five members who shall be
residents of the municipality. The members of the Library Board shall serve a
four-year term of office as specified by state statutes. The Board shall
serve without compensation and may be required, in the discretion of the
governing body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the governing
body and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. At the
time of the Board’s first meeting in July of each year, the Board shall
organize by selecting from their number a Chairperson and Secretary. It shall
be the duty of the Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records
of all meetings, and to file the same with the Municipal Clerk where they
shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable time. A majority
of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. The Board shall meet at such times as the governing body may
designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or
any three members of the Board.



   (B)   The Library Board shall have the authority to appoint a
librarian and all other employees. It shall be the duty of the board to have
general charge of the municipal library and to establish appropriate rules
and regulations for the management, operation and use of the same. The Board
shall have supervisory authority over all employees of the library including
the librarian. All actions of the Board shall be subject to the review and
supervision of the governing body. The Board shall be responsible for making
such reports and performing such additional duties as the governing body may
designate from time to time.



   (C)   (1)   No member of the governing body shall serve as a
member of the library board while serving a term of office as a member of the
governing body.



      (2)   No member of the Library Board shall serve in the
capacity of both the Chairperson and Secretary of the Board.



(1976 Code, § 2-201)  (Ord. 668, passed 9-17-1981)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 51-202



§ 31.03  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   (1)   If the governing body adopts zoning or other
regulations pursuant to Neb. RS 19-901 et seq., the Planning Commission shall
consist of five, seven or nine regular members, as specified by the governing
body by ordinance, who shall represent, insofar as is possible, the different
professions or occupations in the municipality and shall be appointed by the
Mayor, by and with the approval of a majority vote of the members elected to
the governing body. Two of the regular members may be residents of the area
over which the municipality is authorized to exercise extraterritorial zoning
and subdivision regulations. When there are 500 residents in the area over
which the municipality exercises extraterritorial zoning and subdivision
regulation, one regular member of the Commission shall be a resident from
such area. If it is determined by the governing body that 500 residents
reside in the area subject to extraterritorial zoning or subdivision
regulation, and no such resident is a regular member of the Commission, the
first available vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by the appointment
of such an individual. A number of Commissioners equal to a majority of the
number of regular members appointed to the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of any business. All regular members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation. The term of each regular member
shall be three years; except that, one-third or fewer of the regular members
of the first Commission to be so appointed shall serve for terms of one year,
one-third or fewer for terms of two years and the remaining members for terms
of three years. All regular members shall hold office until their successors
are appointed. Any member may, after a public hearing before the governing
body, be removed by the Mayor with the consent of a majority vote of the
members elected to the governing body for inefficiency, neglect of duty or
malfeasance in office or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies occurring
otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the
unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor.



      (2)   The Mayor may, with the approval of a majority vote of
the elected members of the governing body, appoint one alternate member to
the Planning Commission. The alternate member shall serve without
compensation. The term of the alternate member shall be three years, and he
or she shall hold office until his or her successor is appointed and
approved. The alternate member may be removed from office in the same manner
as a regular member. If the alternate member position becomes vacant other
than through expiration of the term, the vacancy shall be filled for the
unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor with the approval of a majority
vote of the elected members of the governing body. The alternate may attend
any meeting and may serve as a voting and participating member of the
Commission at any time when less than the full number of regular Commission
members is present and capable of voting.



      (3)   A regular or alternate member of the Planning Commission
may hold any other municipal office, except:



         (a)   Mayor;



         (b)   A member of the governing body;



         (c)   A member of any community redevelopment authority
or limited community redevelopment authority created under Neb. RS
18-2102.01; or



         (d)   A member of any citizen advisory review committee
created under Neb. RS 18-2715.



   (B)   The commission shall elect its Chairperson from its members
and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term
of the Chairperson shall be one year and he or she shall be eligible for
reelection. The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each
calendar quarter, except the governing body may require the Commission to
meet more frequently and the Chairperson of the Commission may call for a
meeting when necessary to deal with business pending before the Commission.
The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of
business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings
and determinations, which shall be a public record.



   (C)   No member of the Commission shall serve in the capacity of
both the Mayor and Secretary of the Commission. The Secretary shall keep the
full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and file them with the
Municipal Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection during
office hours.



   (D)   The governing body may provide the funds, equipment and
accommodations necessary for the work of the Commission, but the expenditures
of the Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts
appropriated for that purpose by the governingbody, and no expenditures nor
agreements for expenditures shall be valid in excess of such amounts.



   (E)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 19-930 to
19-933, the Planning Commission shall:



            1.   Make and adopt plans for the physical
development of the municipality, including any areas outside its boundaries
which in the Conunission’s judgment bear relation to the planning of such
municipality and including a comprehensive development plan as defined by
Neb. RS 19-903;



            2.   Prepare and adopt such implemental means as a
capital improvement program, subdivision regulations, building codes and a
zoning ordinance in cooperation with other interested municipality
departments; and



            3.   Consult with and advise public officials and
agencies, public utilities, civic organizations, educational institutions and
citizens with relation to the promulgation and implementation of the
comprehensive development plan and its implemental programs. The Commission
may delegate authority to any such group to conduct studies and make surveys
for the Commission, make preliminary reports on its finding and hold public
hearings before submitting its final report.



         (b)   The governing body shall not take final action on
matters relating to the comprehensive development plan, capital improvements,
building codes, subdivision development, the annexation of territory or
zoning until it has received the recommendation of the Planning Commission;
provided that, the Planning Commission shall make its recommendation so that
it is received by the governing body within 60 days after the Commission
begins consideration of a matter or within such other number of days as the
governing body has set by ordinance.



         (c)   A recommendation from the Planning Commission
shall not be required for subdivision of existing lots and blocks whenever
all required public improvements have been installed, no new dedication of
public rights-of-way or easements is involved, and such subdivision complies
with the ordinance requirements concerning minimum areas and dimensions of
such lots and blocks, if the governing body has designated, by ordinance, an
agent pursuant to Neb. RS 19-916.



      (2)   (a)   The Commission may, with the consent of the
governing body, in its own name:



            1.   Make and enter into contracts with public or
private bodies;



            2.   Receive contributions, bequests, gifts or
grant funds from public or private sources;



            3.   Expend the funds appropriated to it by the
municipality;



            4.   Employ agents and employees; and



            5.   Acquire, hold and dispose of property.



         (b)   The Commission may, on its own authority, make
arrangements consistence with its programs, conduct or sponsor special
studies or planning work for any public body or appropriate agency, receive
grants, remuneration or reimbursement for such studies or work, and at its
public hearings, summon witness, administer oaths and compel the giving of
testimony.



      (3)   (a)   The Commission may grant conditional uses or
special exceptions to property owners for the use of their property if the
governing body has, through a zoning ordinance or special ordinance,
generally authorized the Commission to exercise such powers and has approved
the standards and procedures adopted by the Commission for equitably and
judiciously granting such conditional uses or special exceptions. The
granting of a conditional use permit or special exception shall only allow
property owners to put their property to a special use if it is among those
uses specifically identified in the zoning ordinance as classification of
uses which may require special conditions or requirements to be met by the
owners before a use permit or building permit is authorized.



         (b)   The power to grant conditional uses or special
exceptions shall be the exclusive authority of the Commission; except that,
the governing body may choose to retain for itself the power to grant
conditional uses or special exceptions for those classifications of uses
specified in the zoning ordinance. The governing body may exercise such power
if it has formally adopted standards and procedures for granting such
conditional uses or special exceptions in a manner that is equitable and will
promote the public interest.



         (c)   An appeal of a decision by the Commission or
governing body regarding a conditional use or special exception shall be made
to the district court.



(1976 Code, § 2-202)  (Ord. 577, passed 9-21-1978; Ord. 1151, passed
2-6-1995; Ord. 1190, passed 1-22-1996; Ord. 1479, passed 2-5-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 19-924 through 19-929



§ 31.04  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint, with the consent of the City Council,
a Board of Adjustment, which shall consist of five regular members, plus one
additional member designated as an alternate who shall attend and serve only
when one of the regular members is unable to attend for any reason. Each
member shall be appointed for a term of three years and shall be removable
for cause by the Mayor upon written charges and after public hearings.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term
becomes vacant. One member only of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed
from the membership of the Planning Commission and the loss of membership on
the Planning Commission by such member shall also result in his or her
immediate loss of membership on the Board of Adjustment and the appointment
of another Planning Commissioner to the Board of Adjustment. If the Board
does not include a member who resides in the extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction of the city, the first vacancy occurring on the Board of
Adjustment after the effective date of this section shall be filled by the
appointment of a person who resides in the extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction of the city at such time as more than 200 persons reside within
such area. Thereafter, at all times, at least one member of the Board of
Adjustment shall reside outside the corporate boundaries of the city, but
within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction. Neither the Mayor nor any
member of the City Council shall serve as a member of the Board of Adjustment.



   (B)   The members of the Board shall serve without compensation and
may be required, in the discretion of the City Council, to give a bond in a
sum set by resolution of the City Council and conditioned upon the faithful
performance of their duties. The Board shall organize at its first meeting
each year after the City Council meeting when appointments are regularly made
and shall elect from its membership a Chairperson and Secretary. No member of
the Board of Adjustment shall serve in the capacity of both Chairperson and
Secretary of the Board.



   (C)   The Board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions
of this section and  sections Neb. RS 19-901 to 19-914. Meetings of the
Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as
the Board may determine. Special meetings may be also held upon the call of
any three members of the Board. A majority of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for the purpose of doing business. The Chairperson or, in his or her
absence, the acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the
public. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep complete and accurate
minutes of the Board’s proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and to
keep records of the Board’s examinations and other official actions, all of
which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be
public record. The Board shall be responsible for making such reports and
performing such other duties as the Mayor and City Council may designate.



   (D)   Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or
by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any
decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a
reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the
officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken
shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer
from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board, after the notice of
appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by reason of facts stated
in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril
to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court
of record on application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and on due cause shown. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to
the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon
the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.



   (E)   The Board shall have only the following powers:



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any
zoning regulation or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of
structures; except that, the authority to hear and decide appeals shall not
apply to decisions made by the City Council or Planning Commission regarding
a conditional use or special exception;



      (2)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of
any zoning regulation, requests for interpretation of any map; and



      (3)   When by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the
zoning regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or
other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of
property, the strict application of any zoning regulation would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue
hardships upon the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal
relating to the property, a variance from such strict application so as to
relieve such difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially
impairing  the intent and purpose of any ordinance or resolution.



   (F)   (1)   No such variance shall be authorized by the Board
unless it finds that:



         (a)   The strict application of the zoning regulation
would produce undue hardship;



         (b)   Such hardship is not shared generally by other
properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity;



         (c)   The authorization of such variance will not be of
substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district
will not be changed by the granting of the variance; and



         (d)   The granting of such variance is based upon reason
of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for
purposes of convenience, profit or caprice.



      (2)   No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds
that the condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use
of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make
reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted
as an amendment to the zoning regulations.



   (G)   In exercising the powers granted in this section, the Board
may, in conformity with Neb. RS 19-901 to 19-915, reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers
of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four
members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of any such administrative official or to decide in
favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under
any such regulation or to effect any variation in such regulation.



   (H)   Appeals from a decision by the Board may be taken as provided
in Neb. RS 19-912.



(1976 Code, § 2-203)  (Ord. 578, passed 9-21-1978; Ord. 1191, passed
1-22-1996; Ord. 1354, passed 11-8-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 19-908, 19-909, 19-910



§ 31.05  BOARD OF HEALTH.



   (A)   The governing body shall appoint a Board of Health which shall
consist of five members.



   (B)   The members of the Board shall include the Mayor, who shall
serve as Chairperson; the Police Chief, who shall serve as secretary and
quarantine officer; a physician who shall serve as the medical advisor; and
the President of the City Council; and a veterinarian, who shall serve as the
veterinary advisor. The members of the Board shall serve, without
compensation, a one-year term of office, unless reappointed, and shall
reorganize at the first meeting in June of each year. It shall be the duty of
the Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of all
meetings and to file the same with the Municipal Clerk where they shall be
available for public inspection at any reasonable time. The Board of Health
shall be funded by the governing body from time to time out of the General
Fund. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
doing business. The Board shall meet at such times as the governing body may
designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or
any two members of the Board. It shall be the duty of the Board to enact
rules and regulations which shall have the full force and effect of law, to
safeguard the health of the residents of the municipality. Included in the
duties of the Board shall be to enforce the rules and regulations, and to
provide fines and punishments for any violations thereof. It may regulate,
suppress and prevent the occurrence of nuisances and shall actively enforce
all laws of the state and ordinances of the municipality relating to matters
of sanitation which affect the health and safety of the people. The Board
shall regularly inspect such premises and businesses as the governing body
may direct. All members of the Board shall be responsible for making such
reports and performing such other duties as the governing body may, from time
to time, designate. No member of the Board of Health shall hold more than one
Board of Health position.



(1976 Code, § 2-104)  (Ord. 563, passed 9-22-1977; Ord. 1322, passed
11-10-2003)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-121



§ 31.06  BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   The governing body shall appoint the Board of Public Works. The Board
shall consist of not less than three, nor more than six, members who are
residents of the municipality. The members of the Board shall serve a
four-year term of office, at a salary set by ordinance of the governing body.
No member of the Board shall ever be financially interested in a contract
entered into by the Board on behalf of the municipality. The members of the
Board shall be required to take an oath to faithfully perform the duties of
their office before entering upon the discharge thereof. At the time of the
Board’s first meeting in June of each year, the Board members shall
organize by selecting from among their number a Chairperson and Secretary. It
shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and
records of all meetings and to file the same with the Municipal Clerk where
they shall be available for public inspection at any time. The minutes, or a
sufficient abstract thereof, of each meeting shall be published in a legal
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality within 30 days after it
is held. The Board shall meet at such times as the governing body may
designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or
any three members of the Board. A majority of the Board members shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. It shall be the duty of
the Board to operate any utility owned by the municipality and the exercise
all powers conferred by law upon the municipality for the operation of
utilities to same extent as the governing body, except the Board shall not
make an expenditure other than or ordinary operational expenses exceeding
$40,000 without first obtaining the approval of the governing body. The Board
may, in its discretion, employ a Commissioner to operate one or more of the
municipal utilities and who shall be under the immediate authority of the
Board of Public Works. All actions of the Board shall be subject to the
review and supervision of the governing body. The Board shall be responsible
for making such reports and performing such other duties as the governing
body may, from time to time, designate. No members of the governing body
shall serve as a member of the Board of Public Works while serving a term of
office as a member of the governing body. No member of the Board of Public
Works shall serve in the capacity of both the Chairperson and Secretary of
the Board.



(1976 Code, § 2-106)  (Ord. 1023, passed 1-7-1991; Ord. 1107, passed
3-21-1994)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-801 through 17-808, 17-810



§ 31.07  BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS.



   (A)   The governing body shall appoint the Board of Park
Commissioners. The Board shall consist of not less than six members, who
shall be resident freeholders in the municipality. The members of the Board
shall serve a three-year term of office. Two members shall be appointed
originally for a term of one year; two members for a term of two years; and
two members for a term of three years. Board members shall serve without
compensation and may be required, in the discretion of the governing body to
give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the governing body, and conditioned
upon the faithful performance of their duties. At the time of the Board’s
first meeting in June of each year, the Board shall organize by selecting
from their number a Chairperson and Secretary. It shall be the duty of the
Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings,
and to file the same with the Municipal Clerk where they shall be available
for public inspection at any reasonable time. A majority of the Board members
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Board shall
meet at such times as the governing body may designate. Special meetings may
be held upon the call of the Chairperson or any four of the Board Members.
The Board shall provide the general care, management and supervision of all
parks and recreational facilities, but excluding baseball and softball
fields, and supervision of the municipal cemetery. The Board shall have the
power and authority to limit and regulate the number of cemetery lots that
may be owned by the same person in the municipal cemetery, to prescribed
rules for enclosing, adorning and erecting monuments and tombstones on
cemetery lots and to prohibit any diverse or improper use of the municipal
cemetery; provided that, no religious tests shall be made as to the ownership
of lots, the burial therein and the ornamentation of graves. The Board shall
use all the revenue received from the sale of cemetery lots, gifts to the
cemetery or other income to the cemetery for the care, management and
administration of the municipal cemetery. All actions of the Board shall be
subject to the review and supervision of the governing body, and the Board
shall be responsible for making such reports and performing such additional
duties as the governing body may designate. No member of the governing body
shall serve as a member of the Board of Park Commissioners while serving a
term of office as a member of the governing body. No member of the Board of
Park Commissioners shall serve in the capacity of both the Chairperson and
Secretary of the Board.



   (B)   The governing body shall appoint as a sub-committee of the
Board of Park Commissioners, a Baseball/Softball Committee consisting of six
members who shall be resident freeholders in the municipality. Each member
shall serve a one-year term and will serve without compensation. The
Baseball/Softball Committee shall be responsible for the management and
supervision of all baseball and softball leagues within the municipality. All
actions of the Baseball/Softball Committee shall be subject to the review and
supervision of the governing body and said Committee shall be responsible for
making such reports and performing such additional duties as the Board of
Park Commissioners and the governing body shall require. The city shall be
responsible for the general care and management of all baseball and softball
facilities and for allocating maintenance responsibilities for those
facilities.



(1976 Code, § 2-108)  (Ord. 662, passed 6-4-1981; Ord. 1035, passed
6-17-1991; Ord. 1090, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 1451, passed 3- -2014)



§ 31.08  AIRPORT AUTHORITY BOARD.



   (A)   The Airport Authority Board shall have the full and exclusive
jurisdiction and control over all facilities owned or hereafter acquired by
the municipality for the purpose of aviation operation, air navigation and
air safety operation. The Board is a body corporate and politic, constituting
a public corporation and an agency of the municipality. The Board shall
consist of five members.



   (B)   Members of the Board shall be nominated and elected in the
manner provided by law for the election of other elected officials and shall
take office at the same time as the officers of such city each municipal
election year. Members of the Board shall be residents of the municipality
and shall serve a term of six years. Two members of the Board shall be
elected in each municipal election year; provided that, in each third
election year, one member only shall be elected to the Airport Authority
Board. Any vacancy on the Board resulting from any other cause than the
expiration of a term of office, shall be filled by temporary appointment by
the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, until a successor can be
elected at the next general municipal election to serve the unexpired portion
of the term. A member of the Board may be removed from office for
incompetence, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. An action for the
removal of such officer may be brought, upon resolution of the City Council,
in the District Court of the county. The Board shall have such other powers
and duties as may be prescribed by law.



(1976 Code, § 2-109)  (Ord. 952, passed 9-26-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 3-501 through 3-514



§ 31.09  CITY TREE BOARD.



   (A)   In general.



      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         COMMUNITY FOREST MANAGER. The official representative of
the Tree Board and as such is responsible for administration of the community
forestry program.



         PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody
vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by
the city, or to which the public has free access as a park.



         STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody
vegetation on land lying between the property lines on either side of all
streets, avenues or ways within the city.



      (2)   Creation and establishment of a City Tree Board. There
is hereby created and established a City Tree Board, which shall consist of
nine members, citizens and residents of the city, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.



      (3)   Term of office. The term of the nine persons to be
appointed by the Mayor shall be three years; except that, the term of three
of the members appointed to the first Board shall be for only one year and
the term of three members of the first Board shall be for two years. In the
event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor
shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.



      (4)   Compensation. Members of the Tree Board shall serve
without compensation.



      (5)   Duties and responsibilities.



         (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board
to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and
administer a written plan for the care, replacement, maintenance and removal
or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other
public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the City Council and,
upon their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official
comprehensive city tree plan.



         (b)   The Tree Board, when requested by the City
Council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend
upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.



      (6)   Operation. The Tree Board shall choose its own officers,
make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A
majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.



(1976 Code, § 2-110)



   (B)   Management of community forest resource.



      (1)   Street tree species to be planted. The city shall
maintain a list of recommended trees for planting in public areas. The
purpose of this listing will be to maintain diversity in the total tree
population. This list shall be available to residents of the city upon
request to aid in the selection of trees for private properties. The list of
recommended trees shall be updated periodically to reflect new developments
or species that will affect the population of the community forest.



      (2)   Distances and clearances for planting.



         (a)   Street trees may be planted in the tree lawn where
there is more than six feet between the edge of the sidewalk and the curb of
the street. Street trees shall be planted no closer than three feet from a
sidewalk, driveway or street.



         (b)   No street trees shall be planted closer than 35
feet from any street corner, measured from the point of the nearest
intersection of curbs or curblines.



         (c)   No street tree shall be planted closer than ten
feet from any fireplug.



         (d)   No street tree shall be planted within ten feet of
any point on a line on the ground immediately below any overhead utility
wire, or within ten lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line,
transmission line or other utility.



      (3)   Public tree care.



         (a)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune,
maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within right-of-way or bounds of
all streets, alleys, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary
to ensure the public safety.



         (b)   The Tree Board may remove or cause or order to be
removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which,
by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas
lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is seriously affected
with any fatal disease.



         (c)   The abutting property owners shall have the right
to perform normal tree care on all street trees.



      (4)   Permits required. No person shall plant a street tree or
any other tree in public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from
the City Clerk. There will be no fee for such permit.



      (5)   Compensatory payments. No person shall remove any public
tree without replacing such tree with a tree or trees of equivalent dollar
value in the vicinity of the removed tree. The value of trees shall be
determined by the community forest manager in accordance with regulations
considering the species, location, size and condition of trees adopted by the
Tree Board. If no suitable location exists in the vicinity of the tree
removed or if the replacement tree is of lesser value, the person causing the
tree to be removed shall make a compensatory payment to the city equal to the
difference in value between the tree removed and any replacement tree. Such
compensatory payment shall be paid into the Park Fund and used solely for the
purpose of enhancing the community forest.



      (6)   Tree topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice
for any person, firm or city department to top any street tree, park tree or
other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back
of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s
crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical
shall be exempted from this section.



      (7)   Clearance over streets and walkways. Clearance over
streets and walkways shall be the responsibility of the abutting property
owner. A clearance of 8 feet must be maintained over walkways and a clearance
of 12 feet must be maintained over streets. Property owners are responsible
for trees on their own property as well as trees on the public way that abut
their property.



      (8)   Dead or diseased tree removal. The city shall remove or
cause to be removed any dead or diseased tree within the city limits.
DISEASED TREES are defined as those trees that may constitute a hazard to
life and property and represent a potential threat to other trees within the
city due to the presence of a fatal disease (e.g., Dutch Elm disease,
Chestnut Blight). The Tree Board will notify in writing the owners of such
trees. Removal is the responsibility of the owners of such trees and shall be
accomplished within 60 days of notification. In the event of failure to
remove by the owner, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees
and charge the costs of removal to the owner or owners or levy the cost
against the real estate as a special assessment, collectible in the normal
fashion for special assessments.



      (9)   Removal of stumps. All stumps of street and park trees
shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump
shall not project above the surface of the ground.



      (10)   Interference with the Tree Board. It shall be unlawful
for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the Tree Board or any of
its representatives or agents, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any trees within the
community forest, as authorized in this section.



      (11)   Access. It shall be unlawful to any person to prevent,
delay or interfere with access to private property by the city or its
representatives in the legal performance of any section of this ordinance.



      (12)   Review by City Council. The City Council shall have the
right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the Tree Board. Any person
may appeal from any ruling or order of the Tree Board to the City Council who
may hear the matter and make final decision.



(1976 Code, § 2-111)



(Ord. 1096, passed 9-13-1993)



§ 31.10  HOUSING AGENCY.



   (A)   Rights and duties of Housing Agency. The previously created
and existing Housing Authority shall continue to exist as a Housing Agency
under the state’s Housing Agency Act, being Neb. RS 71-1572 to 71-15,168
and shall hereafter conduct its operations consistent with the said Act,
being Neb. RS 71-1572 to 71-15,168. It shall be named the “Cozad Housing
Agency” and all property, rights and land, buildings, records and equipment
and any funds, money, revenue, receipts or assets of the Housing Authority
shall belong to the city’s Housing Agency as successor. All obligations,
debts, commitments and liabilities of the Housing Authority shall become
obligations, debts, commitments and liabilities of the city’s Housing
Agency. Any previously passed resolutions of the Housing Authority and any
actions taken by the Housing Authority prior to 1-1-2000 with regard to any
project or program which is to be completed within or to be conducted for a
12-month period following 1-1-2000 and which resolution or action is lawful
under state law as it exists prior to the operative date of LB-105 shall be a
lawful resolution or action of the city’s Housing Agency, binding upon and
enforceable by or against the city’s Housing Agency, not withstanding that
such resolution or action is inconsistent with, not authorized or prohibited
under the provisions of the state’s Housing Agency Act, being Neb. RS
71-1572 to 71-15,168. All Commissioners of the Housing Authority and all
officers, legal counsel, technical experts, directors and other appointees or
employees of the Housing Authority holding office or employment by virtue of
any such prior law on 1-1-2000 shall be deemed to have been appointed or
employed under the state’s Housing Agency Act, being Neb. RS 71-1572 to
71-15,168.



(1976 Code, § 2-307)



   (B)   Housing Agency  Board. The Mayor/President shall appoint,
subject to confirmation or denial of the Council, five persons who, along
with the Resident Commissioner, if any, shall constitute the Housing Agency
Board, and such persons shall be called the Commissioners. One Commissioner
shall be appointed each year. Each Commissioners shall serve a five-year term
of office or until his or her successor is duly appointed and qualified;
provided that, all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms. The
Council may appoint one of its members to serve as one of the five members of
such Housing Agency for such term as the Council may determine. No person
shall serve as a Commissioner unless he or she resides within the area of
operation of the city’s Housing Agency. A certificate of the appointment or
reappointment of any Commissioner shall be filed with the City Clerk and such
certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the proper appointment of such
Commissioner. The Commissioner shall receive no compensation for his or her
services, but he or she shall be entitled to the necessary expenses,
including travel expenses, incurred in discharge of his or her duties as
provided by Neb. RS 81-1179 thru 81-1177. A majority of Commissioners shall
constitute a quorum of the Agency for the purpose of conducting its business,
exercising its powers and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the
Agency upon the vote of the majority of the Commissioners present and voting,
unless the by-laws of the Agency or the ordinance creating the Agency require
a larger number. The Commissioners shall elect a Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson from among the Commissioners and shall have the power to
employ an executive director who shall serve as ex officio secretary of the
Agency. The Agency may also employ legal counsel for said services as it may
require. It may employ accountants, appraisers, technical experts and such
other officers, agents and employees as it may require and shall determine
their qualifications, duties, compensations and terms of office. The Agency
may delegate such other powers and duties to its agents or employees, as it
may deem proper. During his or her tenure and for one year thereafter, no
Commissioner, officer or employee of the Housing Agency shall voluntarily
acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any project or in any property
included or planned to be included in any project, or in any contact or
proposed contact relating to a housing project. If any such Commissioners,
officer or employee involuntarily acquires any such interest, or voluntarily
or involuntarily acquired any such interest prior to appointment or
employment as Commissioner, officer or employee, he or she shall immediately
disclose his or her interest in writing to the Agency, and such disclosure
shall be entered upon the minutes of the Agency, and he or she shall not
participate in any action by the Agency relating to the property or contract
in which he or she has any such interest. Any violation of the provisions of
this section shall constitute misconduct in office. This prohibition shall
not apply to the acquisition of any interest in notes or bonds of the Agency
issued in connection with any housing project, or to the execution of the
agreements by banking institutions for deposit or handling of funds in
connection with a project or to act as trustee under any trust indenture, or
to utility services, the rates for which are fixed or controlled by a
governmental agency. This section shall not be construed to preclude,
regulate or restrict the participation of any tenant of the Agency from
serving, if appointed, as a Commissioner of such authority, but he or she may
not participate in any decision solely affecting his or her individual
interest.



(1976 Code, § 2-308)



   (C)   Appointment of resident Commissioner. A sixth Commissioner, to
be known as the Resident Commissioner, shall be appointed to the governing
body by the President of the City Council, subject to confirmation or denial
by the Council. To select the initial Resident Commissioner, or to fill
subsequent vacancies in the position, the Housing Agency shall notify any
Resident Advisory Board or other resident organization and all adult persons
directly assisted by such Agency, to the effect that the position of Resident
Commissioner is open and that if any such person is interested in being
considered as a candidate for the position, such person should notify the
Housing Agency, in writing, within 30 days of the person’s willingness to
be considered and to serve as Resident Commissioner. The names of all persons
interested who have notified the Housing Agency of their interests in so
serving shall be forwarded to the President of the Council and the Resident
Commissioner shall be appointed from the list of names, subject to
confirmation by the Council. Upon the appointment of a Resident Commissioner,
the certificate of appointment shall state the term is for five years or when
no longer an eligible resident, whichever occurs first. In the event that no
qualified person has submitted his or her name to the Housing Agency as being
interested as a candidate for the position and the Housing Agency has
received no notification of interest in serving as Resident Commissioner by
any person, no Resident Commissioner shall be required to be selected. In the
event a Resident Commissioner is appointed and resigns from the position
prior to completion of the appointed term, or is no longer an eligible
resident, or is otherwise disqualified or removed from the Board, and a
vacancy is created, the Housing Agency shall solicit new candidate(s) for the
position following the same procedure set forth above. In the event that no
Resident Commissioner is selected and the position is unfilled, the Agency
shall renotify all adult persons directly assisted by the Agency that the
position of Resident Commissioner is open and solicit these persons for
candidates for the position not less than once annually.



(1976 Code, § 2-309)



   (D)   Removal of Commissioners. The Mayor/President may remove a
Commissioner for neglect of duty, misconduct in office or conviction of any
felony, in the manner prescribed hereinafter. The Mayor/President shall send
a notice of removal to such Commissioner, which notice shall set forth the
charges against him or her. Unless within ten days from the receipt of such
notice, the Commissioner files with the Clerk a request for a hearing before
the Council, the Commissioner shall be deemed removed from office. If a
request for a hearing is filed with the Clerk, the Council shall hold a
hearing not sooner than ten days after the date a hearing is requested, at
which time the Commissioner shall have the right to appear in person or by
counsel and the Council shall determine whether the removal shall be upheld.
If the removal is not upheld, the Commissioner shall continue to hold his or
her office.



(1976 Code, § 2-310)



   (E)   Autonomy of Agency. The city’s Housing Agency is a political
subdivision, independent from the city and operated by the Housing Agency.
The Housing Agency shall constitute a public body, corporate and politic, and
shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate
the purposes and provisions of the state’s Housing Agency Act, being Neb.
RS 71-1572 to 71-15,168.



(1976 Code, § 2-311)



   (F)   Housing Agency Act adopted. Except as otherwise herein
specifically provided, the definitions, terms, provisions and conditions set
forth in the state statutes under the state’s Housing Agency Act, being
Neb. RS 71-1572 to 71-15,168 are hereby adopted by reference, as they now
exist, or may hereafter be amended, for the operation and management of the
city’s Housing Agency, and the Housing Agency Commission shall fully comply
with and be governed by the terms of the state’s Housing Agency Act, being
Neb. RS 71-1572 to 71-15,168.



(1976 Code, § 2-312)



   (G)   Policies and procedures.



      (1)   The Housing Agency shall adopt and promulgate fair and
equitable policies establishing a plan for selection of applicants.



      (2)   The plan shall include standards for eligibility,
procedures for prompt notification of eligibility or disqualification and
procedures for maintaining a waiting list of eligible applicants for whom
vacancies are not immediately available.



      (3)   Eligible applicants shall be offered available vacancies
as provided in such policies.



(1976 Code, § 2-313)



   (H)   Rules and regulations. The Housing Agency may adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations related to carrying out the
purposes of the local housing agency and exercising its powers and to amend
or repeal such rules and regulations from time to time.



(1976 Code, § 2-314)



   (I)   Annual  reports. Within six months after the end of the
Housing Agency’s fiscal year, the Housing Agency shall prepare an annual
report. This report shall contain financial statements and the results of the
operations. The report shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners and
signed by the Chairperson. The annual report of the Housing Agency shall be a
public record and available for inspection and copying by members of the
general public at the Housing Agency office. The annual report shall be
placed on file with the City Clerk upon completion thereof.



(1976 Code, § 2-315)



   (J)   Filing of plans. The Housing Agency shall file with the City
Clerk a copy of the five-year plan and annual plan required by § 511 of the
Federal Quality Housing and Work Responsibility Act of 1998. The plans shall
be filed within 30 days after the date the plan is filed with the Department
of Housing and Urban Development.



(1976 Code, § 2-316)  (Ord. 1281, passed 9-25-2000)



§ 31.11  COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The City Council hereby finds and deteraiines that it is
necessary and desirable for purposes of providing for the redevelopment and
general welfare of the city that a community redevelopment authority be
created pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2102.01, reissue 2012, of the state’s
Community Development Law, being Neb. RS 18-2101 to 18-2154 (the “Act”).



   (B)   There shall be and there is hereby created in and for the city
an agency to be known as the “Community Redevelopment Authority of the City
of Cozad, Nebraska” (the “Authority”), which shall consist of seven
members selected from the Board of Directors of the Cozad Development
Corporation. The Authority shall exercise all of the power and authority
granted to a community redevelopment authority in the Act codified at Neb. RS
18-2101 to 18-2144 and 18-2147 to 18-2153, reissue 2012, as amended, and as
hereafter amended.



   (C)   The President of the Cozad Development Corporation shall hold
one of the seven seats on the Authority and shall serve as the Chairperson of
the Authority. The Authority shall select one of its remaining six members as
Vice Chairperson. The City Clerk shall serve as the ex officio Secretary of
the Authority. The Authority may adopt rules for the transaction of its
business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings
and determinations, which records shall be made available for public
inspection during regular business hours.



   (D)   The City Council hereby finds and determines that it is no
longer necessary and desirable that the Community Development Agency of the
city exist for purposes of providing for the redevelopment and general
welfare of the city.



   (E)   The Community Development Agency of the city is hereby
terminated and dissolved and shall no longer have the power or authority
granted under the Act.



   (F)   The Authority shall be the successor in interest to the
Community Development Agency of the city.



(Ord. 1470, passed 7-10-2017)



§ 31.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such
failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 2-401)  (Ord. 1449, passed 12-23-2013)



CHAPTER 32:  ORDINANCES, INITIATIVES AND REFERENDUMS



Section




Ordinances, Resolutions and the Like




   32.01   Grant of power



   32.02   Introduction



   32.03   Resolutions and motions



   32.04   Style



   32.05   Title



   32.06   Reading, passage



   32.07   Publication or posting; certificate



   32.08   Emergency ordinances



   32.09   Amendments and revisions




Initiatives and Referendums




   32.20   Definitions



   32.21   Petitions and ballots



   32.22   Petition form



   32.23   Declaratory judgment



   32.24   Signature sheets



   32.25   Petitions and affidavits



   32.26   Petitions and notifications



   32.27   Frequency of occurrence



   32.28   Direct vote



   32.29   Elections



   32.30   Ballots



   32.31   Initiatives



   32.32   Referendum limitations



   32.33   Referendum passage



   32.34   Applicability



 



   32.99   Penalty




ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND THE LIKE




§ 32.01  GRANT OF POWER.



   The governing body shall have the responsibility of making all
ordinances, bylaws, rules, regulations and resolutions, not inconsistent with
the laws of the state, as may be necessary and proper for maintaining the
peace, good government and welfare of the municipality and its trade,
commerce and security.



(1976 Code, § 1-601)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505



§ 32.02  INTRODUCTION.



   Ordinances shall be introduced by members of the governing body in
either of the following ways:



   (A)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a Council member may, in
the presence and hearing of a majority of the members elected to the Council
read aloud the substance of his or her proposed ordinance and file a copy of
the same with the Municipal Clerk for future consideration; or



   (B)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a Council member may
present his or her proposed ordinance to the Clerk who, in the presence and
hearing of a majority of the members elected to the Council, shall read aloud
the substance of the same and shall file the same for future consideration.



(1976 Code, § 1-602)



§ 32.03  RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS.



   (A)   Resolutions and motions shall be introduced in one of the
methods prescribed for the introduction of ordinances.



   (B)   After their introduction, they shall be fully and distinctly
read one time in the presence and hearing of a majority of the members
elected to the Council.



   (C)   The issue raised by said resolutions or motions shall be
disposed of in accordance with the usage of parliamentary law adopted for the
guidance of the Council. A majority vote shall be required to pass any
resolution or motion.



   (D)   The vote on any resolution or motion shall be by roll call
vote.



(1976 Code, § 1-603)



§ 32.04  STYLE.



   The style of all municipal ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by
the Mayor and Council of the City of Cozad, Nebraska: ...”



(1976 Code, § 1-604)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-613



§ 32.05  TITLE.



   No ordinance shall contain a subject not clearly expressed in its title.



(1976 Code, § 1-605)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-614



§ 32.06  READING, PASSAGE.



   (A)   (1)   All ordinances and resolutions or orders for the
appropriation or payment of money shall require for their passage or adoption
the concurrence of a majority of all members elected to the City Council.



      (2)   The Mayor may vote when his or her vote would provide
the additional vote required to attain the number of votes equal to a
majority of the number of members elected to the Council, and the Mayor
shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to be a member of the Council.



      (3)   Ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be
read by title on three different days unless three-fourths of the City
Council vote to suspend this requirement; except that, this requirement shall
not be suspended for any ordinance for the annexation of territory.



      (4)   In case this requirement is suspended, the ordinance
shall be read by title and then moved for final passage.



      (5)   Three-fourths of the City Council may require a reading
of any such ordinance in full before enactment under either procedure set out
in this section.



   (B)   (1)   On the passage or adoption of every bylaw or
ordinance, and every resolution or order to enter into a contract by the City
Council, the yeas and nays shall be called and recorded.



      (2)   To pass or adopt any bylaw, ordinance or any such
resolution or order, a concurrence of a majority of the whole number of
members elected to the City Council shall be required.



      (3)   All appointments of the officers by the City Council
shall be made by viva voce, and the concurrence of a like majority shall be
required, and the names of those, and for whom they voted, on the vote
resulting in an appointment, shall be recorded.



      (4)   The requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall
be satisfied by a city which utilized an electronic voting device which
allows the yeas and nays of each member of the City Council to be readily
seen by the public.



(1976 Code, § 1-606)  (Ord. 1149, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1447, passed
12-23-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-614, 17-616



§ 32.07  PUBLICATION OR POSTING; CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a general nature shall, before they take
effect, be published one time, within 15 days after they are passed:



      (1)   In newspaper in or of general circulation in the city; or



      (2)   In hook or pamphlet form.



(1976 Code, § 1-607)



   (B)   The passage, approval and publication or posting of all
ordinances shall be sufficiently proven by a certificate under the seal of
the municipality from the Municipal Clerk showing that the said ordinance was
passed and approved, and when, and in what paper the same was published, or
when, and by whom, and where the same was posted.



(1976 Code, § 1-608)  (Ord. 911, passed 10-20-1986)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-613



§ 32.08  EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.



   (A)   In the case of riot, infectious or contagious diseases or
other impending danger, failure of a public utility or other emergency
requiring its immediate operation, such ordinance shall take effect upon the
proclamation of the Mayor, and the posting thereof in at least three of the
most public places in the municipality.



   (B)   Such emergency notice shall recite the emergency and be passed
by a three-fourths vote of the governing body and entered upon the Municipal
Clerk’s minutes.



(1976 Code, § 1-609)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-613



§ 32.09  AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS.



   No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the
new ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended,
and the ordinance or section so amended shall be repealed.



(1976 Code, § 1-610)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-614




INITIATIVES AND REFERENDUMS




§ 32.20  DEFINITIONS.



   The powers of initiative and referendum are reserved to the qualified
electors of the municipality by state law. This subchapter shall govern the
use of initiative to enact, and the use of referendum to amend or repeal
measures affecting the governance of the municipality. For the purpose of
this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIRCULATOR. Any person who solicits signatures for an initiative or
referendum petition.



   CLERK. The Municipal Clerk or the municipal official in charge of
elections.



   GOVERNING BODY. The legislative authority of the municipality.



   MEASURE. An ordinance, charter provision or resolution which is within
the legislative authority of the governing body to pass, and which is not
excluded from the operation of referendum by the exceptions in § 32.32 of
this chapter.



   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Cozad, Nebraska.



   PETITION. A document authorized for circulation pursuant to § 32.21 of
this chapter or any copy of such document.



   PLACE OF RESIDENCE. The street and number of the residence. If there is
no street and number for the residence, PLACE OF RESIDENCE shall mean the
mailing address.



   PROSPECTIVE PETITION. A sample document containing the information
necessary for a completed petition, including a sample signature sheet, which
has not yet been authorized for circulation.



   QUALIFIED ELECTORS. All persons registered to vote, at the time the
prospective petition is filed, in the jurisdiction governed or to be governed
by any measure sought to be enacted by initiative, or altered or repealed by
referendum.



   RESIDENCE. The place at which a person has established his or her home,
where he or she is habitually present, and to which, when he or she departs,
he or she intends to return.



   SIGNATURE SHEET. A sheet of paper which is part of a petition and which
is signed by persons wishing to support the petition effort.



(1976 Code, § 1-1001)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2501 through 18-2511



§ 32.21  PETITIONS AND BALLOTS.



   (A)   Before circulating an initiative or referendum petition, the
petitioner shall file with the Clerk a prospective petition. The Clerk shall
date the prospective petition immediately upon its receipt. The Clerk shall
verify that the prospective petition is in proper form and shall provide a
ballot title for the initiative or referendum proposal, as described below.
If the prospective petition is in proper form, the Clerk shall authorize the
circulation of the petition and such authorization shall be given within
three working days from the date the prospective petition was filed. If the
form of the prospective petition is incorrect, the Clerk shall, within three
working days from the date the prospective petition was filed, inform the
petitioner of necessary changes and request that those changes be made. When
the  requested  changes  have been made and  the revised prospective
petition has been submitted to the Clerk in proper form, the Clerk shall
authorize the circulation of the petition and such authorization shall be
given within two working days from the receipt of the properly revised
petition. Verification by the Clerk that the prospective petition is in
proper form does not constitute an admission by the Clerk, governing body or
municipality that the measure is subject to referendum or limited referendum
or that the measure may be enacted by initiative.



   (B)   The ballot title of any measure to be initiated or referred
shall consist of:



      (1)   A briefly-worded caption by which the measure is
commonly known or which accurately summarizes the measure;



      (2)   A briefly-worded question which plainly states the
purpose of the measure and is phrased so that an affirmative response to the
question corresponds to an affirmative vote on the measure; and



      (3)   A concise and impartial statement, of not more than 75
words, of the chief purpose of the measure.



   (C)   The ballots used when voting on an initiative or referendum
proposal shall contain the entire ballot title. Proposals for initiative and
referendum shall be submitted on separate ballots and the ballots shall be
printed in lower case ten-point type; except that, the caption shall be in
bold face type. All initiative and referendum measures shall be submitted in
a non-partisan manner without indicating or suggesting on the ballot that
they have or have not been approved or endorsed by any political party or
organization.



(1976 Code, § 1-1002)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2512, 18-2513



§ 32.22  PETITION FORM.



   (A)   The forms designed by the Secretary of State to be used for
initiative and referendum petitions shall be made available to the public by
the City Clerk, and they shall serve as a guide for individuals preparing
prospective petitions. Substantial compliance with initiative and referendum
forms is required before authorization to circulate such petition shall be
granted by the City Clerk. Chief petitioners or circulators preparing
prospective petitions shall be responsible for making copies of the petition
for circulation after authorization for circulation has been granted.



   (B)   Each petition presented for signature must be identical to the
petition authorized for circulation by the City Clerk. Every petition shall
contain the name and place of residence of not more than three persons as
chief petitioners or sponsors of the measure. The chief petitioners or
sponsors shall be qualified electors of the municipality potentially affected
by the initiative or referendum proposal. Every petition shall contain the
caption and the statement specified to be part of the ballot title. When a
special election is being requested, such fact shall be stated on every
petition.



(1976 Code, § 1-1003)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983; Ord. 1348, passed 11-8-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2514, 18-2515



§ 32.23  DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.



   (A)   The city or any chief petitioner may seek a declaratory
judgment regarding any questions arising under this subchapter, as it may be
from time to time amended, including, but not limited to, determining whether
a measure is subject to referendum or limited referendum or whether a measure
may be enacted by initiative. If a chief petitioner seeks a declaratory
judgment, the city shall be served by personal, residence or certified mail
service upon the chief executive officer or City Clerk. If the city seeks a
declaratory judgment, only the chief petitioner or chief petitioners shall be
required to be served.



   (B)   Any action brought for declaratory judgment for purposes of
determining whether a measure is subject to limited referendum or referendum,
or whether a measure may be enacted by initiative, may be filed in the
district court at any time after the filing of a referendum or initiative
petition with the City Clerk for signature verification until 40 days from
the date the City Council received notification from the verifying official
that the necessary signatures have been obtained. If the city does not bring
an action for declaratory judgment to determine whether the measure is
subject to limited referendum or referendum, or whether the measure may be
enacted by initiative, until after it has received such notification, it
shall be required to proceed with the initiative or referendum election in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. If the city does file such
an action prior to receiving such notification, it shall not be required to
proceed to hold such election until a final decision has been rendered in the
action.



   (C)   Any action for a declaratory judgment shall be governed
generally by Neb. RS 25-21,149 through 25-21,164; except that, only the city
and each chief petitioner shall be required to be made parties. The city,
City Clerk, City Council or any of the city’s officers shall be entitled to
rely on any order rendered by the court in any such proceeding. Any action
brought for declaratory judgment pursuant to this section shall be given
priority in scheduling hearings and in disposition as determined by the
court. When an action is brought to determine whether the measure is subject
to limited referendum or referendum, or whether a measure may be enacted by
initiative, a decision shall be rendered by the court no later than five days
prior to the election.



   (D)   The provisions of this section relating to declaratory
judgments shall not be construed as limiting, but construed as supplemental
and additional to other rights and remedies conferred by law.



(1976 Code, § 1-1003)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983; Ord. 1348, passed 11-8-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. 18-2538



§ 32.24  SIGNATURE SHEETS.



   (A)   Every signature sheet shall:



      (1)   Contain the caption required in § 32.21(A) of this
chapter;



      (2)   Be part of a complete and authorized petition when
presented to potential signatories;



      (3)   Provide space for signatories to write their names,
places of residence and the date of signing; and



      (4)   Contain a statement that anyone falsifying information
on a signature sheet shall be subject to penalties provided by law.



   (B)   No more than 25 signatures on each signature sheet shall be
counted. In order to be valid, a signature shall be that of an individual
registered to vote, at the time of signing, in the jurisdiction governed or
to be governed by the measure addressed in the petition. A signature shall
include the signatory’s full name, his or her place of residence, and the
date of signing. No signatory shall use ditto marks as a means of affixing
his or her place of residence or date on any petition. A wife shall not use
her husband’s Christian or given name when she signs a petition and she
shall sign her own Christian or given name along with her surname.



(1976 Code, § 1-1004)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2516



§ 32.25  PETITIONS AND AFFIDAVITS.



   Included in the contents of every petition shall be an affidavit, to be
signed by the circulator in the presence of a notary, which states that the
circulator is a qualified elector, that each person who signed the petition
did so in the presence of the circulator on the date indicated, and that the
circulator believes that each signatory was registered to vote in the
affected jurisdiction at the time he or she signed the petition and that the
circulator believes that each signatory has stated his or her name and place
of residence correctly.



(1976 Code, § 1-1005)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2517



§ 32.26  PETITIONS AND NOTIFICATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Signed petitions shall be filed with the Clerk for
signature verification. Upon the filing of a petition, and passage of a
resolution by the governing body, the municipality and the County Clerk or
Election Commissioner of the county in which such municipality is located may
by mutual agreement provide that the County Clerk or Election Commissioner
shall ascertain whether the petition is signed by the requisite number of
voters. The municipality shall reimburse the county for any costs incurred by
the County Clerk or Election Commissioner.



      (2)   When the verifying official has determined that 100%
percent of the necessary signatures required by this subchapter have been
obtained, he or she shall notify the governing body of that fact and shall
immediately forward to the governing body a copy of the petition.



   (B)   In order for an initiative or referendum proposal to be
submitted to the governing body and the voters, the necessary signatures
shall be on file with the Clerk within six months from the date the
prospective petition was authorized for circulation. If the necessary
signatures are not obtained by such date, the petition shall be void.



(1976 Code, § 1-1006)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983)



§ 32.27  FREQUENCY OF OCCURRENCE.



   The same measure, either in form or in essential substance, may not be
submitted to the people by initiative petition, either affirmatively or
negatively, more often than once every two years. No attempt to repeal or
alter an existing measure or portion of such measure by referendum petition
may be made within two years from the last attempt to do the same. Such
prohibition shall apply only when the subsequent attempt to repeal or alter
is designed to accomplish the same, or essentially the same purpose as the
previous attempt.



(1976 Code, § 1-1007)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2519



§ 32.28  DIRECT VOTE.



   (A)   The executive officer and governing body of the municipality
may at any time, by resolution, provide for the submission to a direct vote
of the electors of any measure pending before it, passed by it, including an
override of any veto, if necessary, or enacted by the electors under this
subchapter and may provide in such resolution that such measure shall be
submitted at a special election or the next regularly scheduled primary or
general election.



   (B)   Immediately upon the passage of any such resolution for
submission, the Clerk shall cause such measure to be submitted to a direct
vote of the electors, at the time specified in such resolution and in the
manner provided in this subchapter for submission of measures upon proposals
and petitions filed by voters.



   (C)   Such matter shall become law if approved by a majority of the
votes cast.



(1976 Code, § 1-1008)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2520



§ 32.29  ELECTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The Clerk shall call elections under this subchapter,
either at a special election or regularly scheduled primary or general
election.



      (2)   He or she shall cause notice of every such election to
be printed in one or more newspapers of general circulation in such
municipality at least once not less than 30 days prior to such election and
also posted in the office of the Clerk and in at least three conspicuous
places in such municipality at least 30 days prior to such election.



      (3)   The notice shall be substantially as follows:



 


Notice is hereby given that on Tuesday, the               day of    
                                                ,  
          , at (identify polling place or precinct) of the municipality
of                                                  
          , Nebraska, an election will be held at which there will be
submitted to the electors of the municipality for their approval or
rejection, the following measures, propositions or issues: (naming measures,
propositions or issues), which election will be open at 8:00 a.m. and will
continue open until 8:00 p.m., of the same day.

 

Dated this                               day of          
                                            ,      
                  .

 

                                                   
                                                   

Clerk of the City/Village of                                
                  , Nebraska.



 



   (B)   The Clerk shall make available for photocopying a copy in
pamphlet form of measures initiated or referred. Such notice provided in this
section shall designate where such a copy in pamphlet form may be obtained.



(1976 Code, § 1-1009)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2521



§ 32.30  BALLOTS.



   All ballots for use in special elections under this subchapter shall be
prepared by the Clerk and furnished by the governing body, unless the
governing body contracts with the county for such service, and shall be in
form the same as provided by law for election of the executive officer and
governing body of such municipality. When ordinances under such sections are
submitted to the electors at a regularly scheduled primary or general
election, they shall be placed upon the official ballots as provided in this
subchapter.



(1976 Code, § 1-1010)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2522



§ 32.31  INITIATIVES.



   (A)   The power of initiative allows citizens the right to enact
measures affecting the governance of the municipality. An initiative proposal
shall not have as its primary or sole purpose the repeal or modification of
existing law, except if such repeal or modification is ancillary to and
necessary for the adoption and effective operation of the initiative measure.



   (B)   An initiative shall not be effective if the direct or indirect
effect of the passage of such initiative measure shall be to repeal or alter
an existing law, or portion thereof, which is not subject to referendum or
subject only to limited referendum pursuant to § 32.21 of this chapter.



   (C)   Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in
number to at least 15% of the qualified electors of the municipality has been
filed with the Clerk and verified, it shall be the duty of the governing body
to consider passage of the measure contained in the petition including an
override of any veto, if necessary. If the governing body fails to pass the
measure without amendment, including  an override of any veto, if necessary,
within 30 days from the date it received notification, the Clerk shall cause
the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at the next regularly
scheduled primary or general election held within the municipality. If the
governing body desires to submit the measure to a vote of the people at a
special election prior to the next regularly scheduled primary or general
election held within the municipality, the governing body shall, by
resolution, direct the Clerk to cause the measure to be submitted at a
special election. Such resolution shall not be subject to referendum or
limited referendum.



   (D)   Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in
number to at least 20% of the qualified electors which requests that a
special election be called to submit the initiative measure to a vote of the
people, has been filed with the Clerk and verified pursuant to § 32.26 of
this chapter, it shall be the duty of the governing body to consider passage
of the measure contained in the petition including an override of any veto,
if necessary. If the governing body fails to pass the measure, without
amendment, including an override of any veto, if necessary, within 30 days
from the date it received notification, the Clerk shall cause the measure to
be submitted to a vote of the people at a special election called for such
purpose. The date of such election shall not be less than 30, nor more than
60, days from the date the governing body received notification pursuant to
§ 32.26 of this chapter.



   (E)   If a majority of voters voting on the initiative measure shall
vote in favor of such measure, it shall become a valid and binding measure of
the municipality 30 days after certification of the election results, unless
the governing body by resolution orders an earlier effective date or the
measure itself provides for a later effective date, which resolution shall
not be subject to referendum or limited referendum. A measure passed by such
method shall not be amended or repealed except by two-thirds majority of the
members of the governing body. No such attempt to amend or repeal shall be
made within one year from the passage of the measure by the electors.



(1976 Code, § 1-1011)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2523 through 18-2526



§ 32.32  REFERENDUM LIMITATIONS.



   The power of referendum allows citizens the right to repeal or amend
existing measures, or portions thereof, affecting the governance of the
municipality.



   (A)   The following measures shall not be subject to referendum or
limited referendum:



      (1)   Measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations,
including, but not limited to, those relating to the issuance of or provided
for in bonds, notes, warrants or other evidences of indebtedness, for
projects previously approved by a measure which was, or is, subject to
referendum or limited referendum or previously approved by a measure adopted
prior to the effective date of this subchapter;



      (2)   Measures relating to any industrial development
projects, subsequent to  measures giving initial approval to such projects;



      (3)   Measures adopting proposed budget statements following
compliance with procedures set forth in the state’s Budget Act, being Neb.
RS 13-501 through 13-513;



      (4)   Measures relating to the immediate preservation of the
public peace, health or safety which have been designated as urgent measures
by unanimous vote of those present and voting of the governing body and
approved by its executive officer;



      (5)   Measures relating to projects for which notice has been
given as provided for in division (A)(4) above for which a sufficient
referendum petition was not filed within the time limit stated in such notice
or which received voter approval after the filing of such petition;



      (6)   Resolutions directing the Clerk to cause measures to be
submitted to a vote of the people at a special elections as provided in §§
32.31(C) and 32.33(E) of this chapter;



      (7)   Resolutions ordering an earlier effective date for
measures enacted by initiative as provided in § 32.31(A) of this chapter; and



      (8)   Measures relating to any facility or system adopted or
enacted pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act, being Neb. RS
13-2001 through 13-2043 by the municipality and which are necessary to carry
out contractual obligations provided for in previously issued bonds, notes,
warrants or other evidence of indebtedness.



   (B)   The following measures shall be subject to limited referendum:



      (1)   Measures in furtherance of a policy of the municipality
or relating to  projects previously approved by a measure which was subject
to referendum or which was enacted by initiative or has been approved by the
voters at an election; except that, such measures shall not be subject to
referendum or limited referendum for a period of one year after any such
policy or project was approved at a referendum election, enacted by
initiative or approved by the voters at an election;



      (2)   Measures relating to  the acquisition, construction,
installation, improvement or enlargement, including the financing or
refinancing of the costs of public ways, public property, utility systems and
other capital projects, and measures giving initial approval for industrial
development projects;



      (3)   Measures setting utility system rates and charges,
except for measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations provided
for in previously issued bonds, notes, warrants or other evidences of
indebtedness and pay rates and salaries for municipal employees other than
the members of the governing body and the executive officer; and



      (4)   Measures relating to any facility or system adopted or
enacted pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act, being Neb. RS
13-2001 through 13-2043 by the municipality, except for measures necessary to
carry out contractual obligations provided for in previously issued bonds,
notes, warrants or other evidence of indebtedness.



   (C)   Measures subject to limited referendum shall ordinarily take
effect 30 days after their passage by the governing body, including an
override of any veto, if necessary. Referendum petitions directed at measures
subject to limited referendum shall be filed for signature verification
pursuant to § 32.26 of this chapter within 30 days after such measure’s
passage by the governing body, including an override of any veto, if
necessary, or after notice is first published pursuant to division (D) below.
If the necessary number of signatures as provided in § 32.31 of this chapter
has been obtained within the time limitation, the effectiveness of the
measure shall be suspended unless approved by the voters.



   (D)   (1)   For any measure relating to the acquisition,
construction, installation, improvement or enlargement of public ways, public
property, utility systems or other capital projects or any measure relating
to any facility or system adopted or enacted pursuant to the Integrated Solid
Waste Management Act, being Neb. RS 13-2001 through 13-2043, the municipality
may exempt all subsequent measures relating to the same project from the
referendum and limited referendum procedures provided for in this subchapter
by the following procedure:



         (a)   By holding a public hearing on the project, the
time and place of such hearing being published at least once not less than
five days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation within the governing body’s jurisdiction;



         (b)   By passage of a measure approving the project,
including an override of a veto, if necessary, at a meeting held on any date
subsequent to the date of hearing; and



         (c)   After passage of such measure, including an
override of a veto, if necessary, by giving notice as follows:



            1.   For those projects for which applicable
statutes require an ordinance or resolution of necessity, creating a district
or otherwise establishing the project, notice shall be given for such project
by including either as part of such ordinance or resolution or as part of any
publicized notice concerning such ordinance or resolution a statement that
the project as described in the ordinance or resolution is subject to limited
referendum for a period of 30 days after the first publication of such notice
and that, after such 30-day period, the project and measures related to it
will not be subject to any further right of referendum; and



            2.   For projects for which applicable statutes do
not require an ordinance or resolution of necessity, notice shall be given by
publication of a notice concerning such projects stating in general terms the
nature of the project and the Engineer’s estimate of costs of such project
and stating that the project described in the notice is subject to limited
referendum for a period of 30 days after the first publication of such notice
and that, after such 30-day period, the project and measures related to it
will not be subject to any further right of referendum. The notice required
by this subdivision shall be published in at least one newspaper of general
circulation within the municipality and shall be published not later than 15
days after passage by the governing body, including an override of a veto, if
necessary, of a measure approving the project.



      (2)   The right to hold such a hearing prior to the passage of
the measure by the governing body and give such notice after passage of such
measure by the governing body to obtain exemption for any particular project
in a manner described in this division (D)(2) is optional and the
municipality shall not be required to hold such a hearing or give such notice
of any particular project.



   (E)   All measures, except as provided in divisions (A), (B) and (D)
above, shall be subject to the referendum procedure at any time after such
measure has been passed by the governing body, including an override of a
veto, if necessary, or enacted by the voters by initiative.



(1976 Code, § 1-1012)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983; Ord. 1078, passed 3-8-1993)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2527, 18-2528



§ 32.33  REFERENDUM PASSAGE.



   (A)   Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in
number to at least 15% of the qualified electors of the municipality has been
filed with the Clerk and verified pursuant to § 32.26 of this chapter, it
shall be the duty of the governing body to reconsider the measure or portion
of such measure which is the object of the referendum. If the governing body
fails to repeal or amend the measure or portion thereof in the manner
proposed by the referendum, including an override of any veto, if necessary,
within 30 days from the date the governing body receives notification
pursuant to § 32.26 of this chapter, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be
submitted to a vote of the people at the next regularly scheduled primary or
general election held within the municipality. If the governing body desires
to submit the measure to a vote of the people at a special election prior to
the next regularly scheduled primary or general election held within the
municipality, the governing body shall, by resolution, direct the Clerk to
cause the measure to be submitted at a special election. Such resolution
shall not be subject to referendum or limited referendum.



   (B)   Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in
number to at least 20% of the qualified voters of the municipality which
requests that a special election be called to submit the referendum measure
to a vote of the people, has been filed with the Clerk and verified, it shall
be the duty of the governing body to reconsider the measure or portion of
such measure which is the object of the referendum. If the governing body
fails to repeal or amend the measure or portion thereof, in the manner
proposed by the referendum, including an override of any veto, if necessary,
the Clerk shall cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at
a special election called for such purpose within 30 days from the date the
governing body received notification. The date of such special election shall
not be less than 30, nor more than 60, days from the date the governing body
received notification.



   (C)   If a majority of the electors voting on the referendum measure
shall vote in favor of such measure, the law subject to the referendum shall
be repealed or amended. A measure repealed or amended by referendum shall not
be reenacted or returned to its original form, except by a two-thirds
majority of the members of the governing body. No such attempt to reenact or
return the measure to its original form shall be made within one year of the
repeal or amendment of the measure by the electors. If the referendum measure
does not receive a majority vote, the ordinance shall immediately become
effective or remain in effect.



(1976 Code, § 1-1013)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2529 through 18-2531



§ 32.34  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of the statutes of the state relating to
election officers, voting places, election apparatus and blanks, preparation
and form of ballots, information to voters, delivery of ballots, calling of
elections, conduct of elections, manner of voting, counting of votes, records
and certificates of election, and recounts of votes, so far as applicable,
shall apply to voting on ordinances by the electors pursuant to this
subchapter.



   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall apply to procedures for
initiatives or referendums provided in Neb. RS 18-412 and 18-412.02, relating
to municipal light and power plants, Neb. RS 70-504, 70-650.01 and 70-650.02,
relating to public power districts, and Neb. RS 80-203 to 80-205, relating to
soldiers and sailors monuments.



(1976 Code, § 1-1015)  (Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed
11-3-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2536, 18-2537



§ 32.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500
for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of such failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 1-1101)



   (B)   (1)   Whoever knowingly or willfully makes a false
affidavit or takes a false oath regarding the qualifications of any person to
sign petitions under Neb. RS 18-2501 through 18-2531 shall be guilty of a
Class I misdemeanor with a limit of $300 on the fine.



      (2)   Whoever falsely makes or willfully destroys a petition
or any part thereof, or signs a false name thereto, or signs or files any
petition knowing the same or any part thereof to be falsely made, or
suppresses any petition, or any part thereof, which has been duly filed,
pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2501 through 18-2531 shall be guilty of a Class I
misdemeanor with a limit of $500 on the fine.



      (3)   Whoever signs any petition under Neb. RS 18-2501 through
18-2531 knowing that he or she is not a registered voter in the place where
such petition is made, aids or abets any other person in doing any of the
acts mentioned in this division (B), bribes or gives or pays any money or
thing of value to any person directly or indirectly to induce him or her to
sign such petition, or engages in any deceptive practice intended to induce
any person to sign a petition, shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor with
a limit of $300 on the fine.



      (4)   Any Clerk who willfully refuses to comply with the
provisions of Neb. RS 18-2501 through 18-2531 or who willfully causes
unreasonable delay in the execution of his or her duties under such sections
shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor, but imprisonment shall not be
included as part of the punishment.



(1976 Code, § 1-1014)



(Ord. 690, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 757, passed 11-3-1983; Ord. 249, passed
11-8-1983; Ord. 1449, passed 12-23-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2532 through 18-2535



CHAPTER 33:  ELECTIONS



Section



   33.01   Generally



   33.02   Election of officers; certifications required



   33.03   Term of office



   33.04   Primary election; number of candidates filing



   33.05   Candidate filing forms; deadlines; filing officer



   33.06   Tie votes



   33.07   General elections; preparation of ballot



   33.08   Qualifications; terms



   33.09   Filing fee



   33.10   Joint, general; notice



   33.11   Special elections



   33.12   Petition, write-in and other candidates for general election
ballot



   33.13   Council members



   33.14   Voter qualifications



   33.15   Wards



   33.16   Ballots



   33.17   Inability to assume office



   33.18   Recall procedure



   33.19   Candidate qualifications



§ 33.01  GENERALLY.



   (A)   All municipal issues and offices shall be combined on the
statewide primary and general election ballots whenever possible. The
issuance of separate ballots shall be avoided in a statewide election if
municipal offices or issues can reasonably be combined with the non-partisan
ballot and state law does not require otherwise. All municipal elections
involving the election of officers shall be held in accordance with the
Election Act, being Neb. RS Ch. 32 and in conjunction with the statewide
primary or general election.



   (B)   When the municipality holds an election in conjunction with
the statewide primary or general election, the election shall be held as
provided in the Election Act, being Neb. RS Ch. 32. Any other election held
by the municipality shall be held as provided in the Election Act, being Neb.
RS Ch. 32 unless otherwise provided by the charter, code or bylaws of the
municipality.



(1976 Code, § 1-701)  (Ord. 558, passed 9-22-1977; Ord. 1356, passed
11-8-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 32-404, 32-556



§ 33.02  ELECTION OF OFFICERS; CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.



   No later than January 5 of each even-numbered year, the City Council
shall certify to the Election Commissioner or the County Clerk, on forms
prescribed by such official, the name of the city, the number of officers to
be elected, the length of the terms of office, the vacancies to be filled by
election and length of remaining term and the number of votes to be cast by a
registered voter for each office.



(1976 Code, § 1-701.01)  (Ord. 1356, passed 11-8-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 32-404



§ 33.03  TERM OF OFFICE.



   All elected officers of the municipality shall serve a term of four
years and until their successors are elected and have qualified.



(1976 Code, § 1-702)  (Ord. 666, passed 9-17-1981)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107.02(2)



§ 33.04  PRIMARY ELECTION; NUMBER OF CANDIDATES FILING.



   If the number of candidates properly filed for nomination at the
primary election does not exceed two for each vacancy to be filled, all
candidates properly filed shall be considered nominated and no primary
election for their nomination shall be required.



(1976 Code, § 1-703)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107.02(4)



§ 33.05  CANDIDATE FILING FORMS; DEADLINES; FILING OFFICER.



   (A)   (1)   Any candidate may place his or her name on the
primary election ballot by filing a candidate filing form prescribed by the
Secretary of State as provided in division (B) below. If a candidate is an
incumbent of any elective office, the filing period for filing the candidate
filing form shall be between December 1 and February 15 prior to the date of
the primary election. No incumbent who resigns from elective office prior to
the expiration of his or her term shall file for any office after February 15
of that election year.



      (2)   All other candidates shall file for office between
December 1 and March 1 prior to the date of the general election.



   (B)   Candidate filing forms shall be filed in the office of the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk.



(1976 Code, § 1-704)  (Ord. 1426B, passed 12-5-2011)



Statutory reference:



   Filling of vacancy on ballot, see Neb. RS 32-625, 32-627



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 32-606, 32-607



   Withdrawal after filing, see Neb. RS 32-622



§ 33.06  TIE VOTES.



   In the case of a tie vote of any of the candidates in either the
primary or general election, the County Clerk shall notify such candidates to
appear at his or her office on a given day and hour to determine the same by
lot before the canvassing board, and the certificate of nomination or
election shall be given accordingly. Notice to appear shall be given by
certified mail.



(1976 Code, § 1-705)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107.02(6)



§ 33.07  GENERAL ELECTIONS; PREPARATION OF BALLOT.



   (A)   When more than one person becomes a candidate by filing,
petition or write-in procedures for the same position in the primary, the
County Clerk, in preparing the official ballot for the general election shall
place thereon the names of the persons who received the greatest number of
votes in the primary, but in no event shall the names on the general election
ballot be more than twice the number of vacancies to be filled at the general
election.



   (B)   The County Clerk shall place the names of the candidates on
the general election ballot in the direct order according to the number of
votes received at the primary election. If no primary election was held, the
name of the candidates shall be placed upon the general election ballot in
the order of their filing.



(1976 Code, § 1-705)  (Ord. 667, passed 9-17-1981)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107.02(6), (7)



§ 33.08  QUALIFICATIONS; TERMS.



   (A)   The City Council shall consist of not less than four, nor more
than 12, residents of the city who are registered voters.



   (B)   All Council members shall be nominated and elected on a
non-partisan ballot unless the city provides for a partisan ballot by
ordinance.



   (C)   If members of the Council are not elected at large:



      (1)   Unless the city elects Council members at large as
provided in Neb. RS 32-554, the city shall be divided into not less than two,
nor more than six, wards, as provided by ordinance of the City Council. Each
ward shall contain, as nearly as practicable, an equal portion of the
population;



      (2)   Unless the city elects council members at large as
provided in Neb. RS 32-554, each ward of the city shall have at least two
Council members elected in the manner provided in the Election Act, being
Neb. RS Ch. 32. No person shall be eligible to the office of Council member
who is not at the time of the election an actual resident of the ward for
which he or she is elected and a registered voter; and



      (3)   Such wards shall be substantially equal in population as
determined by the most recent federal decennial census.



   (D)   The term of office shall begin on the first regular meeting of
the Council in December following the statewide general election.



   (E)   Members of the Council shall serve for terms of four years or
until their successors are elected and qualified.



   (F)   If the city operates under a city manager plan, members of the
City Council shall be residents and registered voters of the city and shall
hold no other employment with the city. Any Council member who ceases to
possess any of the qualification required by this section or who has been
convicted of a felony or of any public offense involving the violation of the
oath of office of such member while in office shall forthwith forfeit such
office.



(Ord. 1468, passed 2-6-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-102, 17-103, 17-104, 19-613, 32-533,
32-557



§ 33.09  FILING FEE.



   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (D) or (E) below, a filing fee
shall be paid to the City Treasurer by or on behalf of each candidate for
city office prior to filing for office. The fee shall be placed in the
General Fund of the city. No candidate filing forms shall be filed until the
proper payment or the proper receipt showing the payment of such filing fee
is presented to the filing officer. On the day of the filing deadline, the
City Treasurer’s office shall remain open to receive filing fees until the
hour of the filing deadline.



   (B)   Except as provided in divisions (D) or (E) below, the filing
fee shall be a sum equal to 1% of the annual salary as of November 30 of the
year preceding the election for the office for which he or she files as a
candidate.



   (C)   All declared write-in candidates shall pay the filing fees
that are required for the office at the time that they present the write-in
affidavit to the filing officer. Any undeclared write-in candidate who is
nominated or elected by write-in votes shall pay the filing fee required for
the office within ten days after the canvass of votes by the county’s
Canvassing Board and shall file the receipt with the person issuing the
certificate of nomination or the certificate of election prior to the
certificate being issued.



   (D)   No filing fee shall be required for any candidate filing for
an office in which a per diem is paid rather than a salary or for which there
is a salary of less than $500 per year.



   (E)   (1)   No filing fee shall be required of any candidate
completing an affidavit requesting to file for elective office in forma
pauperis.



      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         AVAILABLE RESOURCES. Includes every type of property or
interest in property that an individual owns and may convert into cash,
except:



            1.   Real property used as a home;



            2.   Household goods of a moderate value used in
the home; and



            3.   Assets to a maximum value of $3,000 used by a
recipient in a planned effort directed towards self-support.



         PAUPER. A person whose income and other resources for
maintenance are found under assistance standards to be insufficient for
meeting the cost of his or her requirements and whose reserve of cash or
other available resources does not exceed the maximum available resources
than an eligible individual may own.



   (F)   If any candidate dies prior to an election, the spouse of the
candidate may file a claim for refund of the filing fee with the City Council
prior to the date of the election. Upon approval of the claim by the City
Council, the filing fee shall be refunded.



(1976 Code, § 1-708)  (Ord. 1418, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1455B, passed
2-9-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 32-608



§ 33.10  JOINT, GENERAL; NOTICE.



   (A)   The County Clerk shall publish in a newspaper designated by
the County Board the notice of the election no less than 40 days prior to the
primary or general election.



   (B)   This notice will serve the notice requirement for all
municipal elections which are held in conjunction with the county.



(1976 Code, § 1-709)  (Ord. 536, passed 4-21-1977)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 32-402.01



§ 33.11  SPECIAL ELECTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 77-3444, any issue to
be submitted to the registered voters at a special election by the city shall
be certified by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
at least 50 days prior to the election. A special election may be held by
mail as provided in Neb. RS 32-952 through 32-959 RS Neb. Any other special
election shall be subject to division (B) below.



      (2)   In lieu of submitting the issue at a special election,
the city may submit the issue at a statewide primary or general election or
at any scheduled county election; except that, no such issue shall be
submitted at a statewide election or scheduled county election unless the
issue to be submitted has been certified by the City Clerk to the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk by March 1 for the primary election and by
September 1 for the general election.



      (3)   After the Election Commissioner or County Clerk has
received the certification of the issue to be submitted, he or she shall be
responsible for all matters relating to the submission of the issue to the
registered voters; except that, the City Clerk shall be responsible for the
publication or posting of any required special notice of the submission of
such issue other than the notice required to be given of the statewide
election issues. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare the
ballots and issue ballots for early voting and shall also conduct the
submission of the issue, including the receiving and counting of ballots on
the issue. The election returns shall be made to the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk. The ballots shall be counted and canvassed at the same time and
in the same manner as the other ballots. Upon completion of the canvass of
the vote by the county’s Canvassing Board, the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk shall certify the election results to the City Council. The
canvass by the county’s Canvassing Board shall have the same force and
effect as if made by the City Council.



   (B)   (1)   Any special election under the Election Act, being
Neb. RS Ch. 32 shall be held on the first Tuesday following the second Monday
of the selected month unless otherwise specifically provided.



      (2)   No special election shall be held under the Election
Act, being Neb. RS Ch. 32 in April, May, June, October, November or December
of an even-numbered year unless it is held in conjunction with the statewide
primary or general election.



(1976 Code, § 1-710)  (Ord. 753, passed 9-6-1984; Ord. 1346, passed
11-8-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 32-405, 32-559



§ 33.12  PETITION, WRITE-IN AND OTHER CANDIDATES FOR GENERAL ELECTION
BALLOT.



   (A)   (1)   Any registered voter who was not a candidate in the
primary election and who was not registered to vote with a party affiliation
on or after March 1 and before the general election in the calendar year of
the general election may have his or her name placed on the general election
ballot for a partisan office by filing petitions as prescribed in the section
and Neb. RS 32-621 or by nomination by political party convention or
committee pursuant to Neb. RS 32-627 or 32-710.



      (2)   Any candidate who was defeated in the primary election
and any registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary election may
have his or her name placed on the general election ballot if a vacancy exits
on the ballot under Neb. RS 32-625(2) and the candidate files for the office
by petition as prescribed in divisions (B) and (C) of this section, files as
a write-in candidate as prescribed in Neb. RS 32-615, or is nominated by
political party convention or committee pursuant to Neb. RS 32-710.



   (B)   (1)   Petitions for nomination shall conform to the
requirements of Neb. RS 32-628. Petitions shall state the office to be filled
and the name and address of the candidate. Petitions for partisan office
shall also indicate the party affiliation of the candidate.



      (2)   A sample copy of the petition shall be filed with the
filing officer prior to circulation. Petitions shall be signed by registered
voters residing in the city, if candidates are chosen at large, or in the
ward in which the officer is to be elected, if candidates are chosen by ward,
and shall be filed with the filing officer in the same manner as provided for
candidate filing forms in Neb. RS 32-606.



      (3)   Petition signers and petition circulators shall conform
to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630.



      (4)   No petition for nomination shall be filed unless there
is attached thereto a receipt showing the payment of the filing fee required
pursuant to Neb. RS 32-608. The petitions shall be filled by September 1 in
the year of the general election.



   (C)   (1)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed
to place the name of a candidate upon the non-partisan ballot for the general
election shall be at least 10% of the total number of registered voters
voting for Governor or President of the United States at the immediately
preceding general election in the city or in the ward in which the officer is
to be elected, not to exceed 2,000.



      (2)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to
place the name of a candidate for an office upon the partisan ballot for the
general election shall be at least 10% of the registered voters entitled to
vote for the office.



(1976 Code, § 1-712)  (Ord. 753, passed 9-6-1984; Ord. 1426B, passed
12-5-2011; Ord. 1455B, passed 2-9-2015; Ord. 1468, passed 2-6-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 32-616, 32-617, 32-618



§ 33.13  COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   (A)   Council members shall be elected from the municipality at
large unless the residents of the municipality have voted to elect its
Council members by wards. Council members shall serve for a term of four
years and shall be a resident and qualified elector.



   (B)   If the election of Council members takes place by wards, each
nominee for Council member shall be a resident and qualified elector of the
ward for which he or she is a candidate and only residents of that ward may
sign the candidate’s nomination petitions.



(1976 Code, § 1-713)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 5-108



§ 33.14  VOTER QUALIFICATIONS.



   ELECTORS shall mean every person of the constitutionally prescribed age
or upwards, who shall have the right to vote for all officers to be elected
to public office and, upon all questions and proposals, lawfully submitted to
the voters at any and all elections authorized or provided for by the
Constitution or the laws of the state, except school elections; provided, no
person shall be qualified to vote at any election unless such person shall be
a resident of the state and shall have been properly registered with the
election official of the county.



(1976 Code, § 1-714)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-602, 32-102



§ 33.15  WARDS.



   (A)   The municipality shall redistrict as often as necessary using
the most recent Federal Census to ensure that each ward is substantially
equal in population.



   (B)   The municipality shall stand divided into the following wards
as set forth herein:



      (1)   First Ward. The part of the municipality lying east of
the centerline of F Street to the east corporate limits; and



      (2)   Second Ward. The part of the municipality lying west of
the centerline of F Street to the west corporate limits.



(1976 Code, § 1-716)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-102



§ 33.16  BALLOTS.



   The County Clerk shall provide printed ballots for every general
municipal election and the expense of printing and delivering the ballots and
cards of instruction shall be a charge upon the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 1-717)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 32-417, 32-418



§ 33.17  INABILITY TO ASSUME OFFICE.



   In any general election, where the person who received the highest
number of votes is ineligible, disqualified, deceased or for any other reason
is unable to assume the office for which he or she was a candidate, and the
electorate had reasonable notice of such disability at the time of the
election, the candidate in such election who received the next highest number
of votes shall be declared elected, and shall be entitled to the certificate
of election; provided that, any candidate so declared elected received not
less than 35% of the total number of votes cast for such office in the
election. If any of the qualifications of this section are not met by the
candidate to be declared elected, or reasonable notice of the winners
ineligibility is not available to the voters, a vacancy in such office shall
be declared to exist at the time of commencement of the term and shall be
filled as prescribed by law.



(1976 Code, § 1-718)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 32-537(7), (8)



§ 33.18  RECALL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The FILING CLERK is the Election Commissioner or County Clerk.



   (B)   Any member of the governing body may be removed from office by
recall pursuant to this section.



   (C)   (1)   A petition demanding that the question of removing a
member of the governing body be submitted to the registered voters shall be
signed by registered voters equal in number to a least 45% of the total vote
cast for the person receiving the most votes for that office in the last
general election. The signatures shall be affixed to petition papers and
shall be considered part of the petition.



      (2)   Petition circulators shall conform to the requirements
of Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630.



      (3)   The petition papers shall be procured from the Filing
Clerk. Prior to the issuance of such petition papers, an affidavit shall be
signed and filed with the Filing Clerk by at least one registered voter. Such
voter or voters shall be deemed to be the principal circulator or circulators
of the recall petition. The affidavit shall state the name and office of the
Council member sought to be removed, shall include in typewritten form in
concise language of 60 words or less the reason or reasons for which the
recall is sought, and shall request that the filing Clerk issue initial
petition papers to the principal circulator for circulation. The Filing Clerk
shall notify the Council member by any method specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01
or, if notification cannot be made with reasonable diligence by any of the
methods specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01, by leaving a copy of the affidavit at
the Council member’s usual place of residence and mailing a copy of first
class mail to the Council member’s last-known address. If the Council
member chooses, he or she may submit a defense statement in typewritten form
in concise language of 60 words or less for inclusion on the petition. Any
such defense statement shall be submitted to the filing Clerk within 20 days
after the Council member receives the copy of the affidavit. The principal
circulator or circulators shall gather the petition papers within 20 days
after the receipt of the official’s defense statement. The Filing Clerk
shall notify the principal circulator or circulators that the necessary
signatures must be gathered within 30 days from the date of issuing the
petitions.



      (4)   The Filing Clerk, upon issuing the initial petition
papers or any subsequent petition papers, shall enter in a record, to be kept
in his or her office, the name of the principal circulator or circulators to
whom the papers were issued, the date of issuance and the number of papers
issued. The Filing Clerk shall certify on the papers the name of the
principal circulator or circulators to whom the papers were issued and the
date they were issued. No petition paper shall be accepted as part of the
petition unless it bears such certificate. The principal circulator or
circulators who check out petitions from the Filing Clerk may distribute such
petitions to persons who may act as circulators of such petitions.



      (5)   Petition signers shall conform to the requirements of
Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630. Each signer of a recall petition shall be a
registered voter and qualified by his or her place of residence to vote for
the office in question.



   (D)   Each petition paper shall conform to the requirements of Neb.
RS 32-1304.



   (E)   (1)   The principal circulator or circulators shall file as
one instrument, all petition papers comprising a recall petition for
signature verification with the Filing Clerk within 30 days after the Filing
Clerk issues the initial petition papers to the principal circulator or
circulators as provided in division (C) above.



      (2)   Within 15 days after the filing of the petition, the
Filing Clerk shall ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the
requisite number of register voters. No new signatures may be added after the
initial filing of the petition papers. No signatures may be removed unless
the Filing Clerk receives an affidavit signed by the person requesting his or
her signature be removed before the petitions are filed with the Filing Clerk
for signature verification. If the petition is found to be sufficient, the
Filing Clerk shall attach to the petition a certificate showing the result of
such examination. If the requisite number of signatures has been gathered,
the Filing Clerk shall file the petition in his or her office without
prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.



   (F)   (1)   If the recall petition is found to be sufficient, the
Filing Clerk shall notify the Council member whose removal is sought and the
governing body that sufficient signatures have been gathered. Notification of
the Council member may be by any method specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01 or, if
notification cannot be made with reasonable diligence by any of the methods
specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01, by leaving such notice at the Council
member’s usual place of residence and mailing a copy by first class mail to
the Council member’s last-known address.



      (2)   The governing body shall order an election to be held
not less than 30, nor more than 75, days after the notification of the
Council member whose removal is sought under division (F)(1) above; except
that, if any other election is to be held in the city with 90 days after such
notification, the Council shall provide for the holding of the recall
election on the same day. All resignations shall be tendered as provided in
Neb. RS 32-562. If the Council member whose removal is sought resigns before
the recall election is held, the Council may cancel the recall election if
the Council notifies the Election Commissioner or County Clerk of the
cancellation at least 16 days prior to the election; otherwise, the recall
election shall be held as scheduled.



      (3)   If the governing body fails or refuses to order a recall
election within the time required, the election may be ordered by the
District Court having jurisdiction over a county in which the Council member
serves. If a Filing Clerk is subject to a recall election, the Secretary of
State shall conduct the recall election.



   (G)   The form of the official ballot at a recall election held
pursuant to division (F) above shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS
32-1307.



   (H)   (1)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election
are against the removal of the Council member named on the ballot or the
election results in a tie, the Council member shall continue in office for
the remainder of his or her term, but may be subject to further recall
attempts as provided in division (I) below.



      (2)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are
for the removal of the Council member named on the ballot, he or she shall,
regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed
from office unless a recount is ordered. If the Council member is deemed
removed, the removal shall result in a vacancy in the office which shall be
filled as otherwise provided in this section and Neb. RS 32-567 to 32-570 and
32-574.



      (3)   If the election results show a margin of votes equal to
1% or less between the removal or retention of the Council member in
question, the Secretary of State, Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall
order a recount of the votes cast unless the Council member files a written
statement with the Filing Clerk that he or she does not want a recount.



      (4)   If there are vacancies in the offices of one-half or
more of the members of the governing body at one time due to the recall of
such members, a special election to fill such vacancies shall be conducted as
expeditiously as possible by the Secretary of State, Election Commissioner or
County Clerk.



      (5)   No Council member who is removed at a recall election or
who resigns after the initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to
fill the vacancy resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any
other member of the governing body during the remainder of his or her term of
office.



      (6)   No recall petition shall be filed against an elected
Council member within 12 months after a recall election has failed to remove
him or her from office or within six months after the beginning of his or her
term of office or within six months prior to the incumbent filing deadline
for the office.



(1976 Code, § 1-719)  (Ord. 1426B, passed 12-5-2011; Ord. 1461, passed
2-8-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 32-1301, 32-1302, 32-1303, 32-1309



§ 33.19  CANDIDATE QUALIFICATIONS.



   Any person seeking elected office in the municipality shall be a
registered voter prior to holding such office and in addition shall have
reached the age of majority. The Mayor and members of the Council shall be
residents and qualified electors of the city. They shall not hold any other
public elective public office, except for officers of public power districts,
public power and irrigation districts and public utility companies.



(1976 Code, § 1-720)  (Ord. 753, passed 9-6-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-108.02



CHAPTER 34:  PUBLIC SAFETY



Section




Fire Department




   34.01   Operation and funding



   34.02   Fire Chief



   34.03   Rescue Squad Chief



   34.04   Membership



   34.05   Fire; distant fires



   34.06   Preservation of property



   34.07   Impersonating firefighters



   34.08   Mandatory assistance



   34.09   Power of arrest



   34.10   Fire investigations




Police Department




   34.25   Duties



   34.26   Reserve officer bond



   34.27   Arrest and enforcement jurisdiction



   34.28   Police officers; discipline



 



   34.99   Penalty




FIRE DEPARTMENT




§ 34.01  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   (A)   The municipality operates the Municipal Fire Department
through the Municipal Fire Chief and firefighters. The governing body, for
the purpose of defraying the cost of the management, maintenance and
improving the Fire Department may each year levy a tax not exceeding the
maximum limits prescribed by state law, on the actual valuation of all real
estate and personal property within the municipality that is subject to
taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Fire Department
Fund. The Fund shall be at all times the possession of the Municipal
Treasurer.



   (B)   In addition to the above, the Fire Department is authorized to
enter into agreement with the appropriate Rural Fire District for the mutual
aid and protection of the residents of both the municipality and the Rural
Fire District.



(1976 Code, § 3-301)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-147, 17-718, 17-953



§ 34.02  FIRE CHIEF.



   The Fire Chief shall manage the Fire Department and it shall be his or
her duty to inform the governing body when any of the fire engines, hose,
ladders or other apparatus needs repair. Upon the written consent and
directive of the governing body, the Fire Chief shall cause the repair,
improvement or maintenance of the said equipment and shall personally
supervise and approve of the same. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to
come before the governing body at the regular meeting in January of each year
to give an annual report to the governing body of the general condition and
the proposed additions or improvements recommended by him or her.



(1976 Code, § 3-302)



§ 34.03  RESCUE SQUAD CHIEF.



   The Rescue Squad Chief shall manage the rescue squad and it shall be
his or her duty to inform the governing body when any of the emergency units
need repair or replacement. Upon the written consent and directive of the
governing body, the Rescue Squad Chief shall cause the repair, improvement or
maintenance of the equipment of the rescue squad and shall personally
supervise and approve the same. It shall be the duty of the Rescue Squad
Chief to come before the governing body at the regular meeting in January of
each year to give an annual report to the governing body of the general
condition of said equipment and the proposed additions or improvements
recommended by him or her, and further to report on the activities of the
rescue squad for the previous year.



(1976 Code, § 3-302.01)  (Ord. 1113, passed 8-8-1994)



§ 34.04  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of so many members as maybe
decided by the City Council. The members may organize themselves in any way
they may decide, subject to the review of the City Council. The Fire Chief
shall appoint no more than 25 members for each Fire Department company
subject to the review and approval of the City Council. All vacancies shall
be filled in this manner.



   (B)   All members of the Fire Department shall be subject to such
rules and regulations, and shall perform such duties, as may be prescribed or
required of them by the Fire Chief or the City Council. The members of the
Fire Department shall, during the time of a fire or great public danger, have
and exercise the powers and duties of police officers and shall have full
power and authority to arrest all persons guilty of any violation of the
municipal code or the laws of the state.



   (C)   Members of the Fire Department may hold meetings and engage in
social activities with the approval of the City Council. The Secretary shall,
upon request, keep a record of all meetings and shall make a report to the
City Council of all meetings and activities of the Fire Department.



   (D)   Members of the Fire Department shall be considered to be
employees of the city for the purpose of providing them with worker’s
compensation and other benefits, but for no other purposes whatsoever. The
City Council may compensate or reimburse any member of the Fire Department
for expenses incurred in carrying out his or her duties in an amount set by
resolution.



   (E)   The City Council shall purchase and maintain in force a policy
of group term life insurance to age 65 covering the lives of all of the
city’s active volunteer fire and rescue personnel; except that, when any
such person serves more than one municipality or rural or suburban fire
protection district, the policy shall be purchased only by the first
municipality or district which he or she serves. The policy shall provide a
minimum death benefit of $10,000 for death from any cause and shall, at the
option of the insured, be convertible to a permanent form of life insurance
at age 65. The coverage of such policy shall terminate as to any individual
who ceases to be an active volunteer member of the Fire Department of the
city.



   (F)   For purposes of Neb. RS 33-139.01, volunteer firefighters and
rescue squad members testifying as witnesses in that capacity alone shall not
be deemed employees of the city.



(1976 Code, § 3-303)  (Ord. 1344, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 1455A, passed
11-24-2014)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 33-139.01, 35-108, 35-109



§ 34.05  FIRE; DISTANT FIRES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to use all proper
means for the extinguishment of fires, to protect property within the
municipality; and to secure the observance of all ordinances, laws and other
rules and regulations with respect to fires and fire prevention.



(1976 Code, § 3-304)



   (B)   Upon the permission of the Mayor or Fire Chief, such fire
equipment of the municipality as may be designated by the governing body as
rural equipment may be used beyond the corporate limits to extinguish
reported fires.



(1976 Code, § 3-305)



   (C)   The firefighters of the municipality shall be considered as
acting in the performance and within the scope of their duties in fighting
fire or saving property or life outside the corporate limits of the
municipality when directed to do so by the Mayor or Chief of the Fire
Department or some person authorized to act for such Chief and in so doing
may take such fire equipment of the municipality as may be designated by the
governing body.



(1976 Code, § 3-306)



§ 34.06  PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.



   Any official of the Municipal Fire Department shall have the power
during the time of a fire to cause the removal of any private or public
property whenever it shall become necessary to do so for the preservation of
such property from fire, to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect
adjoining property. The said officials may direct the hook and ladder men to
remove any building, erection or fence for the purpose of checking the
progress of any fire, and the official in charge of the firefighting effort
shall have the power to blow up, or cause to be blown up, with powder or
otherwise, any building or erection during the progress of a fire for the
purpose of extinguishing or checking the same.



(1976 Code, § 3-307)



§ 34.07  IMPERSONATING FIREFIGHTERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely personate a fireman by
wearing a badge or other apparel usually worn by a firefighter for the
purpose of obtaining any benefit whatsoever. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the theatrical representation of a fireman for bona
fide entertainment purposes when there is no intent to fraud.



(1976 Code, § 3-308)  Penalty, see § 34.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1219



§ 34.08  MANDATORY ASSISTANCE.



   Any official of the Municipal Fire Department may command the
assistance and services of any person present at a fire to help in
extinguishing the fire, or in the removal and protection of property. In the
event that a spectator refuses, neglects or fails to assist the Fire
Department after a lawful order to do so, he or she shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor.



(1976 Code, § 3-309)  Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.09  POWER OF ARREST.



   The Municipal Fire Chief or the Assistant Fire Chief shall have the
power during the time of a fire and for a period of 36 hours after its
extinguishment, to arrest any suspected arsonist, or other person hindering
or resisting the firefighting effort, or any person who conducts himself or
herself in a noisy or disorderly manner. The said officials shall be
severally vested with the usual powers and authority of municipal police
officers to command all persons to assist them in the performance of their
duties.



(1976 Code, § 3-310)



§ 34.10  FIRE INVESTIGATIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to investigate or cause to
be investigated, the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring
in the municipality in which property has been destroyed or damaged. All
fires of unknown origin shall be reported, and such officers shall especially
make an investigation and report as to whether such fire was the result of
carelessness, accident or design. Such investigation shall be begun within
two days of the occurrence of such fire and the state’s Fire Marshal shall
have the right to supervise and direct the investigation whenever he deems it
expedient or necessary. The officer making the investigation of fires
occurring within the municipality shall immediately notify the state’s Fire
Marshal and shall, within one week of the occurrence of the fire, furnish him
or her with a written statement of all the facts relating to the cause and
origin of the fire, and such further information as he or she may call for.



(1976 Code, § 3-311)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 81-506




POLICE DEPARTMENT




§ 34.25  DUTIES.



   The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such
further number of regular policemen as may be duly ordered by resolution of
the Council. The Chief of Police shall, subject to the direction of the
Mayor, have control and management of all matters relating to the Police
Department, its officers and members and shall have the custody and control
of all property and books belonging to the Department. He or she shall devote
his or her whole time to the municipal affairs, interests of the
municipality, and to the preservation of peace, order, safety and cleanliness
thereof. The Department shall execute and enforce all laws and also the
orders of the Mayor. It shall be the duty of the Department to protect the
rights of persons and property. There shall be a proper police force at all
fires. The Department shall take notice of all nuisances, impediments,
obstructions and defects in the streets, avenues, alleys, business places and
residences of the municipality. The Department shall execute, or cause to be
executed, the processes issued and shall cause all persons arrested to be
brought before the proper court for trial as speedily as possible. The Chief
of Police and all regular and special police officers shall become thoroughly
conversant with the laws of the municipality, and shall see that the same are
strictly enforced and shall make sworn complaints against any person or
persons for violation of the same.



(1976 Code, § 3-401)



§ 34.26  RESERVE OFFICER BOND.



   No appointment of a law enforcement reserve officer shall be valid
until a bond in the amount of $2,000, payable to the city, has been filed
with the Municipal Clerk by the individual appointed, or a blanket surety
bond arranged and paid for by the governing body and bonding all such
officers of the governing body has been filed. Such bonds shall be subject to
the provisions of Neb. RS Ch. 11, Art. 1.



(1976 Code, § 3-402)  (Ord. 912, passed 10-20-1986)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 81-1444



§ 34.27  ARREST AND ENFORCEMENT JURISDICTION.



   (A)   The police officers of the city shall have the power to,
arrest all offenders against the laws of the state or of the city, by day or
by night, in the same manner as the County Sheriff and to keep such offenders
in the city prison, county jail or other place of confinement to prevent
their escape until trial can be had before the proper officer.



   (B)   Every city law enforcement officer has the power and authority
to enforce the laws of the state and the city or otherwise perform the
functions of that officer anywhere within his or her jurisdiction.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER IN NEED OF ASSISTANCE.



         (a)   A law enforcement officer whose life is in danger;
or



         (b)   A law enforcement officer who needs assistance in
making an arrest and the suspect:



            1.   Will not be apprehended unless immediately
arrested;



            2.   May cause injury to himself or herself or
others or damage to property unless immediately arrested; or



            3.   May destroy or conceal evidence of the
commission of a crime.



      PRIMARY JURISDICTION. The geographic area within territorial
limits of the city.



   (D)   Any city law enforcement officer who is within the state, but
beyond his or her primary jurisdiction, has the power and authority to
enforce the laws of the state or any legal ordinance of any city or
incorporated village or otherwise perform the functions of his or her office,
including the authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if enforcing the
laws or performing the functions within his or her primary jurisdiction in
the following cases:



      (1)   Any city law enforcement officer, if in a fresh
attemptto apprehend a person suspected of committing a felony, may follow
that person into any other jurisdiction in the state and there arrest and
detain that person and return that person to the officer’s primary
jurisdiction;



      (2)   Any city law enforcement officer, if ina fresh attempt
to apprehend a person suspected of committing a misdemeanor or a traffic
infraction, may follow that person anywhere in an area within 25 miles of the
boundaries of the officer’s primary jurisdiction and there arrest and
detain that person and return that person to the officer’s primary
jurisdiction;



      (3)   Any city law enforcement officer has this enforcement
and arrest and detention authority when responding to a call in which a
local, state or federal law enforcement officer is in need of assistance; and



      (4)   If the city, under the provisions of the Interlocal
Cooperation Act, being Neb. RS 13-801 through 13-827 or the Joint Public
Agency Act, being Neb. RS 13-2501 through 13-2550, enters into a contract
with any other city or county for law enforcement services or joint law
enforcement services, law enforcement personnel may have this enforcement
authority within the jurisdiction of each of the participating political
subdivisions if provided for in the agreement. Unless otherwise provided in
the agreement, the city shall provide liability insurance coverage for its
own law enforcement personnel as provided in Neb. RS 13-1802.



   (E)   When probable cause exists to believe that a person is
operating or in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle, motorboat,
personal watercraft or aircraft while under the influence of alcohol liquor
or of any drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. RS 28-1465, 28-1466,
28-1472, 37-1254.01, 37-1254.05, 60-4,163, 60-4,164, 60-6,196, 60-6,197,
60-6,211.01 or 60-6,211.02, a city law enforcement officer has the power and
authority to do any of the following or any combination thereof:



      (1)   Transport that person to a facility outside of the law
enforcement officer’s primary jurisdiction for appropriate chemical testing
of the person;



      (2)   Administer outside of the law enforcement officer’s
primary jurisdiction any post-arrest test advisement to the person; or



      (3)   With respect to that person, perform other procedures or
functions outside of the law enforcement officer’s primary jurisdiction
which are directly and solely related to enforcing the laws that concern a
person operating or being in the actual physical control of any motor
vehicle, motorboat, or aircraft while under the influence of alcohol liquor
or of any other drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. RS 28-1465, 28-1466,
28-1472, 37-1254,01, 37-1254.02, 60-4,163, 60-4,164, 60-6,196, 60-6,197,
60-6,211.01 or 60-6,211.02.



   (F)   If city law enforcement personnel are rendering aid in their
law enforcement capacity outside the limits of the city in the event of
disaster, emergency or civil defense emergency or in connection with any
program of practice or framing for a disaster, emergency or civil defense
emergency when that program is conducted or participated in by the state’s
Emergency Management Agency or with any other related training program, the
law enforcement personnel have the power and authority to enforce the laws of
this state or any legal ordinance or resolution of the local government where
they are rendering aid or otherwise perform the functions of their office,
including the authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if enforcing the
laws or performing the functions within their primary jurisdiction. The city
shall self-insure or contract for insurance against any liability for
personal injuries or property damage that may be incurred by it or by its
personnel as the result of any movement made pursuant to this division (F).



(1976 Code, § 3-403)  (Ord. 1345, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 1426B, passed
12-5-2011; Ord. 1479, passed 2-5-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-118, 81-829.65



§ 34.28  POLICE OFFICERS; DISCIPLINE.



   (A)   The Mayor of the city shall have the authority to discipline
or remove, at any time, any police officer or Chief of Police employed by the
city when the Mayor has such facts and evidence as to warrant such action and
the Mayor deems the action necessary for the proper management and the
effective operation of the Police Department in the performance of its duties
under the laws of the state.



   (B)   At the time of imposing disciplinary action or the removal of
an officer or Chief of Police, the Mayor shall inform the officer or the
Chief of Police verbally and in writing, the reasons for such action and of
the right to, and procedures for, appealing the decision of the Mayor to the
City Council.



   (C)   The officer or Chief of Police shall have ten days from the
date of the above action to file a formal written appeal in the office of the
City Clerk. The written appeal shall set out in detail the grounds for
challenging the decision of the Mayor. The ten-day period shall start to run
the day after discipline or removal is imposed. If the tenth day is a
non-working day, the next working day shall be the final day to file an
appeal. Upon receipt of the appeal documents, the City Clerk shall place the
matter on the City Council agenda for the next available meeting. Pending
hearing before the Council and determination of the issue, all suspensions or
terminations shall be with pay.



   (D)   An appeal hearing shall be held before the Council, which
shall be in open session unless the officer or Chief of Police shall request
otherwise. The City Attorney shall at all times represent the Mayor during
all stages of the proceedings, unless the City Attorney determines that
representation of the Mayor would pose a conflict of interest for the City
Attorney. In such a case, the Mayor shall hire independent counsel. The City
Council may hire independent counsel. Strict rules of evidence shall not be
followed. The appealing party may be represented by an attorney at all
stages. The City Attorney shall present the evidence and reasons for the
disciplinary action or removal for the Mayor. The appealing party or counsel
shall present all evidence and reasons challenging the decision of the Mayor.
All proceedings before the City Council shall be recorded.



   (E)   The City Council shall have 30 days after the hearing to
uphold, reverse or modify the removal or disciplinary action. If the Council
fails to so act within 30 days, or a majority of the elected Council members
do not vote to reverse or modify the removal or disciplinary action, it shall
be construed as a vote to uphold the removal of disciplinary action of the
Mayor.



   (F)   The decision of the City Council shall be based upon its
determination that, under the facts and evidence presented at the hearing,
the challenged removal or disciplinary action was necessary for the proper
management and the effective operation of the Police Department in the
performance of its duties under the statutes of the state.



   (G)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the
preemptory suspension or immediate removal from duty of an officer or the
Chief of Police by the Mayor, pending the hearing authorized herein, in cases
of gross misconduct, neglect of duty or disobedience or orders.



   (H)   Because of the time constraints involved, the President of the
City Council, upon receipt of the appeal, is authorized to consult with and
retain independent counsel if the President deems it advisable. Independent
counsel shall be retained only for purposes of the proceedings covered in
this section.



(1976 Code, § 3-404)  (Ord. 1184, passed 1-8-1996)



§ 34.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such
failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 3-1201)  (Ord. 1449, passed 12-23-2013)



CHAPTER 35:  FINANCE AND REVENUE



Section




General Provisions




   35.01   Economic Development Plan




Fiscal Management




   35.15   Definitions



   35.16   Proposed budget statement; contents; availability; correction



   35.17   Proposed budget statement; hearing; adoption; certification
of tax



   35.18   Property tax levy; maximum; authority to exceed



   35.19   Adopted budget statement; expenditures prior to budget
adoption



   35.20   Revisions of budget



   35.21   Budget procedure



   35.22   Appropriations



   35.23   General property tax



   35.24   Expenditures



   35.25   Contracts and purchases; bidding and other requirements



   35.26   Annual audit



   35.27   Claims



   35.28   Warrants



   35.29   Transfer of funds



   35.30   Special Assessment Fund



   35.31   Sinking funds



   35.32   General Fund



   35.33   Deposit, investment of funds



   35.34   Bond issues



   35.35   Motor vehicle tax



   35.36   Transfer of funds by Board of Public Works to General Fund




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 35.01  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   The city’s Economic Development Plan, and any and all amendments, are
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Ord. 1469, passed 6-19-2017; Ord. 1471, passed 6-19-2017; Ord. 1476, passed
1-8-2018)




FISCAL MANAGEMENT




§ 35.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BIENNIAL BUDGET. A budget by the city that provides for a biennial
period to determine and carry on the city’s financial and taxing affairs.



   BIENNIAL PERIOD. The two fiscal years comprising a biennium commencing
in odd-numbered or even-numbered years used by the city in determining and
carrying on its financial and taxing affairs.



   FISCAL YEAR. The fiscal year of the municipality and any public utility
of the municipality commences on October 1 and extends through the following
September 30, except as provided in the Municipal Proprietary Function Act,
being Neb. RS 18-2801 through 18-2808.



   PUBLIC FUNDS. All money, including non-tax money, used in the operation
and functions of governing bodies. If the city has a lottery established
under the state’s County and City Lottery Act, being Neb. RS 9-601 to
9-653, only those net proceeds which are actually received by the city from a
licensed lottery operator shall be considered PUBLIC FUNDS and PUBLIC FUNDS
shall not include amounts awarded as prizes.



(1976 Code, § 1-801)  (Ord. 1187, passed 1-22-1996; Ord. 1438, passed
12-23-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 13-503, 17-701



§ 35.16  PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; CONTENTS; AVAILABILITY; CORRECTION.



   (A)   The City Council shall, annually or biennially, prepare a
proposed budget statement on forms prescribed and furnished by the Auditor of
Public Accounts. The proposed budget statement shall be made available to the
public prior to publication of the notice of the hearing on the proposed
budget statement pursuant to Neb. RS 31-506. A proposed budget statement
shall contain the following information, except as provided by state law:



      (1)   For the immediately preceding fiscal year or biennial
period, the revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other
than revenue received from personal and real property taxation, allocated to
the funds and separately stated as to each such source: the encumbered cash
balance at the beginning and end of the year or biennial period; the amount
received by taxation of personal and real property; and the amount of actual
expenditures;



      (2)   For the current fiscal year or biennial period, actual
and estimated revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes,
allocated to the funds and separately stated as to each such source: the
actual unencumbered cash balance available at the beginning of the year or
biennial period; the amount received from personal and real property
taxation; and the amount of actual and estimated expenditures, whichever is
applicable. This statement shall contain the cash reserve for each fiscal
year or biennial period and shall not whether or not the reserve is
encumbered. The cash reserve projections shall be based upon the actual
experience of prior years or biennial periods. The cash reserve shall not
exceed 50% of the total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;



      (3)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year or biennial
period, an estimate of revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle
taxes, other than revenue to be received from taxation of personal and real
property, separately stated as to each such source: the actual or estimated
unencumbered cash balances, whichever is applicable, to be available at the
beginning of the year or biennial period; the amounts proposed to be expended
during the year or biennial period; and the amount of cash reserve shall not
exceed 50% of the total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;



      (4)   A statement setting out separately the amount sought to
be raised from the levy of a tax on the taxable value of real property:



         (a)   For the purpose of paying the principal or
interest on bonds issued by the City Council; and



         (b)   For all other purposes.



      (5)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement
including each proprietary function fund included in a separate proprietary
budget statement prepared pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act,
being Neb. RS 18-2801 through 18-2808, and a grand total of all funds
maintained by the City Council; and



      (6)   A list of the proprietary functions which are not
included in the budget statement. These proprietary functions shall have a
separate budget statement which is approved by the City Council as provided
in the Municipal Proprietary Function Act, being Neb. RS 18-2801 through
18-2808.



   (B)   The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance required to
be included in the budget statement by this section shall include deposits
and investments of the city as well as any funds held by the County Treasurer
for the city and shall be accurately stated on the proposed budget statement.



   (C)   The City shall correct any material errors in the budget
statement detected by the Auditor of Public Accounts or by other sources.



   (D)   The estimated expenditures, plus the required cash reserve,
for the ensuing fiscal year or biennial period less all estimated and actual
unencumbered balances at the beginning of the year or biennial period and
less the estimated income from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes,
other than taxation of personal and real property shall equal the amount to
be received from taxes and that amount shall be shown on the proposed budget
statement pursuant to this section. The amount to be raised from taxation of
personal and real property, as determined above, plus the estimated revenue
from other sources, including motor vehicle taxes, and the unencumbered
balances shall equal the estimated expenditures, plus the necessary required
cash reserve, for the ensuing year or biennial period.



(1976 Code, § 1-802)  (Ord. 754, passed 9-6-1984; Ord. 1122, passed
2-6-1995; Ord. 1439, passed 12-23-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 13-504, 13-505



§ 35.17  PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; HEARING; ADOPTION; CERTIFICATION OF TAX.



   (A)   The governing body shall each year or biennial period conduct
a public hearing on its proposed budget statement. Notice of the place and
time of the hearing, together with a summary of the proposed budget
statement, shall be published four calendar days prior to the date set for
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality’s
jurisdiction. For the purposes of such notice, the four calendar days shall
include the day of publication, but not the day of hearing. When the total
operating budget, not including reserves, does not exceed $10,000 per year or
$20,000 per biennial period, the proposed budget summary maybe posted at the
governing body’s principal headquarters.



   (B)   After the hearing, the proposed budget statement shall be
adopted, or amended and adopted as amended, and a written record shall be
kept of the hearing. The amount to be received from personal and real
property taxation shall be certified to the levying board after the proposed
budget statement is adopted or is amended and adopted as amended. The
certification of the amount to be received from personal and real property
taxation shall specify separately the amount to be applied to the payment of
principal or interest on bonds issued by the governing body and the amount to
be received for all other purposes.



   (C)   If the adopted budget statement reflects a change from that
shown in the published proposed budget statement, a summary of the changes
shall be published within 20 calendar days after its adoption in the manner
provided in this section, but without provision for hearing, setting forth
the items changed and the reasons for the changes.



   (D)   Upon approval by governing body, the budget shall be filed
with the Auditor of Public Accounts. The auditor may review the budget for
errors in mathematics, improper accounting and non-compliance with the
state’s Budget Act or Neb. RS 13-518 to 13-522. If the Auditor detects such
errors, he or she shall immediately notify the governing body of such errors.
The governing body shall correct any such error as provided in § 35.20 of
this chapter. Warrants for the payment of expenditures provided in the budget
adopted under this section shall be valid notwithstanding any error or
non-compliance for which the Auditor has notified the governing body.



   (E)   When a levy increase has been authorized by vote of the
electors, the adopted budget statement shall indicate the amount of the levy
increase.



(1976 Code, § 1-803)  (Ord. 1440, passed 12-23-2013; Ord. 1479, passed
2-5-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 13-506, 13-507



§ 35.18  PROPERTY TAX LEVY; MAXIMUM; AUTHORITY TO EXCEED.



   (A)   Property tax levies for the support of the city for fiscal
years beginning on or after 7-1-1998, shall be limited to the amounts set
forth in this division (A), except as provided division in division (C)
below. The city may levy a maximum levy of $0.45 per $100 of taxable
valuation of property subject to the levy plus an additional $0.05 per $100
for taxable valuation to provide financing for the city’s share of revenue
required under an agreement or agreements executed pursuant to the Interlocal
Cooperation Act, being Neb. RS 13-801 through 13-827 or the Joint Public
Agency Act, being Neb. RS 13-2501 through 13-2550. The maximum levy shall
include amounts levied to pay for sums to support a library pursuant to Neb.
RS 51-201, museum pursuant to Neb. RS 51-501, visiting community nurse, home
health nurse, or home health agency pursuant to Neb. RS 71-1637, or statue,
memorial or monument pursuant to Neb. RS 80-202. Property tax levies for
judgments, except judgments or orders from the Commission of Industrial
Relations, obtained against the city which require or obligate the city to
pay that judgment, to the extent the judgment is not paid by liability
insurance coverage of the city, for preexisting lease-purchase contracts
approved prior to 7-1-1998, for bonded indebtedness approved according to law
and secured by a levy on property, and for payments by a public airport to
retire interest-free loans from the Division of Aeronautics in lieu of bonded
indebtedness at a lower cost to the public airport are not included in the
levy limits established by this division (A). The limitations on tax levies
provided in this division (A) are to include all other general or special
levies provided by law. Notwithstanding other provisions of law, the only
exceptions to the limits in this division (A) are those provided by or
authorized by this section. Tax levies in excess of the limitations in this
section shall be considered unauthorized levies under Neb. RS 77-1606 unless
approved under division (C) below.



   (B)   (1)   All city airport authorities established under the
Cities Airport Authorities Act, community redevelopment authorities
established under the Community Development Law, and off-street parking
districts established under the Offstreet Parking District Act may be
allocated property taxes as authorized by law which are authorized by the
city and are counted in the municipal levy limit provided by division (A)
above; except that, such limitation shall not apply to property tax levies
for preexisting lease-purchase contracts approved prior to 7-1-1998, for
bonded indebtedness approved according to law and secured by a levy on
property, and for payments by a public airport to retire interest-free loans
from the Division of Aeronautics in lieu of bonded indebtedness at a lower
cost to the public airport. For off-street parking districts established
under Offstreet Parking District Act, the tax shall be counted in the
allocation by the city proportionately, by dividing the total taxable
valuation of the taxable, property within the district by the total taxable
valuation of the taxable property within the city multiplied by the levy of
the district. The City Council shall review and approve or disapprove the
levy request of the political subdivisions subject to this division (B). The
City Council may approve all or a portion of thelevy request and may approve
a levy request that would allow a levy greater than that permitted by law.
The levy allocated by the city maybe exceeded as provided in division (C)
below.



      (2)   On or before August 1, all political subdivisions
subject to city levy authority under this division (B) shall submit a
preliminary request for levy allocation to the City Council. The premmnary
request of the political subdivision shall be in the form of a resolution
adopted by a majority vote of members present of the political
subdivision’s governing body. The failure of a political subdivision to
make a preliminary request shall preclude that political subdivision from
using procedures set forth in Neb. RS 77-3444 to exceed the final levy
allocation as determined in this division (B);



      (3)   (a)   The City Council shall:



            1.   Adopt a resolution by a majority vote of
members present which determines a final allocation of levy authority to its
political subdivisions; and



            2.   Forward a copy of that resolution to the
chairperson of the governing body of each of its political subdivisions.



         (b)   No final levy allocation shall he changed after
September 1, except by agreement between both the City Council and the
governing body of the political subdivision whose final levy allocation is at
issue.



   (C)   (1)   The city may exceed the limits provided in division
(A) above by an amount not to exceed a maximum levy approved by amajority of
registered voters voting onthe issue in a primary, general, or special
election at which the issue is placed before the registered voters. A vote to
exceed the limits must be approved prior to October 10 of the fiscal year
which is to be the first to exceed the limits.



      (2)   The City Council may call fopthe submission of the issue
to the voters:



         (a)   By passing a resolution calling for exceeding the
limits by a vote of at least two-thirds of the members of the City Council
and delivering a copy of the resolution to the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner of every county which contains all or part of the city; or



         (b)   Upon receipt of a petition by the County Clerk or
Election Commissioner of every county containing all or part of the city
requesting an election signed by at least 5% of the registered voters
residing in the city.



      (3)   The resolution or petition shall include the amountof
levy which would be imposed in excess of the limits provided in division (A)
above and the duration of the excess levy authority. The excess levy
authority shall not have a duration greater than five years. Any resolution
or petition calling for a special election shall be filed with the County
Clerk or Election Commissioner no later than 30 days prior to the date of the
election, and the time of publication and providing a copy of the notice of
election required in Neb. RS 32-802 shall be no later than 20 days prior to
the election.



      (4)   The County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall place
the issue on the ballot at anelection as called for in theresolution or
petition which is at least 30 days after receipt of the resolution or
petition. The election shall be held pursuant to the Election Act, being Neb.
RS Ch. 32. For petitions filed with the County Clerk or Election Commissioner
on or after 5-1-1998, the petition shall be in the form as provided in Neb.
RS 32-628 through 32-631.



      (5)   Any excess levy authority approved under this division
(C) shall terminate pursuant to its terms on a vote of the City Council to
terminate the authority to levy more than the limits at the end of the fourth
fiscal year following the first year in which the levy exceeded the limit, or
as provided in division (C)(8) below, whichever is earliest.



      (6)   The City Council may pass no more than one resolution
calling for an election pursuant to this division (C) during any one calendar
year. Only one election may be held in any one calendar year pursuant to a
petition initiated under this division (C). The ballot question may include
any terms and conditions set forth in the resolution or petition and shall
include the language specified in Neb. RS 77-3444.



      (7)   If a majority of the votes cast upon the ballot question
are in favor of the tax, the County Board shall authorize a tax in excess of
the limits in division (A) above, but the tax shall not exceed the amount
stated in the ballot question. If a majority of those voting on the ballot
question are opposed to the tax, the City Council shall not impose the tax.



      (8)   (a)   The city may rescind or modify a previously
approved excess levy authority prior to its expiration by a majority of
registered voters voting on the issue in a primary, general or special
election at which the issue is placed before the registered voters. A vote to
rescind or modify must be approved prior to October 10 of the fiscal year for
which it is to be effective.



         (b)   The City Council may call for the submission of
the issue to the voters:



            1.   By passing a resolution calling for the
rescission or modification by a vote of at least two-thirds of the members of
the City Council and delivering a copy of the resolution to the County Clerk
or Election Commissioner of every county which contains all or part of the
city; or



            2.   Upon receipt of a petition by the County
Clerk or Election Commissioner of every county containing all or part of the
city requesting an election signed by at least 5% of the registered voters
residing in the city.



         (c)   The resolution or petition shall include the
amount and the duration of the previously approved excess levy authority and
a statement either with the excess levy authority will be rescinded or the
excess levy authority will be modified. If the excess levy authority will be
modified, the amount and duration of the modification shall be stated. The
modification shall not have a duration greater than five years. The County
Clerk or Election Commissioner shall place the issue on the ballot at an
election as called for in the resolution or petition which is at least 30
days after receipt of the resolution or petition, and the time of publication
and providing a copy of the notice of election required in Neb. RS 32-802
shall be no later than 20 days prior to the election. The election shall be
held pursuant to the Election Act, being Neb. RS Ch. 32.



(Ord. 1479, passed 2-5-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 77-3442, RS 77-3443, 77-3444



§ 35.19  ADOPTED BUDGET STATEMENT; EXPENDITURES PRIOR TO BUDGET ADOPTION.



   (A)   (1)   After publication and hearing on the proposed budget
statement and within the time prescribed by law, the governing body shall
file with and certify to the levying board or boards on or before September
20 of each year or September 20 of the final year of a biennial period and
file with the Auditor of Public Accounts a copy of the adopted budget
statement which complies with Neb. RS 13-518 to 13-522, together with the
amount of the tax required to fund the adopted budget, setting out separately:



         (a)   The amount to be levied for the payment of
principal or interest on bonds issued by the governing body; and



         (b)   The amount to be levied for all other purposes.



      (2)   Proof of publication shall be attached to the statements.



      (3)   If the prime rate published by the Federal Reserve Board
is 10% or more at the time of filing and certification required under this
division (A), the governing body, in certifying the amount required, may make
allowance for delinquent taxes not exceeded 5% of the amount required plus
the actual percentage of delinquent taxes for the preceding tax year or
biennial period and for the amount of estimated tax loss from any pending or
anticipated litigation which involves taxation and in which tax collections
have been or can be withheld or escrowed by court order. For purpose of this
section, anticipated litigation shall be limited to the anticipation of an
action being filed by a taxpayer who or which filed a similar action for the
preceding year or biennial period which is still pending; except for such
allowances, the governing body shall not certify an amount of tax more than
1% greater or lesser than the amount determined under municipal ordinance.



      (3)   The governing body shall use the certified taxable
values as provided by the County Assessor pursuant to Neb. RS 13-509 for the
current year in setting or certifying the levy, the governing body may
designate one of its members to perform any duty or responsibility required
of the governing body by this section.



(1976 Code, § 1-804)



   (B)   (1)   On and after the first day of its fiscal year in 1993
and of each succeeding year or on or after the first day of its biennial
period and until the adoption of the budget by the City Council in September,
the City Council may expend any balance of cash on hand for the current
expenses of the city. Except as provided in division (B)(2) below, the
expenditures shall not exceed an amount equivalent to the total amount
expended under the last budget in the equivalent period of the prior budget
year or biennial period. The expenditures shall be charged against the
appropriations for each individual fund or purpose as provided in the budget
when adopted.



      (2)   The restriction on expenditures in division (A) above
may be exceeded upon the express finding of the City Council that
expenditures beyond the amount authorized are necessary to enable the city to
meet its statutory duties and responsibilities. The finding and approval of
the expenditures in excess of the statutory authorization shall be adopted by
the City Council in open public session. Expenditures authorized by this
section shall be charged against appropriations for each individual fund or
purpose as provided in the budget when adopted, and nothing in this section
shall be construed to authorize expenditures by the city in excess of that
authorized by any other statutory provision.



(1976 Code, § 1-804.01)  (Ord. 1150, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1442, passed
12-23-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 13-508, 13-509.02



§ 35.20  REVISIONS OF BUDGET.



   (A)   (1)   Unless otherwise provided by law, the City Council
may propose to revise the previously adopted budget statement and shall
conduct a public hearing on that proposal whenever during the current fiscal
year it becomes apparent to the City Council that:



         (a)   There are circumstances which could not reasonably
have been anticipated at the time the budget for the current year was adopted;



         (b)   The budget adopted violated Neb. RS 13-518 through
13-522, such that the revenue of the current fiscal year for any fund thereof
will be insufficient, additional expenses will be necessarily incurred or
there is a need to reduce the budget requirements to comply with Neb. RS
13-518 through 13-522; or



         (c)   The City Council has been notified by the Auditor
of Public Accounts of a mathematical or accounting error or non-compliance
with the state’s Budget Act, being Neb. RS 13-501 through 13-513.



      (2)   The public hearing requirement shall not apply to
emergency expenditures pursuant to Neb. RS 81-829.51.



   (B)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published
at least four calendar days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper
of general circulation within the Council’s jurisdiction. For purposes of
such notice, the four calendar days shall include the day of publication but
not the day of hearing. This published notice shall set forth:



      (1)   The time and place of the hearing;



      (2)   The amount in dollars of additional or reduced money
required and for what purpose;



      (3)   A statement setting forth the nature of the
unanticipated circumstances and, if the budget requirements are to be
increased, the reasons why the previously adopted budget of expenditures
cannot be reduced during the remainder of the current year to meet the need
for additional money in that manner;



      (4)   A copy of the summary of the originally adopted budget
previously published; and



      (5)   A copy of the summary of the proposed revised budget.



   (C)   At the hearing any taxpayer may appear or file a written
statement protesting any application for additional money. A written record
shall be kept of all such hearings.



   (D)   Upon conclusion of the public hearing on the proposed revised
budget and approval of the proposed revised budget by the City Council, the
City Council shall file with the County Clerk of the county or counties in
which the City Council is located, and with the Auditor of Public Accounts, a
copy of the revised budget, as adopted. The City Council may then issue
warrants in payment for expenditures authorized by the adopted revised
budget. These warrants shall be referred to as registered warrants and shall
be repaid during the next fiscal year from funds derived from taxes levied
therefor.



   (E)   Within 30 days after the adoption of the budget under § 35.17
of this chapter, the City Council may, or within 30 days after notification
of an error by the Auditor of Public Accounts, the City Council shall,
correct an adopted budget which contains a clerical, mathematical or
accounting error which does not affect the total amount budgeted by more than
1% or increase the amount required from property taxes. No public hearing
shall be required for such a correction. After correction, the City Council
shall file a copy of the corrected budget with the County Clerk of the county
of counties in which the City Council is located and with the Auditor of
Public Accounts. The City Council may then issue warrants in payment for
expenditures authorized by the budget.



(1976 Code, § 1-804.02)  (Ord. 1461, passed 2-8-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 13-511



§ 35.21  BUDGET PROCEDURE.



   The Manual of Instructions for City/Village Budgets, prepared by the
Auditor of Public Accounts, State Capitol, Lincoln, Nebraska  68509 is
incorporated by reference for the purpose of proper budget preparation.



(1976 Code, § 1-805)



§ 35.22  APPROPRIATIONS.



   The governing body shall adopt a budget statement pursuant to the
state’s Budget Act, being Neb. RS 13-501 through 13-513, to be termed
“The Annual Appropriation Bill”, in which are appropriated such sums of
money as may be deemed necessary to defray all necessary expenses and
liabilities of the city.



(1976 Code, § 1-806)  (Ord. 1124, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1189, passed
1-22-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-706



§ 35.23  GENERAL PROPERTY TAX.



   (A)   The governing body shall cause to be certified to the County
Clerk the amount of tax to be levied upon the assessed value of all the
taxable property of the municipality for the requirements of the adopted
budget for the ensuing year, including all special assessments and taxes.



   (B)   The maximum amount of tax which may be certified and assessed
shall not require a tax levy in excess of the legal maximum as prescribed by
state law.



(1976 Code, § 1-807)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-702



§ 35.24  EXPENDITURES.



   (A)   No municipal official shall have the power to appropriate,
issue or draw any order or warrant on the Municipal Treasury for money,
unless the same has been appropriated or ordered by ordinance.



   (B)   No expenditure for any improvement to be paid for out of the
General Fund of the municipality shall exceed in any one year the amount
provided for that improvement in the adopted budget statement.



(1976 Code, § 1-808)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-708



§ 35.25  CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES; BIDDING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01 for a contract with a
public power district to operate, renew, replace or add to the electric
distribution, transmission or generation system of the municipality, no
contact for enlargement or general improvements, such as water extensions,
sewers, public heating systems, bridges, work on streets or any other work or
improvements when the cost of the enlargement or improvement is assessed to
the property, costing over $30,000, shall be made unless it is first approved
by the governing body.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01, before the
governing body makes any contract in excess of $30,000 for enlargement of
general improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating
system, bridges, work on streets or any other work or improvement when the
cost of the enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property, an
estimate of the cost shall be made by the Municipal Engineer and submitted to
the governing body.



      (2)   In advertising for bids as provided in divisions (C) and
(E) below, the governing body may publish the amount of estiniate.



   (C)   Advertisements for bids shall be required for any contract
costing over $30,000 entered into:



      (1)   For enlargement or general improvements, such as water
extensions, sewers, public heating systems, bridges, work on streets or any
other work or improvement when the cost of the enlargement or improvement is
assessed to the property; or



      (2)   For the purchase of equipment used in the construction
of the enlargement or general improvements.



   (D)   A municipal electric utility may enter into a contract for the
enlargement or improvement of the electric system or for the purchase of
equipment uses for the enlargement or improvement without advertising forbids
if the price is:



      (1)   Thirty thousand dollars or less;



      (2)   Sixty thousand dollars or less and the municipal
electric utility has gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of
$1,000,000;



      (3)   Ninety thousand dollars or less and the municipal
electric utility has gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of
$5,000,000; or



      (4)   One hundred twenty thousand dollars or less and the
municipal electric utility has gross annual revenue from retail sales in
excess of $10,000,000.



   (E)   The advertisement provided for in division (C) above shall be
published at least seven days prior to the bid closing in a legal newspaper
in of of general circulation in the municipality. In case of a public
emergency resulting from infectious or contagious diseases, destructive
windstorms, floods, snow, war or an exigency or pressing necessity or
unforeseen need calling for immediate action or remedy to prevent a serious
loss of or serious injury or damage to life, health or property, estimates of
costs and advertising for bids may be waived in the emergency ordinance
authorized by Neb. RS 17-613 when adopted by a two-thirds vote of the
governing body and entered of record.



   (F)   If, after advertising for bids as provided in this section,
the governing body receives fewer than two bids on a contract or if the bids
received by the governing body contain a price which exceeds the estimated
cost, the governing body may negotiate a contract in an attempt to complete
the proposed enlargement or general improvement at a cost commensurate with
the estimate given.



   (G)   If the materials are of such a nature that, in the opinion of
the manufacturer and with the concurrence of the governing body or Board of
Public Works, no cost can be estimated until the materials have been
manufactured or assembled to the specific qualifications of the
miinicipality, the governing body or Board of Public Works may authorize the
manufacture and assemblage of those materials and may thereafter approve the
estimated cost expenditure when it is provided by the manufacturer.



   (H)   Any municipal bidding procedure maybe waived by the governing
body or Board of Public Works:



      (1)   When materials or equipment are purchased at the same
price and from the same seller as materials or equipment which have formerly
been obtained pursuant to the state bidding procedure in Neb. RS 81-145
through 81-162;



      (2)   When the contract is negotiated directly with a
sheltered workshop pursuant to Neb. RS 48-1503; or



      (3)   When required to comply with any federal grant, loan or
program.



   (I)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law or a home
rule charter, a municipality which has established, by an interlocal
agreement with any county, a joint purchasing division or agency may purchase
personal property without competitive bidding if the price of the property
has been established by the Federal General Services Administration or the
material division of the Department of Administrative Services.



      (2)   For the purpose of this division (I), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes, but is not limited to,
supplies, materials, and equipment used by or furnished to any officer,
office, department, institution, boards or other agency.



         PURCHASING or PURCHASE. The obtaining of personal property
by sale, lease or other contractual means.



(1976 Code, § 1-809)  (Ord. 1479, passed 2-5-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-568.01, 17-568.02, 18-1756



§ 35.26  ANNUAL AUDIT.



   The governing body shall cause an audit of the municipal accounts to be
made by a qualified accountant as expeditiously as possible following the
close of the fiscal year. The said audit shall be completed, and the annual
audit report made not later than six months after the close of the fiscal
year. The accountant making the audit shall submit not less than three copies
of the audit report to the governing body. All public utilities or other
enterprises which substantially generate their own revenue shall be audited
separately, and the results of such audits shall appear separately in the
annual audit report, and such audits shall be on an accrual basis and shall
contain statements and materials which conform to generally accepted
accounting principles. The audit report shall set forth the financial
position and results of financial operations for each fund or group of
accounts of the municipality as well as an opinion by the accountant with
respect to the financial statements. Two copies of the annual audit report
shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk, and shall become a part of the
public records of the Municipal Clerk’s office, and will at all times
thereafter, be open for public inspection. One copy shall be filed with the
Auditor of Public Accounts.



(1976 Code, § 1-810)  (Ord. 560, passed 9-22-1977)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2901 through 19-2909



§ 35.27  CLAIMS.



   All claims against the municipality shall be presented to the governing
body in writing with a full account of the items, and no claim or demand
shall be audited or allowed unless presented as provided for in this section.
No costs shall be recovered against the municipality in any action brought
against it for an unliquidated claim which has not been presented to the
governing body to be audited, nor upon claims allowed in part, unless the
recovery shall be for a greater sum than the amount allowed, with the
interest due. No order or warrant shall be drawn in excess of 85% of the
current levy for the purpose for which it is drawn unless there shall be
sufficient money in the Municipal Treasury for the appropriate fund against
which it is to be drawn; provided that, in the event there exists obligated
funds from the federal and/or state government for the general purpose of
such warrant, then such warrant may be drawn in excess of 85%, but not more
than 100% of the current levy for the purpose for which said warrant is drawn.



(1976 Code, § 1-811)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-714, 17-715



§ 35.28  WARRANTS.



   All warrants drawn upon the Municipal Treasury must be signed by the
Mayor and countersigned by the Municipal Clerk, stating the particular fund
to which the warrant is chargeable, the person to whom it is payable, and the
purpose of the expenditure. No money shall be otherwise paid than upon
warrants so drawn. Each warrant shall specify the amount included in the
adopted budget statement for the fund upon which it is drawn, and the amount
already expended of such fund.



(1976 Code, § 1-812)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-711



§ 35.29  TRANSFER OF FUNDS.



   The governing body may, whenever during the current fiscal year it
becomes apparent due to unforeseen emergencies that there is temporarily
insufficient money in a particular fund to meet the requirements of the
adopted budget of expenditures for that fund, by a majority vote transfer
money from other funds to such fund. No expenditure during any fiscal year
shall be made in excess of the amounts indicated in the adopted budget
statement, except as authorized herein. If, as the result of unforeseen
circumstances, the revenue of the current fiscal year shall be insufficient,
the governing body may propose to supplement the previously adopted budget
statement and shall conduct a public hearing at which time any taxpayer may
appear, or file a written statement protesting the application for additional
money. A written record shall be kept of all such hearings. Notice of a
place, and time for the said hearing shall be published at least five days
prior to the date set for the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation
in the municipality. The published notice shall set forth the time and place
of the proposed hearing, the amount of additional money required, the purpose
of the required money, a statement setting forth the reasons why the adopted
budget of expenditures cannot be reduced to meet the need for additional
money, and a copy of the summary of the originally adopted budget previously
published. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing on the proposed
supplemental budget, and the approval by the governing body, the governing
body shall file with the County Clerk and the State Auditor a copy of the
supplemental budget, and shall certify the amount of additional tax to be
levied. The governing body may then issue warrants in payment for
expenditures authorized by the adopted supplemental budget. The said warrants
shall be referred to as “registered warrants”, and shall be repaid during
the next fiscal year from funds derived from taxes levied therefor.



(1976 Code, § 1-813)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 23-928, 23-929



§ 35.30  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND.



   All money received on special tax assessments shall be held by the
Municipal Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the
improvement for which the assessment was made, and such money shall be used
for no other purpose unless to reimburse the municipality for money expended
for any such improvement.



(1976 Code, § 1-814)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-710



§ 35.31  SINKING FUNDS.



   (A)   The governing  body, subject to the limitations set  forth
herein, shall have the power to levy a tax not to exceed that prescribed by
state law upon the assessed value of all taxable property within the
municipality for a term not to exceed that prescribed by state law in
addition to the amount of tax which may be annually levied for the purposes
of the adopted budget statement of the municipality, for the purpose of
establishing a sinking fund for the construction, purchase, improvement,
extension or repair of the approved uses as authorized by state law.



   (B)   To initiate the said sinking fund, the governing body shall
declare its purpose by resolution to submit to the qualified electors of the
municipality the proposition to provide the improvement at the next general
municipal election. The resolution shall set forth the improvement, the
estimated cost, the amount of the annual levy, the number of years required
to provide the required revenue, the name of the sinking fund proposed and
the proposition as it will appear on the ballot. Notice of the said
proposition shall be published in its entirety three times on successive
weeks before the day of the election in a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality. The sinking fund may be established after
the election if a majority, or more of the legal votes were in favor of the
establishment of the fund. The governing body may then proceed to establish
the said fund in conformity with the provisions of the proposition, and
applicable state law. The funds received by the Municipal Treasurer shall, as
they accumulate, be immediately invested with the written approval of the
governing body in the manner provided by state law.



   (C)   No sinking fund so established shall be used for any purpose
or purposes contrary to the purpose as it appeared on the ballot unless the
governing body is authorized to do so by 60% of the qualified electors of the
municipality voting at a general election favoring such a change in the use
of the sinking fund.



(1976 Code, § 1-815)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 19-1301 through 19-1304, 77-2337,
77-2339



§ 35.32  GENERAL FUND.



   All money not specifically appropriated in the annual appropriation
bill shall be deposited in and known as the “General Fund”.



(1976 Code, § 1-816)



§ 35.33  DEPOSIT, INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.



   (A)   (1)   The City Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times
keep on deposit, for safekeeping, in banks, capital stock financial
institutions or qualifying mutual financial institutions of approved and
responsible standing, all money collected, received or held by him or her as
City Treasurer. Such deposits shall be subject to all regulations imposed by
law or adopted by the City Council for the receiving and holding thereof. The
fact that a stockholder, director, or other officer of such bank, capital
stock financial institution or qualifying mutual financial institution is
also serving as Mayor, as a member of the City Council, as a member of the
Board of Public Works, or as any other officer of the city shall not
disqualify such bank, capital stock financial institution or qualifying
mutual financial institution from acting as a depository for such municipal
funds.



      (2)   (a)   The City Council shall require from all banks,
capital stock financial institutions or qualifying mutual financial
institutions:



            1.   A bond in such penal sum as may be the
maximum amount on deposit at any time less the amount insured or guaranteed
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or, in lieu thereof; and



            2.   Security given as provided in the Public
Funds Deposit Security Act to secure the payment of all such deposits and
accretions.



         (b)   The City Council shall approve such bond or giving
of security. The City Treasurer shall not be liable for any loss of any money
sustained by reason of the failure of any such depository so designated and
approved.



      (3)   The insurance afforded to depositors in banks, capital
stock financial institutions or qualifying mutual financial institutions
through the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall be deemed and
construed to be a surety bond to the extent that the deposits are insured or
guaranteed by such corporation and for deposits so insured or guaranteed, no
other surety bond or other security shall be required.



      (4)   Neb. RS 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock
financial institutions. Neb. RS 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in
qualifying mutual financial institutions.



(1976 Code, § 1-817)



   (B)   Whenever the city has accumulated a surplus of any fund in
excess of its current needs or has accumulated a sinking fund for the payment
of its bonds and the money in such sinking fund exceeds the amount necessary
to pay the principal and interest of any such bonds which become due during
the current year, the governing body of the city may invest any such surplus
in certificates of deposit, in time deposits and in any securities in which
the state investment officer is authorized by law and as provided in the
authorized investment guidelines of the state’s Investment Council in
effect on the date the investment is made.



(1976 Code, § 1-818)



(Ord. 988, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. 1349, passed 11-8-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-607, 77-2362, 17-608, 17-609,
21-1316.01, 77-2341



§ 35.34  BOND ISSUES.



   The governing body may, after meeting all the requirements of state
law, issue bonds, fund bonds and retire bonds for such purposes as may be
permitted by state law. The governing body shall have the authority to levy
special assessments for the payment of interest and principal on such bonds
and may spread the payments up to the maximum number of years permitted by
state law.



(1976 Code, § 1-819)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 10-201 through 10-411, 10-601 through
10-614, 12-1001,



     17-529.01, 17-529.08, 17-534, 17-905, 17-908, 17-911, 17-939,
17-958, 17-968, 18-1801



     through 18-1805, 23-343.13, 39-836



§ 35.35  MOTOR VEHICLE TAX.



   The governing body of the city may levy a tax on all motor vehicles
owned or used in such city. Until the implementation date designated by the
Director of Motor Vehicles under Neb. RS 23-186, the tax shall be paid to the
County Treasurer of Dawson County when the registration fees as provided in
the Motor Vehicle Registration Act, being Neb. RS 60-301 through 60-3,235 are
paid. Such taxes shall be credited by the County Treasurer to the road fund
of the city. On and after the implementation date designated under Neb. RS
23-186, the tax shall be paid to the County Treasurer for credit to such road
fund. Such funds shall be used by the city for construction, resurfacing,
maintaining or improving streets, roads, alleys, public ways or parts
thereof, for the amortization of bonded indebtedness when created for such
purposes.



(1976 Code, § 1-820)  (Ord. 951, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 989, passed
12-18-1989)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1214



§ 35.36  TRANSFER OF FUNDS BY BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS TO GENERAL FUND.



   The Board of Public Works of the city is hereby directed to transfer to
the City Treasurer for deposit in the General Fund of the municipality, 9% of
receipts from customer billings by the Board of Public Works for electric and
water service within the municipality; provided, however, that, receipts from
Hazardous Waste Pumping (HWP) under § 52.06 of this code of ordinances shall
not be included in receipts for the purpose of calculating this transfer. The
Board of Public Works shall make the transfer provided for above each month,
based on receipts for the immediately preceding monthly period, as determined
by the Board of Public Works, and as reported to the municipality. The basis
for the calculation of the transfer shall be provided to the municipality
with each monthly payment.



(1976 Code, § 1-821)  (Ord. 1227, passed 11-4-1996; Ord. 1241, passed
10-6-1997)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY



      51.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE



      52.   ELECTRICAL SYSTEM



      53.   NATURAL GAS



      54.   WATER



      55.   SEWERS



CHAPTER 50:  UTILITIES GENERALLY



Section



   50.01   Diversion of services; penalty



   50.02   Discontinuance of service; notice procedure



   50.03   New subdivisions; underground installation



   50.04   Meters tampering; unauthorized reconnection



§ 50.01  DIVERSION OF SERVICES; PENALTY.



   (A)   The city may bring a civil action for damages against any
person who commits, authorizes, solicits, aids, abets or attempts bypassing,
tampering or unauthorized metering when such act results in damages to a city
utility. A city may bring a civil action for damages pursuant to this section
against any person receiving the benefit of utility service through means of
bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering.



   (B)   In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, the city
shall be entitled, upon proof of willful or intentional bypassing, tampering
or unauthorized metering, to recover as damages:



      (1)   The amount of actual damage or loss if the amount of the
damage or loss is susceptible of reasonable calculation; or



      (2)   Liquidated damages of until 7-1-1985, $500; and, on
7-1-1985 and thereafter, $750, if the amount of actual damage or loss is not
susceptible of reasonable calculation.



   (C)   In addition to damage or loss under divisions (A) or (B)
above, the city may recover all reasonable expenses and costs incurred on
account of the bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering including, but
not limited to, disconnection, reconnection, service calls, equipment, costs
of the suit and reasonable attorneys’ fees in cases within the scope of
Neb. RS 25-1801.



   (D)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a tenant or
occupant at any premises where bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering
is proven to exist caused or had knowledge of such bypassing, tampering or
unauthorized metering if the tenant or occupant had access to the part of the
utility supply system on the premises where the bypassing, tampering or
unauthorized metering is proven to exist and was responsible or partially
responsible for payment, either directly or indirectly, to the utility or to
any other person for utility services to the premises.



   (E)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a customer at any
premises where bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering is proven to
exist caused or had knowledge of such bypassing, tampering or unauthorized
metering if the customer controlled access to the part of the utility supply
system on the premises where the bypassing, tampering or unauthorized
metering was proven to exist.



   (F)   The remedies provided by this section shall be deemed to be
supplemental and additional to powers conferred by existing laws and the
remedies provided in this section are in addition to and not in limitation of
any other civil or criminal statutory or common law remedies.



(1976 Code, § 3-1101)  (Ord. 729, passed 9-1-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 86-331.01 through 86-331.04



§ 50.02  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; NOTICE PROCEDURE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DOMESTIC SUBSCRIBER. Shall not include municipalities, cities,
villages, political subdivisions, companies, corporations, partnerships,
limited liability companies or businesses of any nature.



   (B)   No public or private utility company, including any utility
owned and operated by the city, furnishing water, natural gas or electricity
at retail in the city shall discontinue service to any domestic subscriber
for non-payment of any past-due account unless the utility company first
gives notice to any subscriber whose service is proposed to be terminated.
Such notice shall be given in person, by first-class mail, or by electronic
delivery, except that electronic delivery shall only be used if the
subscribed has specifically elected to receive such notices by electronic
delivery. If notice is given by first-class mail or electronic delivery, such
notice shall be conspicuously marked as to its importance. Service shall not
be discontinued for at least seven days after notice is sent or given.
Holidays and weekends shall be excluded from the seven days.



   (C)   The notice required by division (A) above shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   The reason for the proposed disconnection;



      (2)   A statement of the intention to disconnect unless the
domestic subscriber either pays the bill or reaches an. agreement with the
utility regarding payment of the bill;



      (3)   The date upon which service will be disconnected if the
domestic subscriber does not take appropriate action;



      (4)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
utility’s employee or department to whom the domestic subscriber may
address an inquiry or complaint;



      (5)   The domestic subscriber’s right, prior to the
disconnection date, to request a conference regarding any dispute over such
proposed disconnection;



      (6)   A statement that the utility may not disconnect service
pending the conclusion of the conference;



      (7)   A statement to the effect that disconnection may be
postponed or prevented upon presentation of a duly licensed physician’s
certificate which shall certify that a domestic subscriber or resident within
such subscriber’s household has an existing illness or handicap which would
cause such subscriber or resident to suffer an immediate and serious health
hazard by the disconnection of the utility’s service to that household.
Such certificate shall be filed with the utility within five days of
receiving notice under this section and will prevent the disconnection of the
utility’s service for a period of 30 days from such filing. Only one
postponement of disconnection shall be allowed under this division (C)(7) for
each incidence of non-payment of any past-due account;



      (8)   The cost that will be borne by the domestic subscriber
for restoration of service;



      (9)   A statement that the domestic subscriber may arrange
with the utility for an installment payment plan;



      (10)   A statement to the effect that those domestic
subscribers’ who are welfare recipients may qualify for assistance in
payment of their utility bill and that they should contact their caseworkers
in that regard; and



      (11)   Any additional information not inconsistent with this
section which has received prior approval from the City Council or Board of
Public Works, in the case of a city utility, or the board of directors or
administrative board of any other utility.



   (D)   The utility shall establish a third-party notice procedure for
the notification of a designated third party of any proposed discontinuance
of service and shall advise its subscribers including new subscribers, of the
availability of such procedures.



   (E)   The provisions of Neb. RS 70-1608 through 70-1614 shall apply
to disputes over a proposed discontinuance of service.



   (F)   The procedures adopted for resolving utility bills by the City
Council or Board of Public Works for any city utility, one copy of which is
on file in the office of the City Clerk, are hereby incorporated by reference
in addition to any amendments thereto and are made a part of this section as
though set out in full.



   (G)   This section shall not apply to any disconnections or
interruptions of services made necessary by the utility for reasons of repair
or maintenance or to protect the health or safety of the domestic subscriber
or of the general public.



(1976 Code, § 3-1102)  (Ord. 6/605, passed - -; Ord. 759, passed 9-6-1984;
Ord. 1380, passed - -; Ord. 1461, passed 2-8-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 70-1605, 70-1607 and 70-1615



§ 50.03  NEW SUBDIVISIONS; UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION.



   (A)   In new subdivisions to the city approved by the governing body
after the effective date of this section, all utilities shall be installed
underground. UTILITIES shall include water, sewer, electricity, telephone,
natural gas and cable television.



   (B)   In the installation for electrical services, the Municipal
Power Department shall provide electrical service to the meter. The meter
shall be installed on the improvement on the premises or as prescribed by the
Municipal Power Department.



(1976 Code, § 3-1103)  (Ord. 713, passed 6-9-1983)



§ 50.04  METERS TAMPERING; UNAUTHORIZED RECONNECTION.



   (A)   Any person who connects any instrument, device or contrivance
with any wire supplying or intended to supply electricity or electric current
or connects any pipe or conduit supplying water, without the knowledge and
consent of the city, in such manner that any portion thereof may be supplied
to any instrument by or at which electricity, electric current or water may
be consumed without passing through the meter provided for measuring or
registering the amount or quantity passing through it, and any person who
knowingly uses or knowingly permits the use of electricity, electric current
or water obtained in the above mentioned unauthorized ways shall be deemed
guilty of an offense.



   (B)   Any person who willfully injures, alters or by any instrument,
device or contrivance in any manner interferes with or obstructs the action
or operation of any meter made or provided for measuring or registering the
amount or quantity of electricity or water passing through it, without the
knowledge and consent of the city shall be deemed guilty of an offense.



   (C)   When electrical or water service has been disconnected
pursuant to Neb. RS 70-1601 through 70-1615 or § 50.02 of this chapter, any
person who reconnects such service without the knowledge and consent of the
city shall be deemed guilty of an offense.



   (D)   Proof of the existence of any wire, pipe or conduit connection
or reconnection or of any injury, alteration or obstruction of a meter, as
provided in this section, shall be taken as prima facie evidence of the guilt
of the person in possession of the premises where such connection,
reconnection, injury, alteration or obstruction is proved to exist.



(1976 Code, § 3-1104)  (Ord. 1192, passed 1-22-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 86-329 through 86-331



CHAPTER 51:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE



Section




Collection




   51.01   Authority



   51.02   Notice; removal



   51.03   Nuisance



   51.04   Lien




Disposal




   51.15   Definitions



   51.16   Solid waste, compost and recycling materials



   51.17   Dead animals




Landfill




   51.30   Operation and funding



   51.31   State regulation



 



   51.99   Penalty




COLLECTION




§ 51.01  AUTHORITY.



   The governing body for the city may provide for the collection and
removal of garbage or refuse found upon any lot or land within its corporate
roads or alleys abutting such lot or land which constitutes a public
nuisance. The city may require the owner, duly authorized agent or tenant of
such lot or land to remove the garbage or refuse from such lot or land and
streets, roads or alleys.



(1976 Code, § 4-401)  (Ord. 953, passed 9-26-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901 and
18-1303



§ 51.02  NOTICE; REMOVAL.



   Notice that removal of garbage or refuse is necessary shall be given to
each owner or owner’s duly authorized agent and to the tenant if any. Such
notice shall be provided by personal service or by certified mail. After
providing such notice, the city through its proper offices shall, in addition
to other proper remedies, remove the garbage or refuse, or cause it to be
removed, from such lot or land and streets, roads or alleys.



(1976 Code, § 4-402)  (Ord. 953, passed 9-26-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901 and
18-1303



§ 51.03  NUISANCE.



   If the Mayor/City Manager declares that the accumulation of such
garbage or refuse upon any lot or land constitutes an immediate nuisance and
hazard to public health and safety, the city shall remove the garbage or
refuse, or cause it to be removed, from such lot or land within 48 hours
after notice by personal service or following receipt of a certified letter
in accordance herewith if such garbage or refuse has not been removed.



(1976 Code, § 4-403)  (Ord. 953, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 1479, passed
2-5-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901 and
18-1303



§ 51.04  LIEN.



   Whenever a city removes any garbage or refuse, or causes it to be
removed, from any lot or land pursuant to this subchapter, it shall, after a
hearing conducted by the governing board, assess the cost of the removal
against such lot or land.



(1976 Code, § 4-404)  (Ord. 953, passed 9-26-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901 and
18-1303




DISPOSAL




§ 51.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE. Kitchen refuse, decayed waste, dead animals or anything that
may decompose and become offensive to the public health.



(1976 Code, § 4-201)



   RUBBISH or TRASH. Discarded machinery, chips, pieces of wood, sticks,
dead trees, branches, bottles, broken glass, crockery, tin cans, boxes,
papers, rags or any other litter or debris that is not an immediate hazard to
the health of the residents of the city.



(1976 Code, § 4-202)



   YARD WASTE. Grass and leaves.



(1976 Code, § 4-206)



(Ord. 1154, passed 2-6-1995)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 13-2016.01



§ 51.16  SOLID WASTE, COMPOST AND RECYCLING MATERIALS.



   (A)   The term WASTE, as herein defined, shall mean cinders, ashes,
plaster, brick, stone, sawdust or sand.



(1976 Code, § 4-203)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in, on or about
any residence or commercial enterprise, decayed vegetable or animal
substance, garbage, trash, solid waste, compost materials or refuse matter of
any kind that may be injurious to the public health or offensive to the
residents of the city. It shall be unlawful to throw or sweep into the
streets, alleys, parks or other public grounds any dirt, paper, nails, pieces
of glass, refuse, waste, trash, compost materials or rubbish of any kind. No
person may permit garbage, rubbish, waste, trash, compost materials or refuse
to collect and all persons shall remove the same from his or her property
within 24 hours after being notified to do so by the city’s Police Chief,
who shall represent the city’s Board of Health. All persons residing in
residential districts as indicated on the city’s Zoning Map shall have
provided and maintained by the city receptacles for the collection of solid
waste, compost materials and recycling materials. The city shall provide for
the removal of such solid waste, compost materials and recycling materials
with cost for removal to be assessed to the residents within the city at the
rate of $15 per month for residential unit; and at a rate set by resolution
by the City Council for non-residential solid waste, compost materials and
recycling material removal.



(1976 Code, § 4-204)



   (C)   The city has provided, for the use of all residents of the
city, solid waste receptacles which are tan in color and compost material
receptacles which are green in color. It shall be unlawful to place compost
materials, primarily consisting of grass, leaves and small branches less than
two inches in diameter, in receptacles designated for solid waste. It shall
also be unlawful to place solid waste, which shall mean material which does
not meet the definition of compost materials, in receptacles designated for
compost materials.



(1976 Code, § 4-204.01)



(Ord. 557, passed 9-22-1977; Ord. 644, passed 7-31-1980; Ord. 686, passed
7-29-1982; Ord. 747, passed 8-9-1984; Ord. 1063, passed 7-20-1992; Ord. 1221,
passed 9-9-1996; Ord. 1283, passed 9-25-2000; Ord. 1296, passed 10-8-2001;
Ord. 1406, passed 10-6-2008; Ord. 1415, passed 9-13-2010; Ord. 1474, passed
9-5-2017)  Penalty, see § 51.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2106



§ 51.17  DEAD ANIMALS.



   All dead animals shall be immediately removed and buried by the owner
of such animals; and, if the owner of such animal cannot be found within two
hours after discovering the same, then such animal shall be removed by and at
the expense of the city. Dead animals shall not be buried within the
corporate limits of the city, nor within one mile thereof, nor in or above
the course of ground water that is used for drinking purposes by the city or
its inhabitants.



(1976 Code, § 4-205)  Penalty, see § 51.99



Statutory reference:



   Neb. RS 17-114, 17-123 and 17-207




LANDFILL




§ 51.30  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and operates the city landfill through the Street
Commissioner. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of
the care, management and maintenance of the city landfill may each year levy
a tax not to exceed the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the actual
valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate
limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be
known as the Landfill Fund and shall remain in the custody of the City
Treasurer. The Street Commissioner shall have the direct management and
control of the city landfill and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his
or her position. The Street Commissioner shall have the authority to adopt
rules and regulations for the sanitary and efficient management of the
landfill subject to the supervision and review of the governing body. The
governing body shall provide by ordinance for the management and operation of
the landfill and shall set the rates to be charged for services rendered by
ordinance and file the same in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer for
public inspection at any reasonable time.



(1976 Code, § 3-901)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2101 through 19-2106



§ 51.31  STATE REGULATION.



   The city shall each year apply for a license to operate the city
landfill. Application shall be made to the Department of Environmental
Control on forms provided by the Department. No fee shall be charged for such
licensing. Each license so issued shall expire on October 1, following the
date of issuance. It shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner to comply
with the rules and regulations prescribed by the Department of Environmental
Control for the use and operation of the city landfill.



(1976 Code, § 3-902)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 81-1517 and 81-1519



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more that $500
for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of such failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 4-501)



   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists, as defined in this
chapter, the city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the
same, in the manner provided by law.



      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(1976 Code, § 4-502)



(Ord. 1449, passed 12-23-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720 and 18-1722



CHAPTER 52:  ELECTRICAL SYSTEM



Section



   52.01   Ownership



   52.02   Contracts and terms



   52.03   Licensed electricians



   52.04   Fees and collections



   52.05   Minimum rates



   52.06   Restricted use



   52.07   Posting signs



   52.08   Cogeneration and small power production



§ 52.01  OWNERSHIP.



   The city owns and operates the city electrical system through the Board
of Public Works. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of
the care, management and maintenance of the municipal electrical system may
each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law,
on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the
corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax
shall be known as the Electrical Fund and shall remain in the custody of the
City Clerk/Treasurer. The Light Commissioner shall have the direct management
and control of the city electrical system and shall faithfully carry out the
duties of his or her office. The governing body shall by ordinance set the
rates to be charged for services rendered and shall file the same in the
office of the City Clerk/Treasurer for public inspection at any reasonable
time.



(1976 Code, § 3-1001)  (Ord. 945, passed 9-12-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902 through 17-904, 17-906 and 17-909



§ 52.02  CONTRACTS AND TERMS.



   The city, through its Electrical Department, shall furnish electric
current for light and power purposes to persons whose premises abut on any
supply wire of the distribution system and may furnish electric current to
such other persons within or without its corporate limits, as and when,
according to law, its governing body or Board of Public Works may see fit to
do so. The rules, regulations and rates for electric service, hereinafter
named in this chapter, shall be considered a part of every application
hereafter made for electric service and shall be considered a part of the
contract between every consumer now served by the Electrical Department.
Without further formality, the making of application on the part of any
applicant or the use or consumption of electric energy by present customers
and the furnishing of electric service to said applicant or customer shall
constitute a contract between applicant or customer and the city, to which
both parties are bound. If a customer should violate any of the provisions of
said contract or any reasonable rules and regulations that the Board of
Public Works may hereafter adopt, the Light Commissioner, or his or her
agent, shall cut off or disconnect the electric service from the building or
place of such violation and no further connection of electric service for
such building or place shall again be made save or except by order of the
Commissioner or his or her agent.



(1976 Code, § 3-1002)  (Ord. 945, passed 9-12-1988)



§ 52.03  LICENSED ELECTRICIANS.



   (A)   (1)   Under no circumstances shall connections be made
between the wires of the electrical distribution system of the city and the
meter of the consumer, except by an employee of the city or a licensed
electrician authorized to do so by the Light Commissioner.



      (2)   The consumer may have wiring done by any competent
licensed electrician from the meter to the points of distribution.



      (3)   All wiring, equipment and apparatus shall be installed
according to the Electrical Code duly adopted by the city. All installation
shall be done under the supervision and strictly in accordance with the
rules, regulations and specifications for such installation prescribed by the
Light Commissioner and Building Inspector; provided that, such rules,
regulations and specifications have been reviewed and approved by the Board
of Public Works.



   (B)   The city shall have the right to refuse electric service to
any premises if the initial wiring was not installed by an electrician
licensed by the city.



(1976 Code, § 3-1005)  (Ord. 945, passed 9-12-1988)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902



§ 52.04  FEES AND COLLECTIONS.



   (A)   The governing body has the power and authority to fix the
rates to be paid by electrical consumers for the use of electricity.



   (B)   All rates shall be on file for public inspection at the office
of the City Clerk/Treasurer.



   (C)   The Board of Public Works shall bill the consumers and collect
all money received by the city on the account of the city electrical system.



   (D)   It shall faithfully account to the City Clerk/Treasurer all
revenue collected by it, taking its receipt therefor in duplicate, filing one
with the City Clerk/Treasurer and keeping the other on file in its official
records.



(1976 Code, § 3-1008)  (Ord. 945, passed 9-12-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902



§ 52.05  MINIMUM RATES.



   All electrical consumers shall be liable for the minimum rate provided
by ordinance unless and until the consumer shall, by written order, direct
the Light Commissioner to shut off the electricity in which case consumer
shall not be liable thereafter for electrical service until the electricity
is turned on again.



   (A)   Residential rates.



 

Residential Rate:
 

Summer

 

Winter



Customer charge per month
 

$12.50

 

$12.50



First 700 kWh, per kWH
 

$0.1061

 

$0.0986



Over 700 kWh, per kWH
 

$0.1061

 

$0.0655



Minimum bill
 

$12.50

 

$12.50




 



   (B)   Rural residential rate.



 

Rural Residential Rate:
 

Summer

 

Winter



Customer charge per month
 

$15

 

$15



First 800 kWh, per kWH
 

$0.1114

 

$0.1064



Over 800 kWh, per kWH
 

$0.1114

 

$0.0655



Minimum bill
 

$15

 

$15




 



   (C)   General service rate.



 

General Service Rate:
 

Summer

 

Winter



Customer Charge per month
 

$23

 

$23



First 2,000 kWH, per kWH
 

$0.1132

 

$0.1072



Over 2,000 kWH, per kWH
 

$0.1132

 

$0.0790



Minimum bill
 

$23

 

$23




 



   (D)   General service demand rate.



 

General Service Demand Rate:
 

Summer

 

Winter





Customer charge per month
 

$65

 

$65



Demand charge, per kW - on-peak/kW
 

$16

 

$10



Demand charge, per kW - interruptible
 

$6

 

$10



Energy charge, per kW
 

$0.0530

 

$0.0480



Interruptible energy charge per kWH
 

$0.0490

 

$0.0480



Interruptible energy charge per kWH - ratchet
 

57% of peak summer demand



Interruptible energy charge per kWH - minimum bill
 

Demand charge but not less than $325



Interruptible energy charge per kWH - applicable
 

Loads of 25 kW or greater and less than 1,000 kW



NOTES TO TABLE:

GSD Customers with peak demands between 25kW and 100 kW may be considered for
application of the general service rate solely at the discretion of the city,
as it deems appropriate.




 



   (E)   Large power rate. The large power rate shall be identical to
110% of the city’s wholesale electric cost. The rate shall be reviewed and
adjusted semiannually or as deemed necessary by the city.



 

Customer Charge
 

Summer

 

Winter



Rate
 

$325

 

$325




 



   (F)   Security lighting rate.



 

Security Lighting Rate
 

Summer

 

Winter



Per lamp, per month
 

$15

 

$15




 



   (G)   Municipal service rate and street lighting.



 

Municipal Service Rate and Street Lighting
 

Summer

 

Winter



All kWH
 

$0.0946

 

$0.0746




 



   (H)   Irrigation.



 

Irrigation
 

Fee



Annual charge per horsepower (due to prior irrigation season)
 

$27



Demand charge, per kW
 

$17



Energy charge, per kWH
 

$0.0795




 



   (I)   Adjustments for taxes and other charges. The rates set forth
herein may be increased by the amount of any new or increased governmental
tax imposed and levied on transmission, distribution, production or the sale
of electrical power.



   (J)   Production cost adjustment. The retail rates defined by this
section may be adjusted pursuant to a production cost adjustment in order to
pay the cost for any major construction which is required in order to
maintain or improve the system, or for any major repairs to the system
required in order to maintain the appropriate level of service.



   (K)   Transfer of funds.



      (1)   The Board of Public Works has previously transferred a
percentage of its gross revenues to the General Fund of the city.



      (2)   Pursuant to this section, the Board of Public Works
shall transfer to the city $0.0085 per kWH sold by the Board of Public Works.



   (L)   Rate seasons. For the purpose of defining summer and winter
rates, summer months shall be considered to be the usage months from
approximately April 20 through October 20 (May through October for
interruptible customers) and winter months shall be considered to be the
usage months from approximately October 20 through April 20 (November through
April for interruptible customers).



(1976 Code, § 3-1009)  (Ord. 595, passed 1-11-1979; Ord. 910, passed
11-17-1986; Ord. 945, passed 9-12-1988; Ord. 1167, passed 8-21-1995; Ord.
1284, passed 12-20-2000; Ord. 1377, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 1381, passed
7-25-2005; Ord. 1402, passed 3-10-2008; Ord. 1414, passed 8-9-2010; Ord.
1450, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. 1452, passed 5-5-2014; Ord. 1458, passed
5-18-2015; Ord. 1465, passed 10-17-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902



§ 52.06  RESTRICTED USE.



   (A)   The city electrical system does not guarantee the delivery of
electric current over the lines of the distribution system, except when it
has sufficient power, current, equipment and machinery to do so.



   (B)   The Light Commissioner has the power and authority to
disconnect or discontinue such service for any good and sufficient reason
without liability. The city shall use due care and reasonable diligence to
provide and supply uninterrupted service to consumers, but shall not be
liable for damages resulting from interruption of service due to causes over
which the city has no control and the city expressly reserves the right to
discontinue or disconnect any consumer’s service without preliminary notice.



(1976 Code, § 3-1011)  (Ord. 945, passed 9-12-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902



§ 52.07  POSTING SIGNS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, tack or fasten to the
poles, structures, fixtures or equipment of the city electrical system any
sign, poster, advertisement or banner without written permission from the
Light Commissioner.



(1976 Code, § 3-1013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.08  COGENERATION AND SMALL POWER PRODUCTION.



   The city shall establish guidelines regarding cogeneration and small
power production as it affects the city utilities. The guidelines shall be
established in pamphlet form and incorporated by reference herein as if an
original part hereof.



(1976 Code, § 3-1025)  (Ord. 1416, passed 11-8-2010)



CHAPTER 53:  NATURAL GAS



Section



   53.01   Regulatory authority



   53.02   Rate schedules



   53.03   Refund



   53.04   Other rate changes



   53.05   Information to be provided



   53.06   Notice of application



   53.07   General information



   53.08   Validity of franchise



§ 53.01  REGULATORY AUTHORITY.



   The franchisee shall, at all times, be subject to all rights, power and
authority now or hereafter possessed by the city to regulate and control and
direct the rates and tariffs charged for natural gas service in the city.



(1976 Code, § 10-1001)



§ 53.02  RATE SCHEDULES.



   The franchisee shall provide to the city for informational purposes,
copies of all rate schedules and contracts for all rates charged and the
requirements for service under such schedule within the city. They should
also show separately the base rate and the purchased gas adjustment (PGA)
rate. The base rate shall exclude all gas supply costs and gas supply cost
adjustments. Gas supply costs and gas supply cost adjustments shall be
collected solely through the PGA rate.



(1976 Code, § 10-1002)



§ 53.03  REFUND.



   Any refund including interest thereon, if any, received by the
franchisee from its supplier related to increased rates paid by the
franchisee subject to refund and applicable to natural gas purchased for
resale within the city shall be passed on to presently served customers by an
appropriate adjustment shown as a credit on subsequent bills during a period
selected by the franchisee, not to exceed 12 months, or by a cash refund at
the franchisee’s option, or by such other method as may be approved jointly
by the franchisee and city.



(1976 Code, § 10-1003)



§ 53.04  OTHER RATE CHANGES.



   (A)   In the event the franchisee desires to change its rates for
natural gas service within the city other then to reflect an adjustment for
the cost of purchased gas, the franchisee will present to the city copies of
present and proposed rate schedules and information supporting the proposed
rates to be charged for natural gas service within the city. The rate
schedule and information submitted with the rate schedules shall be referred
to as the rate filing. A filing fee in the amount of $1,500 shall be paid to
the city with the rate filing. Any such rate filing shall be deemed filed
upon receipt of the same and the filing fee by the City Clerk. The fee shall
be considered as an operating cost of the franchisee and shall not be
separately itemized on any customer billings.



   (B)   The City Council shall have the right to select and engage
rate consultants, accountants, auditors, attorneys, engineers and other
experts as deemed necessary or desirable by the City Council to advise and
represent the City Council in evaluating any proposed rate change. The
franchisee shall reimburse the city within 90 days of the presentation of a
bill by the city for the reasonable costs of those services only to the
extent that said costs exceed the filing fee for the rate filing.



   (C)   If the proposed rates sought by the franchisee in its rate
filing have not been passed on final reading by the City Council within 90
days after it was filed, or as such time may be extended by agreement between
franchisee and city in order to supply additional information if requested by
the city, the proposed rates shall be put into effect as interim rates and
shall be collected subject to refund pursuant to Neb. RS 18-415, as the same
may be amended from time to time. Such interim rates shall remain in effect
pending final determination by the city, which determination shall be made
within one year or, in the event of litigation, final rate determination by
the courts.



   (D)   The rates proposed to be charged for non-contract firm natural
gas service within the city shall be based upon the utility’s cost of
providing service to the city or the representative costs in that part of
utility’s service area which includes the city. The period for which the
cost of service is to be recognized may be either a 12-month period preceding
the application for increase or a projected 12-month period commencing not
later than the proposed effective date of the increase. In the event
franchisee utilizes a period of time preceding the application, the city may
require that the franchisee provide a projection based upon the costs of
providing service during a future projected 12-month period commencing not
later than the effective date of the increase, and the city may, at its
option, require that this projection be specifically for the city instead of
another in the service area. The cost of service shall be determined in a
manner consistent with regulated public utility practices and shall include:
appropriate costs as defined and set forth in the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission Uniform System of Accounts Prescribed for Natural Gas Companies
FERC Accounts; and a reasonable return on the utility’s rate base.



   (E)   In determining a reasonable return, a rate (percentage) shall
be employed that is representative of the cost of debt, preferred stock and
common equity capital. The rate base shall consist of the applicable net
investment in utility plant (as defined in the FERC Accounts), allowance for
working capital and such other items as may reasonably be included; less such
investment as may, unless otherwise prevented by law, be attributed to other
than investor capital.



   (F)   The franchisee’s appropriate costs and items of rate base
shall include allocated or apportioned expenses and rate base items, when
such allocations or apportionment are reasonably representative of assigned
common costs and arise from the manner in which the franchisee’s operations
are conducted or from an avoidance of excessive and costly financial record
keeping.



   (G)   Rate filings, not including changes reflecting the cost of
gas, shall be limited to a maximum of one in any 12-calendar-month period.



(1976 Code, § 10-1004)



§ 53.05  INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED.



   (A)   The franchisee shall provide, in its rate filing, three copies
of its most recent annual report to the stockholders and the completed and
signed copies of the “summary of proposed rate change” sheets.



   (B)   In addition, three copies of the following information shall,
on request by city, be provided by the franchisee.



      (1)   A financial summary showing aggregate rate base,
operating revenues, operating expenses, return on rate base and rate of
return:



         (a)   Actual for the most recent calendar year;



         (b)   Number of customers and volume of sales by
customer classes for the projected 12-month period. For the projected
12-month period using natural gas rates currently in effect; and



         (c)   For the projected 12-month period using the
proposed natural gas rates.



      (2)   Rate base schedules, on an original cost basis, showing
for the most recent 12-month period available and for the projected 12-month
period:



         (a)   For utility plant and accumulated depreciation and
amortization components: the beginning and end of period balances by account,
explanations of changes in balances during the period and the calculated rate
base amounts;



         (b)   For cash working capital: in manner in which rate
base amounts are calculated;



         (c)   For other rate base components: beginning and end
of period amounts, explanations of changes in balances during the period and
calculated rate base amounts; and



         (d)   Explanations and calculations of allocated amounts
included in divisions (B)(2)(a) through (B)(2)(c) above.



      (3)   Operating expense schedules, showing:



         (a)   Expenses by FERC accounts for the most recent
calendar year including filing fees and occupation taxes paid to the city;



         (b)   Explanation and calculations of allocated amounts
included in division (B)(3)(a) above;



         (c)   Expenses by FERC accounts or their equivalent for
the projected 12-month period;



         (d)   Explanation of methods employed to develop
projected expenses; and



         (e)   Explanations and calculations of allocated amounts
included in division (B)(3)(c) above.



      (4)   Rate of return/cost of capital schedules showing debt,
preferred stock and common equity amounts at the beginning and end of the
projected 12-month period, explanations of changes during the period and
methods used to calculate or otherwise determine cost of capital.



      (5)   Operating revenue schedules, showing:



         (a)   Number of customers, volume of sales and operating
revenue by customer classes for the most recent calendar year;



         (b)   Number of customers and volume of sales by
customer classes for the projected 12- month period;



         (c)   Explanation of methods employed to determine data
in division (B)(5)(b) above;



         (d)   Operating revenues by rate schedules for the
projected 12-month period using current rates;



         (e)   Operating revenue by customer classes for the
projected 12-month period using proposed rates; and



         (f)   Detailed rates and calculations for divisions
(B)(5)(d) and (B)(5)(e) above, including customer usages (consumption and
analysis) data, peak demand and load factor data by customer class,
allocation methods and justifications and the like.



      (6)   Informational schedules showing for the city as a whole:



         (a)   Cost of utility plant; and



         (b)   Number of customers, volume of sales and operating
revenue by customer classes.



      (7)   Grantee shall clearly designate as part of its expenses,
all expenditures for business gifts and entertainment, institutional,
consumption inducing and other advertising or public relations expenses and
legislative-advocacy expenses. The city may not allow its cost of expenses
for rate making purposes any of these expenditures which the city determines
not to be in the public interest. The franchisee has the burden of showing
these expenses are in the public interest.



(1976 Code, § 10-1005)



§ 53.06  NOTICE OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   The franchisee shall not make changes in its rates, except by
filing a rate filing prescribed with the City Clerk at least 90 days prior to
the proposed effective date of the requested change. Notice of the filing
shall be given by publication by placing a notice to the public of the
proposed change in a newspaper having general circulation in the city.
However, notwithstanding the above, instead of the publication of newspaper
notice contemplated above, the franchisee may provide notice to the public by
mailing such notice by United States mail, postage prepaid, to the billing
address of each directly affected customer, or by including the notice in
such customer’s bill in a conspicuous form. The notice must be in the
following form:



 


NOTICE OF RATE INCREASE


 

The (name of the utility) proposes to increase your rates by (amount of total
annual increase requested) dollars per year, which is an overall increase of
(percentage of increase over all revenues during the applicable test year)
percent and is an increase in base rates of (percentage of increase over all
revenues during the applicable test year which are not subject to escalation
through some form of automatic adjustment clause) per cent. Further
information may be obtained from (name and address of utility official) or
the application on file with the City Clerk.



 



   (B)   An affidavit signed by an official of franchisee and
describing the method of publication of the notice shall be filed with the
City Clerk.



(1976 Code, § 10-1006)



§ 53.07  GENERAL INFORMATION.



   The franchisee shall provide the city, at the request of city, on a
regular continuing basis, within 30 days of publication, copies of documents,
information and data listed below for the franchisee or its parent company as
applicable:



   (A)   Annual report to stockholders;



   (B)   Quarterly report to stockholders;



   (C)   Securities and Exchange Commission Form 10-K, as the same may
be changed from time to time;



   (D)   Securities and Exchange Commission Form 10-Q, as the same may
be changed from time to time;



   (E)   Prospectus for debt securities to be issued;



   (F)   Prospectus for equity securities to be issued; and



   (G)   Distribution system map of the city.



(1976 Code, § 10-1007)



§ 53.08  VALIDITY OF FRANCHISE.



   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
franchise shall for any reason be held invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof.



(1976 Code, § 10-1008)



CHAPTER 54:  WATER



Section



   54.01   Operation and funding



   54.02   Definitions



   54.03   Consumer’s application



   54.04   Water contract



   54.05   Installation procedure; metered service



   54.06   Installation expense



   54.07   Repairs



   54.08   Fees and collections



   54.09   Water rates



   54.10   Water bills



   54.11   Lien



   54.12   Single premises



   54.13   Restricted use



   54.14   Fire hydrants



   54.15   Pollution



   54.16   Mandatory hook-up



   54.17   Water service contracts



   54.18   Inspections



   54.19   Police reports



   54.20   Destruction of property



   54.21   Licensed plumbers



   54.22   Fluoride prohibited



   54.23   Lead pipes, solder and flux



   54.24   Wellhead protection; permit required



§ 54.01  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and operates the city’s Water Department through the
Water Commissioner. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying the cost
of the care, management and maintenance of the city’s Water Department may
each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law,
on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the
corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax
shall be known as the Water Fund and shall remain in the custody of the City
Clerk/Treasurer. The Water Commissioner shall have the direct management and
control of the city’s Water Department and shall faithfully carry out the
duties of his or her office. The Water Commissioner shall have the authority
to adopt rules and regulations for the sanitary and efficient management of
the Water Department subject to the supervision and review of the Board of
Public Works or the governing body. The governing body shall set the rates to
be charged for services rendered by ordinance and shall file a copy of the
rates in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer for public inspection at any
reasonable time.



(1976 Code, § 3-101)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-531, 17-534 and 19-1305



§ 54.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Also,
where no definition is specified, the normal dictionary usage of the word
shall apply.



   MAIN. Any pipe other than a supply or service pipe that is used for the
purpose of carrying water to, and dispersing the same in the city.



   SEPARATE PREMISES. More than one consumer procuring water from the same
service or supply pipe. The second premises may be a separate dwelling,
apartment, building or structure used for a separate business.



   SERVICE PIPE. Any pipe extending from the shutoff, stop box or curb
stop to the premises being served by said service pipe.



   SUPPLY PIPE. Any pipe tapped into a main and extending from the main to
the shutoff, stop box or curb stop for the premises being served by said
SUPPLY PIPE.



   WATER WELL. Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed,
driven, dug, jetted or otherwise constructed for the purpose of exploring for
ground water, monitoring ground water, utilizing the geothermal properties of
the ground or extracting water from or injecting water into the underground
water reservoir. WATER WELL shall not include any excavation made for
obtaining or prospecting for oil, natural gas, minerals or products mined or
quarried or for inserting media to repressure oil or natural gas-bearing
formations.



(1976 Code, § 3-102)  (Ord. 1046, passed 11-20-1991; Ord. 1186, passed
12-18-1995)



§ 54.03  CONSUMER’S APPLICATION.



   (A)   Every owner of property desiring a supply of water must make
application therefor to the Water Commissioner.



   (B)   The Water Commissioner may require any applicant to make a
service deposit in such amount as he or she deems necessary subject to the
review of the Board of Public Works.



   (C)   Water may not be supplied to any house or private service
pipe, except upon the order of the Water Commissioner.



(1976 Code, § 3-103)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-537



§ 54.04  WATER CONTRACT.



   The city, through its Water Department, shall furnish water to persons
within its corporate limits whose premises abut a street or alley in which a
commercial main now is or may hereafter be laid. The city may furnish water
to persons within its corporate limits whose premises do not abut a street or
alley in which a city commercial main is now or may hereafter be laid and may
also furnish water to persons whose premises are situated outside the
corporate limits of the city, as and when, according to law, the governing
body may see fit to do so. The rules, regulations and water rates,
hereinafter named in this chapter, shall be considered a part of every
application hereafter made for water service and shall be considered a part
of the contract between every consumer now or hereafter served. Without
further formality, the making of application on the part of any applicant or
the use or consumption of water service by present consumers thereof and the
furnishing of water service to said consumer shall constitute a contract
between the consumer and the city, to which said contract both parties are
bound. If the consumer shall violate any of the provisions of said contract
or any reasonable rules and regulations that the governing body or Board of
Public Works may hereafter adopt, the Water Commissioner or his or her agent
may cut off or disconnect the water service from the building or premises or
place of such violation. No further connection for water service to said
building, premises or place shall again be made save or except by order of
said Water Commissioner or his or her agent.



(1976 Code, § 3-104)



§ 54.05  INSTALLATION PROCEDURE; METERED SERVICE.



   (A)   (1)   The city shall install all water mains and supply
lines, including the actual tapping into the city main and installation of
the stop box, curb stop and corporation stop. The consumer shall be
responsible for any trenching necessary from the city main to the premises to
be served and for all installation of the service line from the shut off,
stop box or curb stop to the premises served. Meters shall be installed by
the city when the consumer requests service in excess of a three-fourth-inch
tap or where there is more than one tap, the combined size of which is more
than three-fourths of an inch.



      (2)   All installations of the supply line must be of a type
or types of pipe as the governing body or Board of Public Works may from time
to time approve. Installation of the service line must be of copper, one-inch
plastic, 165 pound per square inch plastic or such other type or types of
pipe as the governing body or Board of Public Works may from time to time
approve, and must be laid not less than four feet beneath the surface of the
ground.



      (3)   No tap shall be made into the city water main which is
nearer than two feet of either end of any joint of pipe, nor which is within
18 inches of an existing tap. On four- to six-inch mains, no tap shall be
larger than one inch.



      (4)   In making excavations in streets, alleys or sidewalks
for the purpose of installing pipe, or making repairs, the paving, stones and
earth must be removed and deposited in a manner that will occasion the least
inconvenience to the public and provide for adequate drainage. No person
shall leave an excavation made in the street, alley or sidewalk open at any
time without a barricade and, during the night, warning lights. After service
pipes are laid, the streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be restored to good
condition. If the excavation in any street, alley or sidewalk is left open or
unfinished for a period of 24 hours or more, the Water Commissioner shall
have the duty to finish or correct the work, and all expenses so incurred
shall be charged to the consumer. All installations or repairs of pipes
require inspection by the Water Commissioner. It is the customer’s
responsibility to notify the Commissioner at the time the work is ready for
each inspection. All installation shall be done under the supervision of and
strictly in accordance with the rules, regulations and specifications
prescribed for such installation by the Water Commissioner; provided that,
the said rules, regulations and specifications have been reviewed and
approved by the governing body or the Board of Public Works.



(1976 Code, § 3-105)



   (B)   (1)   All water furnished to industrial or commercial
premises shall be at metered rates through a water meter.



      (2)   All water furnished to residential premises shall be at
metered rates through a water meter.



      (3)   Residential premises without a water meter as of the
effective date of this section shall be permitted to be serviced without a
water meter at the non-metered rate, until the municipality installs a water
meter for such residential premises.



      (4)   All water meters installed pursuant to this division (B)
shall measure water in gallons.



      (5)   (a)   All water meters three-fourths of an inch or
smaller shall remain the property of the city and shall be installed,
maintained and repaired by the city.



         (b)   All water meters in excess of three-fourths of an
inch shall remain the property of the city and be installed, maintained and
repaired at the expense of the city, and the customer shall reimburse the
city the excess cost of acquiring and installing a water meter larger than
three-fourths of an inch.



(1976 Code, § 3-105.01)



(Ord. 949, passed 9-12-1988; Ord. 1030, passed 4-15-1991; Ord. 1121, passed
1-24-1995; Ord. 1186, passed 12-18-1995; Ord. 1212, passed 1-22-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-537



§ 54.06  INSTALLATION EXPENSE.



   (A)   The expense of providing water service from the city main to
the premises served shall be paid by the customer. Said expense shall include
all costs of materials, labor, trenching and tapping, including pipe, stop
box, stop cock and corporation cock.



   (B)   The city shall pay the cost of a water meter where required;
provided, if a meter larger than three-fourths of an inch is required, the
customer shall pay any expense incurred by the city above the price of a
three-fourths-inch meter.



(1976 Code, § 3-106)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-542



§ 54.07  REPAIRS.



   Repairs to the service pipe shall be made by and at the expense of the
customer. All other repairs to the property of the Water Department,
including the meter, shall be made by the city. All water meters shall be
kept in repair by the city at the expense of the city. When meters are worn
out, they shall be replaced and reset by the city at the expense of the city;
provided that, if the customer permits or allows a water meter to be damaged,
injured or destroyed through his or her own recklessness, carelessness or
neglect so that the meter must be repaired or replaced, the Water
Commissioner shall bill and collect from the customer the cost of such meter
repair or replacement in the same manner as water rent is collected.
Permitting a water meter to be damaged or destroyed by freezing shall always
be considered negligence on the part of the customer. All meters shall be
tested at the customer’s request at the expense of the customer any
reasonable number of times; provided that, if the test shows the water meter
to be running 2% or more fast, the expense of such test shall be borne by the
city. The city reserves the right to test any water service meter at any time
and, if said meter is found to be beyond repair, the city shall always have
the right to place a new meter on the customer’s water service fixtures at
city expense. Should a consumer’s meter fail to register properly, the
customer shall be charged for water during the time the meter is out of
repair on the basis of the monthly consumption during the same month of the
preceding year; provided that, if no such basis for comparison exists, the
customer shall be charged such amount as may be reasonably fixed by the Water
Commissioner.



(1976 Code, § 3-107)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-542



§ 54.08  FEES AND COLLECTIONS.



   (A)   The governing body has the power and authority to fix the
rates to be paid by the water consumers for the use of water from the Water
Department. All such fees shall be on file for public inspection at the
office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.



   (B)   The Water Commissioner shall bill the consumers and collect
all money received by the city on the account of the Water Department.



(1976 Code, § 3-108)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-540



§ 54.09  WATER RATES.



   All water consumers shall be liable for the following rates unless and
until the consumer shall, by written order, direct the Water Commissioner to
shut off the water at the stop box, in which case the consumer shall not be
liable thereafter for water service until the water is turned on again.



 


Residential - Monthly Use Rate




Un-metered residential

 

$23 per dwelling unit, per month




Metered

 

$15.50 base charge plus $0.90 commodity fee per 1,000 gallons









 


Business and Commercial - Monthly Use Rate




Base charge

 

$20 plus commodity fee (see below)




Commodity fee per 1,000 gallons

 

$0.90



NOTES TO TABLE:


All account metered.




 



(1976 Code, § 3-109)  (Ord. 596, passed 1-11-1979; Ord. 659, passed
3-26-1981; Ord. 898, passed 5-12-1986; Ord. 948, passed 7-18-1988; Ord. 985,
passed 11-6-1989; Ord. 1031, passed 4-15-1991; Ord. 1034, passed 5-21-1991;
Ord. 1301, passed 5-20-2002; Ord. 1378, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 1423, passed
8-8-2011; Ord. 1460, passed 1-18-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-542



§ 54.10  WATER BILLS.



   Water bills shall be due and payable monthly at the office of the
city’s Book Keeper. The Water Commissioner shall read or cause to be read
water meters monthly between the eighteenth day and the twentieth day of the
month during which service is used; provided, meters will be read on the last
day of the month, upon request. The Water Commissioner shall direct the
city’s Book Keeper to charge and collect from each customer for the amount
of water consumed since the last examination together with any other charges,
properly itemized, due the Water Department. Bills shall be mailed on the
last day of each month and shall be payable by the tenth of each month. Bills
not paid by the tenth day of each month shall be deemed to be delinquent.
Upon being deemed to be delinquent, as herein defined, the city’s Book
Keeper shall give a written notice to the customer of such delinquency and
shall demand payment immediately. In the event that the bill is not paid
within seven days after the sending of said notice, it shall be discretionary
with the Commissioner to cut off service at any time; provided, if the
delinquent customer is a known welfare recipient, it shall be the duty of the
city’s Book Keeper to notify the customer and the county’s Welfare
Department by certified mail of the proposed termination. The Water
Commissioner shall assess an additional fee set by resolution of the
governing body and on file at the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer in the
event that water is shut off for the non-payment of any water bill, to
compensate the city for the additional hookup necessary to again provide
water service to the delinquent customer.



(1976 Code, § 3-110)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-542 and 18-416



§ 54.11  LIEN.



   In addition to all other remedies, if a customer shall for any reason
remain indebted to the city for water service furnished, such amount due,
together with any rents and charges in arrears, shall be considered a
delinquent water rent which is hereby declared to be a lien upon the real
estate for which the same was used. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall notify in
writing or cause to be notified in writing, all owners of premises or their
agents whenever their tenants or lessees are 60 days or more delinquent in
the payment of water rent. It shall be the duty of the Water Commissioner on
June 1 of each year to report to the governing body a list of all unpaid
accounts due for water together with a description of the premises upon which
the same was used. The report shall be examined and, if approved by the
governing body, shall be certified by the City Clerk/Treasurer to the County
Clerk to be collected as a special tax in the manner provided by law.



(1976 Code, § 3-111)



§ 54.12  SINGLE PREMISES.



   (A)   No consumer shall supply water to other families, or allow
them to take water from his or her premises, nor after water is supplied into
a building shall any person make or employ a plumber or other person to make
a tap or connection with the pipe upon the premises for alteration, extension
or attachment without the written permission of the Water Commissioner.



   (B)   It shall further be unlawful for any person to tamper with any
water meter or by means of any contrivance or device to divert the water from
the service pipe so that the water will not pass through the meter or while
passing through said meter to cause the meter to register inaccurately.



(1976 Code, § 3-112)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-537



§ 54.13  RESTRICTED USE.



   The governing body or the Water Commissioner may order a reduction in
the use of water or shutoff the water on any premises in the event of a water
shortage due to fire or other good and sufficient cause. The city shall not
be liable for any damages caused by shutting off the supply of water of any
consumer while the system or any part thereof is undergoing repairs or when
there is a shortage of water due to circumstances over which the city has no
control.



(1976 Code, § 3-113)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-537



§ 54.14  FIRE HYDRANTS.



   All hydrants for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared
to be public hydrants, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than
members of the city’s Fire Department under the orders of the Fire Chief,
or the Assistant Fire Chief; or members of the Water Department to open or
attempt to open any of the hydrants and draw water from the same, or in any
manner to interfere with the hydrants.



(1976 Code, § 3-114)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 54.15  POLLUTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or attempt to pollute
any stream or source of water for the supply of the city’s Water Department.



(1976 Code, § 3-115)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-536



§ 54.16  MANDATORY HOOK-UP.



   All persons within 300 feet of a water main shall be required, upon
notice by the governing body, to hookup with the city water system.



(1976 Code, § 3-116)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-539



§ 54.17  WATER SERVICE CONTRACTS.



   (A)   Contracts for water service are not transferable.



   (B)   Any person wishing to change from one location to another
shall make a new application and sign a new contract.



   (C)   If any consumer shall move from the premises where service is
furnished, or if the said premises is destroyed by fire or other casualty, he
or she shall at once inform the Water Commissioner who shall cause the water
service to be shut off at the said premises.



   (D)   If the consumer should fail to give such notice, he or she
shall be charged for all water used on the said premises until the Water
Commissioner is otherwise advised of such circumstances.



(1976 Code, § 3-117)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-537



§ 54.18  INSPECTIONS.



   The Water Commissioner, or his or her duly authorized agents, shall
have free access, at any reasonable time, to all parts of each premises and
building to, or in which, water is delivered for the purpose of examining the
pipes, fixtures and other portions of the system to ascertain whether there
is any disrepair or unnecessary waste of water.



(1976 Code, § 3-118)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-537



§ 54.19  POLICE REPORTS.



   It shall be the duty of the city police to report to the Water
Commissioner all cases of leakage and waste in the use of water and all
violations of the city code relating to the Water Department. They shall have
the additional duty of enforcing the observance of such regulations.



(1976 Code, § 3-119)



§ 54.20  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly
break, injure or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture,
attachment or appurtenance of the city’s Water Department.



   (B)   No person may deposit anything in a stop box or commit any act
tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of any of the above mentioned
property without the written permission of the Water Commissioner.



(1976 Code, § 3-120)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 54.21  LICENSED PLUMBERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any plumber or pipe fitter to do any
work upon any of the pipes or appurtenances of the system of waterworks, or
to make any connection with or extension of the supply pipes of any consumer
taking water from the said system until such plumber or pipe fitter shall
have first procured a license or permit from the city.



   (B)   All plumbing shall be done in the manner required by the Water
Commissioner.



   (C)   The said licensed plumber shall be at all times subject to the
inspection and approval of the Water Commissioner and it shall be further
unlawful to cover or conceal willfully any defective or unsatisfactory
plumbing work.



(1976 Code, § 3-121)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-537



§ 54.22  FLUORIDE PROHIBITED.



   Fluoride shall not be added to the water supply of the city.



(1976 Code, § 3-122)



§ 54.23  LEAD PIPES, SOLDER AND FLUX.



   (A)   Any pipe, solders or flux used in the installation or repair
of any residential or non-residential facility which is connected to the
public water supply system shall be lead free.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, LEAD-FREE shall mean:



      (1)   Solders and flux: not more than 0.2% lead; and



      (2)   Pipe and pipe fittings: not more than 8% lead.



(1976 Code, § 3-125)  (Ord. 946, passed 5-2-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 71-5301



§ 54.24  WELLHEAD PROTECTION; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place, maintain, construct or
otherwise have any of the following structures or activities within the
distance specified below from an existing city well.



 

Category
 

Distance





Absorption or disposal field for waste
 

500 ft.



All water wells
 

1,000 ft.



Cesspool
 

500 ft.



Chemical storage
 

500 ft.



Corral
 

500 ft.



Dump
 

500 ft.



Feedlot or feedlot runoff
 

500 ft.



Petroleum storage
 

500 ft.



Pit toilet
 

500 ft.



Sanitary landfill
 

500 ft.



Septic tank
 

500 ft.



Sewage lagoon
 

1,000 ft.



Sewage treatment plant
 

500 ft.



Sewage wet well
 

500 ft.





 



   (B)   The City Council may consider locations at a closer proximity
than the minimum distances above. Approval for such location may be given
when circumstances require such a location and when the applicant
demonstrates to the City Council that such a location will not constitute a
pollution hazard to the city water supply. Before the City Council may
consider such a request, the applicant must ensure present and future
compliance with all State Department of Health and Department of Water
Resources regulations.



   (C)   The placement of a water well in the city or within 1,000 feet
of the corporate limits of the city is prohibited, unless the owner of the
property upon which the water well is to be placed first obtains the written
permission of the City Council. Permission of the City Council shall not be
required if the well is required by a federal or state governmental agency;
provided that, application is made to and permission is granted by the
city’s Water Commissioner prior to placement of any such well. The city’s
Water Commissioner shall have the authority to grant permission for the
placement of a water well in an emergency situation; provided that, the
matter shall be submitted to the City Council for approval as soon as
possible following approval by the Water Commissioner.



   (D)   Wells in existence and in use as of 11-20-1991 shall continue
to be permitted unless such continued existence or use presents a hazard to
the quality or quantity of drinking water available for public use. The owner
of any well shall have the burden of establishing the existence and use of
such well at the time of the effective date of this section to the
satisfaction of the City Council.



(1976 Code, § 3-126)  (Ord. 1046, passed 11-20-1991; Ord. 1047, passed
1-20-1992; Ord. 1094, passed 8-9-1993)



CHAPTER 55:  SEWERS



Section




General Provisions




   55.01   Operation and funding



   55.02   Definitions



   55.03   Unlawful deposits of waste; cesspools and the like



   55.04   Mandatory hookup



   55.05   Connection to public sewer; notice



   55.06   Service contracts



   55.07   Repairs and replacement



   55.08   Classification for fees



   55.09   User charge system



   55.10   Payment of charges



   55.11   User charge review



   55.12   Manholes



   55.13   Prohibited discharges



   55.14   Hazardous and prohibited discharges; preliminary treatment



   55.15   Destruction of property



   55.16   Inspections




Private Sewage Disposal




   55.30   When applicable



   55.31   Permit required; fee



   55.32   Permit; when effective; inspections



   55.33   Specifications



   55.34   When not applicable



   55.35   Maintenance



   55.36   Additional requirements




Building Sewer Installation




   55.50   Permit required



   55.51   Classification; permit application fee



   55.52   Expense



   55.53   Single premises



   55.54   Use of existing sewers



   55.55   Construction codes



   55.56   Unlawful connection



   55.57   Inspections



   55.58   Excavations



 



   55.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 55.01  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and operates the city sewer system through the Sewer
Commissioner. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of
the management and maintenance of the city sewer system may, each year, levy
a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law on the actual
valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate
limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be
known as the “Sewer Maintenance Fund”. The Sewer Commissioner shall have
the direct management and control of the Sewer Department and shall
faithfully carry out the duties of his or her office. He or she shall have
the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the sanitary and efficient
management of the Department subject to the supervision and review of the
governing body or Board of Public Works.



(1976 Code, § 3-201)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-149 and 17-925.01



§ 55.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BIOLOGICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste or other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.



   HEAVY COMMERCIAL OR HEAVY INSTITUTIONAL CONTRIBUTOR. Any commercial or
institutional contributor whose discharge may exceed 15,000 gallons per
month, but whose discharge can reasonably be expected to be of normal or less
than normal strength.



   HEAVY INDUSTRIAL CONTRIBUTOR. Any industrial contributor whose
discharge may be of greater than normal strength or may exceed 15,000 gallons
per month.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.



   LIGHT COMMERCIAL CONTRIBUTOR. Any contributor to the city’s treatment
works whose premises are used for commercial retail trade or office purposes
and whose discharge to the wastewater system can reasonably be expected to be
less than 15,000 gallons per month.



   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL CONTRIBUTOR. Any contributor whose premises are used
for industrial or manufacturing purposes, who discharges no process, product
cleaning or cooling water to the wastewater system and whose discharge can
reasonably be expected to be of normal or less than normal strength and less
than 15,000 gallons per month.



   LIGHT INSTITUTIONAL CONTRIBUTOR. Any city office, school, library and
the like, whose discharge can reasonably be expected to be less than 15,000
gallons per month.



   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. Wastewater that has a BOD concentration of
not more than 165 mg/l and a suspended solids concentration of not more than
170 mg/l.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. All expenditures during the useful life of
the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities and other items which are
necessary for managing and maintaining the sewage works to achieve the
capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.



   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch
(1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and is controlled by public authority.



   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such
works were designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
includes REPLACEMENT.



   RESIDENTIAL CONTRIBUTOR. Any contributor to the city’s treatment
works whose lot, parcel of real estate or building is used primarily or
essentially for single-family domestic dwelling purposes. Rooming or boarding
house will be considered to be RESIDENTIAL CONTRIBUTORS only if the area
rented out comprises less than 40% of the total usable area of the dwelling.
Apartment units, trailers and other multiple dwelling units shall be billed
as individual residential units.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments together with
such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used
for treating sewage.



   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.



   STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and
drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted
cooling water.



   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the Board of Public Works of the
city, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and are removable by laboratory
filtering.



   TRAP. A fitting or device so constructed as to prevent the passage of
air or gas through a pipe without materially affecting the flow of sewage or
waste through it.



   TREATMENT WORKS.



      (1)   Any devices and systems for the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of city sewage, domestic sewage or liquid
industrial wastes.



      (2)   These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers,
sewage collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power and other
equipment and their appurtenances; extensions improvement, remodeling,
additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable
recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities;
and any works, including site acquisition of the land that will be an
integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of
residues resulting from such treatment (including land for composting sludge,
temporary storage of such compost and land used for the storage of treated
wastewater in land treatment systems before land application); or any other
method or system of preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating,
separating or disposing of city waste or industrial waste, including waste in
combined storm water and sanitary sewer systems.



   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which a treatment works will
be operated.



   USER CHARGE. The portion of the total wastewater service charge which
is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement of the wastewater treatment works.



   WATER METER. A water volume measuring and recording device, furnished
and/or installed by the city or furnished and/or installed by a user and
approved by the city.



   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.



(1976 Code, § 3-202)  (Ord. 1036, passed 6-17-1991; Ord. 1379, passed
6-6-2005)



§ 55.03  UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS OF WASTE; CESSPOOLS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or
permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.



(1976 Code, § 3-203)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.



(1976 Code, § 3-203.01)



   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(1976 Code, § 3-203.02)



(Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)  Penalty, see § 55.99



§ 55.04  MANDATORY HOOKUP.



   (A)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for
human employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
city, is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 60 days
after date of official notice to do so; provided that, said public sewer is
within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.



   (B)   In the event that any property owner, occupant or lessee shall
neglect, fail or refuse, within a period of ten days after second notice has
been given to him or her to do so by registered mail or by publication in a
newspaper in or of general circulation in the city, to make such connection,
the governing body shall have the power to cause the same to be done, to
assess the cost thereof against the property and to collect the assessment
thus made in the manner provided for collection of other special taxes and
assessments.



(1976 Code, § 3-204)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



§ 55.05  CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER; NOTICE.



   (A)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer
shall be connected to said sewer within 60 days and the private sewage
disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank run
gravel or dirt.



   (B)   In the event that any property owner, occupant or lessee shall
neglect, fail or refuse, within a period of ten days after second notice has
been given to him or her to do so by registered mail or by publication in a
newspaper in or of general circulation in the city, to make such connection,
the governing body shall have the power to cause the same to be done, to
assess the cost thereof against the property and to collect the assessment
thus made in the manner provided for collection of other special taxes and
assessments.



(1976 Code, § 3-206)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



§ 55.06  SERVICE CONTRACTS.



   (A)   Contracts for sewer service are not transferable. Any person
wishing to change from one location to another shall make a new application
and sign a new contract.



   (B)   If any customer shall move from the premises where service is
furnished, or if the said premises is destroyed by fire or other casualty, he
or she shall at once inform the Sewer Commissioner who shall cause the sewer
service to be shut off from the said premises. If the customer should fail to
give notice, he or she shall be charged for that period of time until the
Sewer Commissioner is otherwise advised of such circumstances.



(1976 Code, § 3-207)



§ 55.07  REPAIRS AND REPLACEMENT.



   (A)   (1)   The city’s Sewer Department may require the owner
of any property which is within the city and connected to the public sewers
or drains to repair or replace any connection line which serves the owner’s
property and is broken, clogged or otherwise in need of repair or replacement.



      (2)   The property owner’s duty to repair or replace such a
connection line shall include those portions upon the owner’s property and
those portions upon public property or easements up to and including the
point of junction with the public main.



   (B)   (1)   The city’s Clerk/Treasurer shall give the property
owner notice by registered letter or certified mail, directed to the
last-known address of such owner or the agent of such owner, directing the
repair or replacement of such connection line.



      (2)   If, within 30 days of mailing such notice, the property
owner fails or neglects to cause such repairs or replacements to be made, the
Utilities Superintendent may cause such work to be done and assess the cost
upon the property served by such connection.



(1976 Code, § 3-210)  (Ord. 758, passed 9-6-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1748



§ 55.08  CLASSIFICATION FOR FEES.



   The governing body may classify for the purpose of rental fees the
customers of the city’s Sewer Department; provided that, such
classifications are reasonable and do not discriminate unlawfully against any
consumer or group of consumers.



(1976 Code, § 3-211)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-925.02



§ 55.09  USER CHARGE SYSTEM.



   (A)   (1)   The user charge system shall generate adequate annual
revenues to pay costs of annual operation and maintenance including
replacement and costs associated with debt retirement of bonded capital
associated with financing the treatment works which the city may by ordinance
designate to be paid by the user charge system. The portion of the total user
charge which is designated for operation and maintenance including
replacement of the treatment works shall be established by this division (A)
and division (B) below.



      (2)   The portion of the total user charge collected which is
designated for operation and maintenance including replacement purposes as
established in division (A)(a) above shall be deposited in a separate
non-lapsing fund known as the Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund and
will be kept in two primary accounts as follows:



         (a)   An account designated for the specific purposes of
defraying operation and maintenance costs (excluding replacement) of the
treatment works (Operation and Maintenance Account); and



         (b)   An account designated for the specific purpose of
ensuring replacement needs over the useful life of the treatment works
(Replacement Account). Deposits in the replacement account shall be made
annually from the operation, maintenance and replacement revenue in the
amount of $7,631 annually.



      (3)   Fiscal year-end balances in the operation and
maintenance account and the replacement account shall be carried over to the
same accounts in the subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no other
purposes than those designated for these accounts. Moneys which have been
transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the Operation,
Maintenance and Replacement Fund shall be returned to their respective
accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user charge rates for operation,
maintenance and replacement. The user charge rate(s) shall be adjusted such
that the transferred moneys will be returned to their respective amounts
within the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the moneys were
borrowed.



(1976 Code, § 3-212)



   (B)   The following classes of users and charges to those users are
hereby established.



      (1)   Residential.



 


Residential - Monthly Use Rate



Base charge
 
$30, plus commodity fee (see below)


Commodity fee per 1,000 gallons
 
$1.25


NOTES TO TABLE:

Sewer usage charge shall be based on water usage computed on the average
monthly usage during the months of December, January and February.



 



      (2)   Business and commercial.



 


Business and Commercial - Monthly Use Rate



Base charge
 
$30, plus commodity fee (see below)


Commodity fee per 1,000 gallons
 
$1.25


NOTES TO TABLE:

(1) Any business or commercial account that waters its lawn or landscaping
will have its sewer charged based on average monthly water usage during the
months of December, January and February.

(2) All other businesses or commercial accounts will be charged sewer rates
based on actual monthly water usage.



 



      (3)   Surcharges.



         (a)   Sewer surcharges shall apply to all customers
discharging wastewater with a five-day biological oxygen demand (BOD) greater
than 300 mg/l per weight or containing more than 350 mg/l by weight total
suspended solids (TSS) or containing more than 50 mg/l by weight of total
Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN-ammonia).



         (b)   Monthly loading rates shall be calculated with the
average monthly water use and monthly laboratory testing.



            1.   The surcharge rate for excess BOD shall be
billed at the rate of $0.35/lb.



            2.   The surcharge for excess TSS shall be billed
at the rate of $0.35/lb.



            3.   The surcharge for excess TKN shall be billed
at the rate of $0.35/lb.



      (4)   The effective date of this division (B) shall be
3-1-2016.



(1976 Code, § 3-212.01)



   (C)   Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an
increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the city’s
treatment works, or any user which discharges any substance which singly or
by interaction with other substances causes identifiable increases in the
cost of operation, maintenance or replacement of the treatment works, shall
pay for such increased costs. The charge to each such user shall be as
determined by the responsible plant operating personnel and approved by the
City Council. The user charge rates established in this chapter apply to all
users, regardless of their location of the city’s treatment works.



(1976 Code, § 3-212.03)



(Ord. 630, passed 9-27-1979; Ord. 655, passed 2-19-1981; Ord. 897, passed
5-12-1986; Ord. 1036, passed 6-17-1991; Ord. 1117, passed 11-21-1994; Ord.
1242, passed 10-20-1997; Ord. 1379, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 1383, passed
10-24-2005; Ord. 1424, passed 8-8-2011; Ord. 1460, passed 1-18-2016)



§ 55.10  PAYMENT OF CHARGES.



   (A)   All users shall be billed monthly. Billings for any particular
month shall be made within 30 days after the end of that month. Payments are
due when the billings are made. Any payment not received within ten days
after the billing is made shall be delinquent.



   (B)   (1)   If delinquent for more than 30 days, water and/or
sewer service shall be discontinued.



      (2)   After payment of the delinquent payment, plus a
reconnection charge of $3, service will be restored.



(1976 Code, § 3-213)  (Ord. 655, passed 2-19-1981)



§ 55.11  USER CHARGE REVIEW.



   (A)   The city will review the user charge system every two years,
and revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates
adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance including
replacement and that the system continues to provide for the proportional
distribution of operation and maintenance including replacement costs among
users and user classes. For the flat rate system of user charges, any excess
revenues collected from a class of users shall be credited to that class for
the next year and its rates will be adjusted accordingly.



   (B)   The city will notify each user at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate being charged for operation,
maintenance including replacement of the treatment works.



(1976 Code, § 3-214)  (Ord. 655, passed 2-19-1981)



§ 55.12  MANHOLES.



   Entrance into a manhole or opening for any purpose, except by
authorized persons is hereby prohibited. It shall be unlawful to deposit or
cause to be deposited in any receptacle connected with the sewer system any
substance which is not the usual and natural waste carried by the sewer
system.



(1976 Code, § 3-215)  Penalty, see § 55.99



§ 55.13  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
including interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling
water or unpolluted industrial waters to any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers
or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged, on
approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural
outlet.



(1976 Code, § 3-216)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)  Penalty, see § 55.99



§ 55.14  HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in
the wastes as discharged to the public sewer;



      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works; and



      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such
size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the
like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



(1976 Code, § 3-217)



   (B)   (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears
likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property
or constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to
such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree
of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent
factors. The substances prohibited are:



         (a)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher
than 150°F (65°C);



         (b)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F
and 150°F (0°C and 65°C);



         (c)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor
three-fourths horsepower (seventy-six-hundredths hp metric) or greater shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent;



         (d)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium,
copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes
exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials;



         (e)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other
taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment
of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;



         (f)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



         (g)   Any waters of wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;



         (h)   Materials which exert or cause:



            1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended
solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime
residues) or of dissolved solids, (such as but not limited to, sodium
chloride or sodium sulfate);



            2.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not
limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



            3.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or
chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load
on the sewage treatment works; and/or



            4.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of
wastes constituting “slugs”, as defined herein.



         (i)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are
not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters;



         (j)   Any waters or wastes having:



            1.   A five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per
million by weight;



            2.   Containing more than 350 parts per million by
weight of suspended solids; or



            3.   Having an average daily flow greater than 2%
of the average sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review of the
Superintendent.



      (2)   Where necessary, in the opinion of the Superintendent,
the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment as
may be necessary to:



         (a)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts
per million by weight;



         (b)   Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per
million by weight; or



         (c)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of
such waters or wastes.



      (3)   Plans, specifications and other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for
the approval of the Superintendent and no construction of such facilities
shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.



(1976 Code, § 3-218)



   (C)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in division (B) above,
and which in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life to constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:



         (a)   Reject the wastes;



         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition
for discharge to the public sewers;



         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or



         (d)   Require payment to cover the added cost of
handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges under the provisions of division (H) below.



      (2)   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent,
and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.



(1976 Code, § 3-219)



   (D)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that, such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.



(1976 Code, § 3-220)



   (E)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.



(1976 Code, § 3-221)



   (F)   (1)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and
other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling
and measurement of the wastes.



      (2)   Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.



(1976 Code, § 3-222)



   (G)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter, shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of
all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.)



(1976 Code, § 3-223)



   (H)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefor, by the industrial concern.



(1976 Code, § 3-224)



(Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)  Penalty, see § 55.99



§ 55.15  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   No unauthorized person or persons shall maliciously, willfully or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the sewage works.



(1976 Code, § 3-225)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)  Penalty, see § 55.99



§ 55.16  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The Superintendent or his or her representatives shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical,
oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways
or facilities for waste treatment.



(1976 Code, § 3-226)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the
company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain safe conditions as required in § 55.14(F) of this chapter.



(1976 Code, § 3-227)



   (C)   (1)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized
employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within said easement.



      (2)   All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(1976 Code, § 3-228)



(Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)




PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL




§ 55.30  WHEN APPLICABLE.



   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 55.04 of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected
to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this
subchapter.



(1976 Code, § 3-205)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



§ 55.31  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Sewer
Commissioner. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the Board of Public Works, which the applicant shall supplement
by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by
the Sewer Commissioner. A permit and inspection fee determined by the Board
of Public Works shall be paid at the time the application is filed.



(1976 Code, § 3-205.01)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980; Ord. 1293, passed
6-25-2001)



§ 55.32  PERMIT; WHEN EFFECTIVE; INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent.



   (B)   He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered.



   (C)   The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of
notice by the Superintendent.



(1976 Code, § 3-205.02)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



§ 55.33  SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the state’s
Department of Environmental Control.



   (B)   No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities when the area of the
lot is less than 10,000 square feet.



   (C)   No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to
any natural outlet.



(1976 Code, § 3-205.03)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



§ 55.34  WHEN NOT APPLICABLE.



   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in § 55.04 of this
chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with
suitable material.



(1976 Code, § 3-205.04)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



§ 55.35  MAINTENANCE.



   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.



(1976 Code, § 3-205.05)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



§ 55.36  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.



(1976 Code, § 3-205.06)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)




BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION




§ 55.50  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.



(1976 Code, § 3-208)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)  Penalty, see § 55.99



§ 55.51  CLASSIFICATION; PERMIT APPLICATION FEE.



   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for
residential and commercial service; and for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes.



   (B)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the Board of Public Works.



   (C)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the Sewer Commissioner.



   (D)   A permit and inspection fee determined by the Board of Public
Works shall be paid at the time the application is filed.



   (E)   All sewer taps shall be made using a tapping machine to be
furnished by the Board of Public Works.



(1976 Code, § 3-208.01)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980; Ord. 1293, passed
6-25-2001)



§ 55.52  EXPENSE.



   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.



(1976 Code, § 3-208.02)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



§ 55.53  SINGLE PREMISES.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.



(1976 Code, § 3-208.03)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



§ 55.54  USE OF EXISTING SEWERS.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet
all requirements of this subchapter.



(1976 Code, § 3-208.04)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



§ 55.55  CONSTRUCTION CODES.



   (A)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall
apply.



   (B)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.



   (C)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of
Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight.
Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved
by the Superintendent before installation.



(1976 Code, § 3-208.05)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



§ 55.56  UNLAWFUL CONNECTION.



   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior and
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface
runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



(1976 Code, § 3-208.06)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)  Penalty, see § 55.99



§ 55.57  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer.



   (B)   The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision
of the Superintendent or his or her representative.



(1976 Code, § 3-208.07)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



§ 55.58  EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
city.



   (B)   In making excavations in streets, alleys or sidewalks for the
purpose of installing pipe or making repairs, the paving, stones and earth
must be removed and deposited in a manner that will occasion the least
inconvenience to the public and provide for adequate drainage. No person
shall leave an excavation made in the street, alley or sidewalk open at any
time without a barricade, and during the night, warning lights. After the
house sewer is laid, the public ways and property shall be restored to good
condition. If the excavation in the public ways and property is left open or
unfinished for a period of 24 hours or more, the Sewer Commissioner shall
have the duty to finish or correct the work, and all expenses so incurred
shall be charged to the owner, occupant or lessee of the property.



(1976 Code, § 3-209)  (Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)  Penalty, see § 55.99



§ 55.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person violating § 55.15 shall be subject to immediate
arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.



(1976 Code, § 3-225)



   (C)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter
except § 55.15 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.



(1976 Code, § 3-229)



   (D)   (1)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond
the time limit provided in division (C) above, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not
exceeding $100 for each violation. Each 24-hour period in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



      (2)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the city by reason of such violation.



(1976 Code, § 3-230)



(Ord. 629, passed 5-8-1980)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   VEHICLE OPERATION



      72.   PARKING RULES



      73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



      74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      75.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Littering from vehicles



   70.03   Signs; defacing, unauthorized display




Administration and Enforcement




   70.15   Accidents



   70.16   Emergency regulations; authority



   70.17   Refusal to obey police



   70.18   Traffic officers




Registration, Equipment and Operation Requirements




   70.30   Operator and vehicle license



   70.31   Trailers



   70.32   License plates



   70.33   Equipment and maintenance



   70.34   Unobstructed views



   70.35   Loads



 



   70.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   The words and phrases used in this traffic code, pertaining to
motor vehicles and traffic regulations, shall be construed as defined in Neb.
RS Ch. 60, Art. 6, as now existing or hereafter amended. If not defined in
the designated statutes, the word or phrase shall have its common meaning.



   (B)   A MOTOR VEHICLE is every self-propelled land vehicle not
operated upon rails, except bicycles, mopeds, self-propelled chairs used by
persons who are disabled and electric personal assistive mobility devices.



(1976 Code, § 5-101)  (Ord. 1125, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1461, passed
2-8-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-606 through 60-676



§ 70.02  LITTERING FROM VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drop, or cause to be left, upon
any municipal highway, street or alley, except at places designated by the
governing body, any rubbish, debris or waste, and any person so doing shall
be guilty of littering.



(1976 Code, § 5-301)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-683



§ 70.03  SIGNS; DEFACING, UNAUTHORIZED DISPLAY.



   (A)   Defacing or interfering with. It shall be unlawful for any
person to willfully deface, injure, remove, obstruct or interfere with any
official traffic sign or signal.



(1976 Code, § 5-302)



   (B)   Unauthorized  display. It shall be unlawful for any person to
maintain or display upon, or in view of any street, any unofficial sign,
signal or device which purports to be, is an imitation of, or resembles an
official traffic sign or signal which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, or which hides from view, or interferes with the effectiveness of
any official sign or signal. Every such prohibited sign, signal or device is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and any police officer is hereby
empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed, without notice.



(1976 Code, § 5-303)



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-618, 39-619




ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 70.15  ACCIDENTS.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident upon a
public highway, private road or private drive, resulting in injury or death
to any person shall:



      (1)   Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the
accident;



      (2)   Give his or her name, address and the registration
number of his or her vehicle, and exhibit his or her operator’s, or
chauffeur’s license, to the person struck, or the driver, or occupants, of
any vehicle collided with; and



      (3)   Render to any person injured in such accident reasonable
assistance, including the carrying of such person to a physician or surgeon
for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is
necessary, or is requested by the injured person.



   (B)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident, whether
upon the public highway, private road or private drive, resulting in damage
to property shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident
and give his or her name, address and the registration number of his or her
vehicle, and exhibit his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license to the
owner of the property struck, or the driver, or occupants of any other
vehicle involved in the collision.



(1976 Code, § 5-323)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-6,104.01, 39-6,104.02



§ 70.16  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to make and enforce
temporary traffic regulations to cover emergencies.



(1976 Code, § 5-325)



   (B)   The municipal police are hereby authorized, empowered and
ordered to exercise all powers, and duties, with relation to the management
of street traffic and to direct, control, stop, restrict, regulate and, when
necessary, temporarily divert or exclude, in the interest of public safety,
health and convenience the movement of pedestrian, animal and vehicular
traffic of every kind in streets, parks and on bridges. The driver of any
vehicle shall stop upon the signal of any police officer.



(1976 Code, § 5-326)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-6,192



§ 70.17  REFUSAL TO OBEY POLICE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, or fail to comply with,
any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer.



(1976 Code, § 5-327)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-697



§ 70.18  TRAFFIC OFFICERS.



   The governing body or the municipal police may at any time detail
officers, to be known as “traffic officers,” at street intersections. All
traffic officers shall be vested with the authority to regulate and control
traffic at the intersections to which they are assigned. It shall be their
duty to direct the movement of traffic and prevent congestion and accidents.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any order, or signal, of any
such traffic officer notwithstanding the directive of a stop sign, or signal
device, which may have been placed at any such intersection.



(1976 Code, § 5-328)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-669.21, 39-697, 39-6,192




REGISTRATION, EQUIPMENT AND OPERATION REQUIREMENTS




§ 70.30  OPERATOR AND VEHICLE LICENSE.



   (A)   No person shall operate or park a motor vehicle upon any
street, alley or public highway within the municipality without having first
registered the same in accordance with Neb. RS Ch. 60, Art. 3, and Neb. RS
60-321, except as provided in this section. A person may operate a motor
vehicle without registration for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date
of purchase. Upon registration, such vehicle shall have the required number
plates displayed upon said vehicle in the manner and places provided for by
Neb. RS 60-323. If a citation is issued to an owner or operator of a vehicle
for a violation of this division (A) and the owner properly registers and
licenses the vehicle not in compliance and pays all taxes and fees due and
the owner or operator provides proof of such registration to the prosecuting
attorney within ten days after the issuance of the citation, no prosecution
for the offense cited shall occur.



   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any street, alley
or public highway without having obtained a motor vehicle operator’s
license in accordance with Neb. RS Ch. 60, Art. 4. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street, alley or public
highway during the period that his or her operator’s license has been
revoked or canceled.



(1976 Code, § 5-401)  (Ord. 1051, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 1128, passed
2-6-1995; Ord. 1194, passed 1-22-1996)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-302, 60-320, 60-320.01, 60-321,
60-323, 60-4,186



§ 70.31  TRAILERS.



   No trailer, semi-trailer or cabin trailer shall be operated or parked
on any street, alley or public highway within the municipality without having
first registered the same in accordance with Neb. RS Ch. 60, Art. 3, and Neb.
RS 60-321, except as provided in this section. A person may pull such
trailer, semi-trailer or cabin trailer without registration for a period not
to exceed 30 days from the date of purchase. Upon registration, such trailer,
semi-trailer or cabin trailer shall have the required number plate displayed
upon said trailer as provided for by Neb. RS 60-311. If a citation is issued
to an owner or operator of a vehicle for a violation of this section and the
owner properly registers and licenses the vehicle not in compliance and pays
all taxes and fees due and the owner or operator provides proof of such
registration to the prosecuting attorney within ten days after the issuance
of the citation, no prosecution for the offense cited shall occur.



(1976 Code, § 5-402)  (Ord. 1129, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1195, passed
1-22-1996)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-302, 60-320, 60-321



§ 70.32  LICENSE PLATES.



   The license plates, required on every motor vehicle by laws of the
state, or by laws of any other state while such vehicle is operated within
the corporate limits, shall be kept clear and free from grease, dust or other
blurring matter so they will be plainly visible at all times, and shall be
attached in such manner as to be clearly readable at a distance of 100 feet
and under no circumstances shall they be obstructed by any portion of the
vehicle.



(1976 Code, § 5-403)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-324, 60-325



§ 70.33  EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE.



   Every motor vehicle, while in use on the streets, alleys or highways of
the municipality shall be equipped with efficient brakes adequate to control
the movement of, to stop and to hold such vehicle, including two separate
means of applying the brakes, and shall be further equipped with a good and
sufficient horn in good working order or other efficient signal devices. From
sunset to sunrise, and any other time when there is not sufficient light to
render clearly discernible persons or vehicles upon the street, alley or
highway at a distance of 500 feet, every motor vehicle shall be equipped with
lighted headlights and every motor vehicle and trailer shall be equipped with
one or more taillights, at the rear of the motor vehicle or trailer,
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
rear of such vehicle. No person shall operate any crosswalks within the
municipality. Every motor vehicle having a width of 80 inches or more shall
display clearance lights as required by state law. All vehicle brakes shall
be maintained in good working order; provided, motorcycles need only be
equipped with one brake. All horns on motor vehicles shall be capable of
emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less
than 200 feet; provided, no vehicle, except as herein provided, shall be
equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a vehicle, any siren or horn
otherwise than as reasonable warning; nor shall any person use any horn or
warning device upon a vehicle to make any unnecessary, loud or  harsh sound;
and, provided further that, every Police and Fire Department vehicle,
ambulance or other authorized emergency vehicle used for emergency calls
shall be equipped with a bell, siren or whistle of the type approved by the
governing body.



(1976 Code, § 5-404)  (Ord. 1130, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1196, passed
1-22-1996)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,219, 60-6,220, 60-6,224, 60-6,235,
60-6,244, 60-6,285



§ 70.34  UNOBSTRUCTED VIEWS.



   (A)   No person shall drive on a street any motor vehicle
constructed or loaded in such a way as to prevent the driver from obtaining a
view of the street to the rear unless such vehicle is equipped with a mirror
so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the street for a distance of
at least 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive upon a street, any vehicle with a sign, poster or other
non-transparent material upon the front windshield, side windows or rear
windows of such motor vehicle other than a certificate, or paper required to
be so displayed by law.



   (B)   Every windshield on a motor vehicle shall be equipped with a
device for removing rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield, which
device shall be so constructed as to be operated by the driver within the
vehicle.



(1976 Code, § 5-405)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-6,124, 39-6,136, 39-6,170



§ 70.35  LOADS.



   (A)   Projecting. When any vehicle shall be loaded in such a manner
that any portion of the load extends more than four feet beyond the rear of
the bed or the body of such vehicle, a red flag of not less than 12 inches
both in length and width shall be carried by day, and red light after sunset
at the extreme rear end of such load.



(1976 Code, § 5-406)



   (B)   Spilling. All vehicles used for carrying coal, earth, cinders,
sand, gravel, rock, asphalt, tar or any similar substance shall be so
constructed as to prevent the sifting or spilling of any of the contents.



(1976 Code, § 5-407)



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-6,129, 39-6,130, 39-6,137



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this traffic code, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500
for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of such failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 5-701)



   (B)   Every person convicted of violating the provisions of §§
70.15 through 70.18 of this chapter, relative to the duty to stop in the
event of certain accidents, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$100. In addition thereto the court may, in its discretion, revoke the
operator’s or chauffeur’s license of the person so convicted for a period
not to exceed one year.



(1976 Code, § 5-324)



(Ord. 1449, passed 12-23-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-6,104.02, 39-6,104.03



CHAPTER 71:  VEHICLE OPERATION



Section




General Provisions




   71.01   Automatic lights and signals; signal system



   71.02   Right turn on red



   71.03   Truck routes



   71.04   One-way traffic



   71.05   Traffic lanes, arterial streets designated



   71.06   Turning movements



   71.07   Right-of-way



   71.08   Position of vehicle on highway



   71.09   Stops; crossing sidewalks



   71.10   Crosswalks



   71.11   Child passengers; restraint system




Prohibited Operation




   71.25   Reckless driving



   71.26   Careless driving



   71.27   Negligent driving



   71.28   Backing vehicles



   71.29   Unnecessary stopping



   71.30   Passing; intersections; hinderance



   71.31   Driving abreast



   71.32   Following vehicles



   71.33   Crowding in front seat



   71.34   Driving in sidewalk space



   71.35   Unnecessary noise; mufflers



   71.36   Wrongful taking



   71.37   Radar devices



   71.38   Driving on highway shoulders



   71.39   Engine brakes



   71.40   Snow emergency routes




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 71.01  AUTOMATIC LIGHTS AND SIGNALS; SIGNAL SYSTEM.



   (A)   Automatic lights and signals. No vehicle shall turn at any
intersection where an automatic signal system is in operation, except when
such signal system is displaying a green light; provided, vehicles may turn
on a red signal when in compliance with the provisions of this section
governing such turns. No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the
opposite direction at any intersection where an automatic signal system is in
operation.



(1976 Code, § 5-201)



   (B)   Automatic signal system. At each intersection where an
automatic signal system is in operation, all vehicular and pedestrian traffic
crossing such street intersection shall be governed by such automatic signal
system. The display of the red signal light shall be a signal for traffic to
stop outside of the street intersection. The display of the yellow signal
light shall announce that traffic be at attention to stop when the red light
is displayed, and the green signal light shall be a signal for traffic to
promptly move forward. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
such signal.



(1976 Code, § 5-202)



   (C)   Signs and signals. The governing body may, by resolution,
provide for the placing of stop signs or other signs, signals, standards or
mechanical devices in any street or alley under the municipality’s
jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating or prohibiting traffic thereon.
Such resolution shall describe the portion of the street or alley wherein
traffic is to be regulated or prohibited; the regulation or prohibition; the
location where such sign, signal, standard or mechanical device shall be
placed; and the hours when such regulation or prohibition shall be effective.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with
such regulation or prohibition.



(1976 Code, § 5-220)



   (D)   Stop signs. Every person operating any vehicle shall, upon
approaching any stop sign erected in accordance with the resolution
prescribed heretofore, cause such vehicle to come to a complete stop before
entering or crossing any street, highway or railroad crossing. The vehicle
operator shall stop at a marked stop line or, if there is no stop line,
before entering the crosswalk; but, if neither is indicated, then as near the
right-of-way line of the intersecting roadway as possible.



(1976 Code, § 5-221)



   (E)   Signs, traffic-control devices, traffic surveillance devices;
defacing or interfering with. It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully or maliciously deface, injure, remove, obstruct, knock down or
interfere with any official traffic sign or signal, traffic-control device or
traffic-control surveillance device.



(1976 Code, § 5-222)



(Ord. 990, passed 12-18-1989)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-609 through 39-611, 39-614, 39-619,
39-619.01, 39-697



§ 71.02  RIGHT TURN ON RED.



   Except where a traffic-control device is in place prohibiting a turn,
vehicles facing a steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to
make a right turn after stopping. Such turning vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within the adjacent crosswalk and to
other vehicular traffic lawfully using the intersection. The governing body
of the municipality has the authority to prohibit turning right on red at any
intersection within the municipality where it deems such a prohibition
necessary; provided, those intersections where turning right on red is
prohibited shall bear signs to that effect placed and printed in such a
manner so as to be conspicuous from a vehicle about to enter the intersection.



(1976 Code, § 5-203)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-614, 39-697



§ 71.03  TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate on 8th Street between F Street
and Highway 30 in the city any semi-tractor truck with trailer attached or
unattached, trucks with beds or boxes that exceed nine feet in length or
more, including agricultural and industrial equipment exceeding 10,000 pounds
in gross weight.



   (B)   It shall not be unlawful for the following vehicles to operate
upon any street or alley in the city: emergency vehicles; vehicles being used
for the purpose of delivering or collecting goods, wares, merchandise;
vehicles being directly used for building, repair, service, moving
operations; vehicles being used to obtain materials or making repairs while
dealing with regularly established businesses or equipment related thereto.



   (C)   Signage designating such prohibition shall be erected upon or
at the entrance to said affected streets as may be most appropriate.



(1976 Code, § 5-204)  (Ord. 1462, passed 5-23-2016)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-6,189



§ 71.04  ONE-WAY TRAFFIC.



   The governing body may, by resolution, provide for one-way travel in
any street or alley located in the municipality and shall provide for
appropriate signs and markings when said streets have been so designated by
resolution.



(1976 Code, § 5-205)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb RS 39-697



§ 71.05  TRAFFIC LANES, ARTERIAL STREETS DESIGNATED.



   (A)   The governing body may, by resolution, mark lanes for traffic
on street pavements at such places as it may deem advisable.



(1976 Code, § 5-206)



   (B)   The governing body may, by resolution, designate any street or
portion thereof as an arterial street and shall provide for appropriate signs
or markings when such street has been so designated.



(1976 Code, § 5-207)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-697



§ 71.06  TURNING MOVEMENTS.



   (A)   “U” turns. No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in
the opposite direction, except at a street intersection. No vehicle shall be
turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction at any intersection where
an automatic signal is in operation or where a sign is posted indicating that
U-turns are prohibited.



(1976 Code, § 5-208)



   (B)   Hand signals. A signal of intention to turn right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled
by the vehicle before turning. The signals herein required shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by a signal device of a type approved
by the Department of Roads. The hand and arm signals herein required shall be
given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner:



      (1)   Stop or decreased speed: hand and arm extended downward;



      (2)   Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally; and



      (3)   Right turn: hand and arm extended upward.



(1976 Code, § 5-209)



   (C)   Generally.



      (1)   Vehicles turning to the right into an intersecting
street shall approach such intersection in the lane of traffic nearest to the
right hand side of the highway and must turn the corner as near the right-
hand curb as possible to keep between the curb to the right and the center of
the intersection of the two streets. The driver of a vehicle intending to
turn to the left shall approach such centerline of the highway and, in
turning, shall pass as near as possible to the center of the intersection,
passing as closely as practicable to the right thereof before turning such
vehicle to the left.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, the CENTER OF THE
INTERSECTION shall mean the meeting point of the medial lines of the highways
intersecting one another.



(1976 Code, § 5-210)



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-650, 39-651, 39-652 through 39-654,
39-697



§ 71.07  RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   (1)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection
at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right when the paths of such
vehicles intersect and there is danger of a collision, unless otherwise
directed by a municipal police officer stationed at the intersection.



      (2)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left within an
intersection, or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is
within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate
hazard.



      (3)   The driver of a vehicle on any street shall yield the
right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing such street within any clearly marked
crosswalk, or at any regular pedestrian crossing at the end of a block where
the movement of traffic is being regulated by traffic officers or traffic
direction devices. Every pedestrian crossing a street at any point other than
a pedestrian crossing, crosswalk or intersection shall yield the right-of-way
to vehicles upon the street.



      (4)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from or entering an
alley, building, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian approaching on any sidewalk.



      (5)   The driver of a vehicle entering a municipal street from
a private road or drive shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on such streets.



      (6)   The driver of a vehicle upon a street shall yield the
right-of-way to authorized emergency vehicles when the latter are operated
upon official business and the drivers thereof make proper use of visual or
audible signals.



(1976 Code, § 5-211)



   (B)   Overtaking vehicles. The driver of a vehicle about to be
overtaken and passed by another vehicle approaching from the rear shall give
way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle.



(1976 Code, § 5-212)



   (C)   Slow moving vehicles. Vehicles moving slowly shall keep as
close as possible to the curb on the right, allowing more swiftly moving
vehicles free passage to their left. Vehicles in motion shall be kept between
the curb at the right and the center of the street.



(1976 Code, § 5-213)



   (D)   Emergency vehicles. Upon the approach of any authorized
emergency vehicle, every vehicle within one block of the route of such
emergency vehicle shall immediately stop, except at the time they are on or
crossing a street intersection, in which event, such vehicle shall drive
clear of the street intersection and then stop. Every vehicle along the route
of such emergency vehicle shall immediately move to a position as near the
right-hand curb as possible and remain there until such authorized emergency
vehicle or vehicles have passed; provided, said vehicles are operated on
official business and the drivers thereof make use of proper visual or
audible signals.



(1976 Code, § 5-214)



(Ord. 1126, passed 2-6-1995)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-622, 39-640, 39-697, 60-6,146
through 60-6,154



§ 71.08  POSITION OF VEHICLE ON HIGHWAY.



   (A)   Generally. Upon all highways of sufficient width, one-way
streets excepted, the driver of a vehicle shall drive the same on the right
half of the roadway. In passing or meeting other vehicles, drivers shall give
each other at least one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway.



(1976 Code, § 5-215)



   (B)   Passing. A vehicle shall not be driven to the left of the
centerline of the highway in overtaking or passing another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and free from
oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance to permit such overtaking and
passing to be made in safety.



(1976 Code, § 5-216)



   (C)   Slow vehicles. Vehicles moving slowly shall keep as close as
possible to the curb on the right, allowing more swiftly moving vehicles free
passage on the left.



(1976 Code, § 5-217)



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-620, 39-622, 39-625, 39-697



§ 71.09  STOPS; CROSSING SIDEWALKS.



   All vehicles, before crossing a sidewalk, emerging from a garage,
alley, filling station or other place within the Business District shall come
to a complete stop and after giving sufficient warning shall proceed slowly
and with extreme caution while crossing such sidewalk, or leaving such
garage, alley, filling station or other place. The term SLOWLY shall be
construed to mean such rate of speed as is reasonable and proper under the
circumstances and the condition of the street and traffic thereon.



(1976 Code, § 5-218)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-638



§ 71.10  CROSSWALKS.



   The governing body may, by resolution, establish and maintain, by
appropriate devices, markers or lines upon the street, crosswalks, at
intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
street, and at such other places as it may deem necessary.



(1976 Code, § 5-219)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-697



§ 71.11  CHILD PASSENGERS; RESTRAINT SYSTEM.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, OCCUPANT PROTECTION SYSTEM has
the meaning provided in Neb. RS 60-6,265.



   (B)   (1)   Any person who drives any motor vehicle which has or
is required to have an occupant protection system shall ensure that:



         (a)   All children up to six years of age being
transported by such vehicle use a child passenger restraint system of a type
which meets Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 213, as developed by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, as such standard existed on
1-1-2004, and which is correctly installed in such vehicle; and



         (b)   All children six years of age and less than 18
years of age being transported by such vehicle use an occupant protection
system.



      (2)   Division (B)(1) shall apply to every motor vehicle which
is equipped with an occupant protection system or is required to be equipped
with restraint systems pursuant to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208,
as such standard existed on 1-1-2004, except taxicabs, mopeds, motorcycles
and any motor vehicle designated by the manufacturer as a 1963 year model or
earlier which is not equipped with an occupant protection system.



   (C)   Whenever any licensed physician determines, through accepted
medical procedures, that use of a child passenger restraint system by a
particular child would be harmful by reason of the child’s weight, physical
condition or other medical reason, the provisions of division (B) above shall
be waived. The driver of any vehicle transporting such a child shall carry on
his or her person or in the vehicle a signed written statement of the
physician identifying the child and stating the grounds for such waiver.



   (D)   The drivers of authorized emergency vehicles shall not be
subject to the requirements of division (B) above when operating such
authorized emergency vehicles pursuant to their employment.



   (E)   A driver of a motor vehicle shall not be subject to the
requirements of division (B) above if the motor vehicle is being operated in
a parade or exhibition and the parade or exhibition is being conducted in
accordance with applicable state law and local ordinances and resolutions.



   (F)   (1)   A person violating any provision of division (B)
above is guilty of an offense. The failure to provide a child restraint
system for more than one child in the same vehicle at the same time, as
required in division (B) above, shall not be treated as a separate offense.



      (2)   Enforcement of division (B)(1)(b) above shall be
accomplished only as a secondary action when an operator of a motor vehicle
has been cited or charged with a violation of some other offense unless the
violation involves a person under the age of 18 years riding in or on any
portion of the vehicle not designed or intended for the use of passengers
when the vehicle is in motion.



(1976 Code, § 5-332)  (Ord. 1017, passed 1-21-1991; Ord. 1357, passed
11-8-2004)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,267, 60-6,268




PROHIBITED OPERATION




§ 71.25  RECKLESS DRIVING.



   Any person who drives a motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate
an indifferent or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property
shall be deemed to be guilty of reckless driving and, as such, shall be
punished as provided by statute.



(1976 Code, § 5-308)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-669.01, 39-669.02, 39-669.26



§ 71.26  CARELESS DRIVING.



   Any person who drives any motor vehicle in the municipality carelessly
or without due caution so as to endanger a person or property shall be guilty
of careless driving.



(1976 Code, § 5-309)  (Ord. 619, passed 8-23-1979)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-669



§ 71.27  NEGLIGENT DRIVING.



   Any person who operates a motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate
a want of ordinary care and caution that a person of ordinary prudence would
use under like circumstances shall be deemed guilty of negligent driving.



(1976 Code, § 5-310)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-669.26



§ 71.28  BACKING VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to back a motor vehicle on the
municipal streets except to park in or to remove the vehicle from a permitted
parking position, to move the vehicle from a driveway or to back to the curb
for unloading where such unloading is permitted; provided, a vehicle shall be
backed only when such movement can be made in safety and in no case shall the
distance of the backing exceed one and one-half lengths of the vehicle.



(1976 Code, § 5-311)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.29  UNNECESSARY STOPPING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop any vehicle on any public
street or alley, other than in permitted parking areas, except when such a
stop is necessary for emergency situations, to comply with traffic-control
devices and regulations or to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians or to
other vehicles.



(1976 Code, § 5-312)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.30  PASSING; INTERSECTIONS; HINDERANCE.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction, while traversing a street
intersection, if such passing requires such overtaking vehicle to drive to
the left of the center of the street.



(1976 Code, § 5-313)



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle about to be overtaken and passed by
another vehicle shall not increase the speed of his or her vehicle until
completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.



(1976 Code, § 5-314)



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-622, 39-625



§ 71.31  DRIVING ABREAST.



   Two or more vehicles shall not be driven abreast, except when passing,
or when traversing a multi-lane or one-way street; provided, motorcycles may
be driven no more than two abreast in a single lane.



(1976 Code, § 5-315)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-628, 39-694



§ 71.32  FOLLOWING VEHICLES.



   (A)   Distance. The operator of a vehicle shall not follow another
vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent having due regard for the
speed of the vehicles, and the traffic and condition of the street.



(1976 Code, § 5-316)



   (B)   Fire apparatus. The driver of any vehicle shall not follow any
fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet, or
drive into, or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm.



(1976 Code, § 5-317)



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-629, 39-681



§ 71.33  CROWDING IN FRONT SEAT.



   No person shall drive a motor vehicle when it is so loaded, or when
there is in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to
obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to
interfere with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of such
vehicle.



(1976 Code, § 5-318)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-677



§ 71.34  DRIVING IN SIDEWALK SPACE.



   No motor vehicle or livestock shall be driven or ridden within any
sidewalk space, except a permanent or temporary driveway.



(1976 Code, § 5-319)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-676



§ 71.35  UNNECESSARY NOISE; MUFFLERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create any unreasonably
loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise of such character, intensity and
duration as to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 5-320)



   (B)   Every motor vehicle operated within the municipality shall be
provided with a muffler in good working order to prevent excessive or unusual
noise as provided in the previous section. It shall be unlawful to use a
“muffler cut-out” on any motor vehicle upon any streets; provided, the
provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.



(1976 Code, § 5-321)



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-6,137, 60-2,209



§ 71.36  WRONGFUL TAKING.



   Whoever wrongfully takes any automobile, or motorcycle from a garage,
or any other place where the same may have been lawfully placed, without the
consent of the owner, or who shall use any motor vehicle in bailment beyond
that use which was originally intended or agreed upon, with intent to
wrongfully use the automobile or motorcycle so taken, shall be guilty of
wrongful taking of a motor vehicle and shall be punished as provided by law.



(1976 Code, § 5-322)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-521



§ 71.37  RADAR DEVICES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or possess any
radar transmission device while operating a motor vehicle on any road,
street, highway or interstate highway in the municipality; except that, this
section shall not apply to any such device which has been lawfully licensed
by the Federal Communications Commission or is being used by law enforcement
officials in their official duties.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      POSSESSION. To have a device defined above in a motor vehicle if
such device is not:



         (a)   Disconnected from all power sources; and



         (b)   In the rear trunk, which shall include the spare
tire compartment, or any other compartment which is not accessible to the
driver or any other person in the vehicle while such vehicle is in operation.
If no such compartment exists in a vehicle, then such device must be
disconnected from all power sources and be placed in a position not readily
accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle.



      RADAR TRANSMISSION DEVICE. Any mechanism designed to interfere
with the reception of radio microwaves in the electromagnetic spectrum, which
microwaves, commonly referred to as radar, are employed by law enforcement
officials to measure the speed of motor vehicles.



      TRANSCEIVER. An apparatus contained in a single housing,
functioning alternately as a radio transmitter and receiver.



(1976 Code, § 5-329)  (Ord. 697, passed 8-5-1982)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-6,205 through 39-6,207



§ 71.38  DRIVING ON HIGHWAY SHOULDERS.



   No person shall drive on the shoulders of highways; except that:



   (A)   Vehicles may be driven onto the shoulders of roadways:



      (1)   By federal mail carriers while delivering the United
States mail; or



      (2)   To safely remove a vehicle from traffic lanes.



   (B)   Implements of husbandry may be driven onto the shoulders of
roadways.



(1976 Code, § 5-331)  (Ord. 955, passed 9-26-1988)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-631



§ 71.39  ENGINE BRAKES.



   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term ENGINE
BRAKE is hereby defined as a specific braking mechanism which utilizes the
release of compressed air as part of an engine retarder or engine brake on
any motor vehicle as a means of slowing or stopping said vehicle.



   (B)   Prohibition of engine brakes. It shall be unlawful for anyone
to operate a motor vehicle and use engine retarders or engine brakes as a
means of slowing or stopping said vehicle within the city limits.



   (C)   Affirmative defense. The use of an engine retarder or brake in
an emergency situation to avoid an imminent accident which would otherwise
result in damage or injury to person(s) or property, or the fact that the
motor vehicle is equipped with a proper muffler system which eliminates noise
emitted or caused by the use of an engine retarder or brake system shall
constitute affirmative defenses to the application of the provisions of this
section.



(1976 Code, § 5-334)  (Ord. 1307, passed 9-16-2002)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.40  SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.



   (A)   Movement of snow from private property into city streets. No
person or entity shall move snow and/or ice from lots, driveways or parking
lots, owned or controlled by him, her or it, onto public streets, alleys,
sidewalks or other public property.



(1976 Code, § 5-629)



   (B)   Operation of motor vehicles on snow emergency routes.



      (1)   Whenever an emergency has been declared pursuant to Ch.
75, Schd. II, of this code of ordinances, no person operating a motor vehicle
on a snow emergency route shall allow such vehicle to become stalled or stuck
so that it remains in such a position longer than momentarily.



      (2)   No person operating a motor vehicle on a snow emergency
route during the declaration of emergency snow conditions shall allow such
vehicle to become stalled because the motor fuel supply is exhausted or the
battery has become inoperative.



      (3)   Whenever a motor vehicle becomes stalled for any reason,
whether or not in violation of this section, on any snow emergency route on
which there is a parking prohibition in effect, the person operating such
vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off
the roadway of such snow emergency route. No person shall abandon or leave
his or her vehicle in the roadway of a snow emergency route, except for the
purpose of securing assistance for removal.



(1976 Code, § 5-630)



   (C)   Emergency declarations of the Mayor or Street Commissioner.



      (1)   The Mayor and/or Street Commissioner shall cause each
declaration of a snow emergency which shall be made by him or her, pursuant
to this section, to be publicly announced by means of broadcasting or
telecast from broadcasting stations with a normal operating range covering
the city, and he or she may, in addition, cause such declaration to be
announced in newspapers of general circulation within the city, when
feasible. Each announcement shall describe the action taken by the Mayor
and/or Street Commissioner, including the time the emergency  became or will
become effective. The announcement shall specify the streets or areas
affected. The Mayor and/or Street Commissioner shall make or cause to be made
a record of each time and date when an emergency declaration is announced to
the public by issuing an executive order as soon after the declaration of any
emergency as is feasible.



      (2)   Whenever the Mayor and/or Street Commissioner shall find
that some or all of the conditions which gave rise to a parking prohibition
placed in effect pursuant to the provisions of this section no longer exist,
he or she shall declare the prohibition terminated, in whole or in part,
effective immediately upon the announcement or at a later specified time.



(1976 Code, § 5-631)



   (D)   Provisions temporarily effective to take precedence. Any
provision of this section which becomes effective by declaration of the Mayor
and/or Street Commissioner upon the occurrence of a snow emergency, while
temporarily in effect, takes precedence over other conflicting provisions of
law; except that, it shall not take precedence over provisions of law
relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency
vehicles or emergency traffic directions by a police officer.



(1976 Code, § 5-632)



(Ord. 1393, passed 2-5-2007; Ord. 1478, passed 2-19-2018)  Penalty, see §
70.99



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING RULES



Section




General Provisions




   72.01   Parking Bureau of Violations



   72.02   Parking citations



   72.03   Summons; destruction prohibited



   72.04   Impoundment and removal



   72.05   Owner responsible for violations




Regulations and Conditions




   72.20   Unattended vehicles



   72.21   Parking generally



   72.22   Designated parking



   72.23   Alleys; obstruction



   72.24   Unlawful obstructions



   72.25   Truck parking



   72.26   Fire hydrants and stations



   72.27   Street intersections



   72.28   Curbs; curbside parking



   72.29   Parking for display or repair



   72.30   Time limit parking



   72.31   Snow removal and maintenance




Parking for the Handicapped or Disabled




   72.45   On-street parking spaces; display of permits



   72.46   Off-street parking spaces



   72.47   Definitions



   72.48   Permit issuance



   72.49   Permit contents; duplicates



   72.50   Permit renewal; period valid



   72.51   Permits non-transferable; violation or suspension



   72.52   Removal of unauthorized vehicles



   72.53   Citations; issuance; complaint and trial




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 72.01  PARKING BUREAU OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Bureau of Violations within the
powers and duties of the office of the Municipal Clerk.



   (B)   (1)   A copy of each citation issued for non-moving traffic
violations shall be deposited with the Municipal Clerk, whose duty it shall
be to collect all fines and to maintain appropriate and accurate records of
all such fines paid to him or her.



      (2)   Fines shall be payable at the office of the Clerk.



      (3)   Such fines shall be in the amount of $10 for each
violation if paid within 15 days from the date of issuance.



      (4)   The fine for any such violation after 15 days from date
of issuance shall be $20. Should any such fine not be paid within 30 days
from the date of issuance of the citation, the Clerk shall forward said
citation to the prosecuting attorney together with a request that a complaint
be filed in the appropriate court.



   (C)   All money collected by the Municipal Clerk under this section
shall be transferred to the school district in which the municipality lies.



(1976 Code, § 5-618)  (Ord. 679, passed 1-21-1982; Ord. 1033, passed
5-7-1991)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1729



§ 72.02  PARKING CITATIONS.



   All citations issued for violations of non-moving traffic regulations
contained in this subchapter shall, in addition to information normally
stated on such citations, carry the following information:



   (A)   The amount of the fine if paid within 15 days;



   (B)   The amount of the fine if not paid within 15 days;



   (C)   The location where payment may be made; and



   (D)   The fact that a complaint will be filed after 30 days if the
fine is not paid in that time.



(1976 Code, § 5-619)  (Ord. 1033, passed 5-7-1991)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 29-423



§ 72.03  SUMMONS; DESTRUCTION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to tear up, or destroy, a parking
tag placed upon any vehicle by the municipal police, or to disregard the
summons contained on such tag, and fail to appear in court as directed by
said tag.



(1976 Code, § 5-620)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-697



§ 72.04  IMPOUNDMENT AND REMOVAL.



   (A)   Fees, release.



      (1)   There is hereby created in the city a pound for the
impounding of automobiles and other vehicles of any character, which is
designated as an “automobile pound”.



      (2)   The Mayor of the city is hereby empowered and directed
to locate the automobile pound for the placement of impounded vehicles where
and as may be appropriate for said purpose and as may be necessary to
accommodate the vehicles impounded. The Mayor of the city may change the
location of the automobile pound designated for the placement of impounded
vehicles as may be appropriate for said purpose and as may be necessary to
accommodate the vehicles impounded. The city may enter into a contract with
private persons, firms and corporations for the use of the impoundment area
or for the towing of such impounded vehicles found to be in violation of this
municipal code.



      (3)   Whenever any vehicle is found by a police officer parked
or left standing in the streets, alleys, public ways or parking facilities or
other public places of the city which has previously been in violation of, or
which is at present in violation of this municipal code of the city, the
police officer may remove and convey the vehicle by means of towing it or
otherwise to the automobile pound, or such police officer may remove said
vehicle or order that said vehicle be towed to the location designated by the
city for the placement of impounded vehicles; and, thereupon, the vehicle
shall not be discharged or removed from the automobile pound, except upon
payment by the owner, driver or operator of such vehicle of a towing and
storage fee as established by resolution of the City Council. In such case
when such vehicle is towed or removed to the automobile pound said owner,
driver or operator shall pay such towing fees as may be established between
the city and such person, firm or corporation operating the towing service.
When the owner, driver or operator of such vehicle presents himself or
herself to the Police Department of the city to claim his or her vehicle, it
shall be the duty of the Police Department to inform the owner, driver or
operator of the nature and the circumstance of the violation for which the
vehicle was impounded. If such person is found not guilty by the court
involved of the charges for which the vehicle was impounded, the city shall
refund to such person the towing and impoundment fees paid by such person.



      (4)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to account for
any fees collected for the city under the provisions of this section. The
Chief of Police shall keep a record of the name of the owner of each vehicle
impounded, the number of the registration plates thereon, the nature and
circumstances of each violation involved and the disposition of each case.



      (5)   Nothing set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(4)
above shall be construed as superseding any other provisions of the city code
concerning the proper parking or operation of vehicles and the collection of
fees hereunder shall not prevent or preclude the prosecution of the violation
of any of the provisions of the city code concerning the parking or operation
of vehicles in the city.



(1976 Code, § 5-622)



   (B)   Private lots.



      (1)   (a)   Any person parking a motor vehicle in a
properly posted, restricted parking lot without the consent of the owner or
tenant authorized to give permission shall be guilty of an infraction and the
vehicle shall be subject to being towed away at the request of such lot owner
or tenant.



         (b)   Any person found guilty under this section shall
be subject to the penalties provided for infractions.



         (c)   If the identity of the operator of a motor vehicle
in violation of this section cannot be determined, the owner or person in
whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible
for such infraction.



         (d)   When any law enforcement officer observes or is
advised that a motor vehicle may be in violation of this section, he or she
shall make a determination as to whether a violation has in fact occurred
and, if so, shall personally serve or attach to such motor vehicle a citation
directed to the owner or operator of such vehicle, which shall set forth the
nature of the violation.



         (e)   Any person who refuses to sign the citation or
otherwise comply with the command of the citation shall be punished as
provided by Neb. RS 29-426.



      (2)   Signs designating a restricted parking lot shall be
readily visible and shall state the purpose or purposes for parking on the
restricted parking lot, state the hours for restricted parking and state who
to contact for information regarding a towed vehicle.



(1976 Code, § 5-623)



   (C)   Removal of illegally parked vehicles.



      (1)   Whenever any police officer shall find a vehicle
standing upon a street or alley in violation of any of the provisions of this
section, such individual may remove or have such vehicle removed, or require
the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move such vehicle, to
a position off the roadway of such street or alley or from such street or
alley.



      (2)   (a)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to
the possession of any vehicle towed or stored shall be charged with the
reasonable cost of towing and storage fees.



         (b)   Any such towing or storage fee shall be a lien
upon the vehicle prior to all other claims.



         (c)   Any person towing or storing a vehicle shall be
entitled to retain possession of such vehicle until such charges are paid.



         (d)   The lien provided for in this section shall not
apply to the contents of any vehicles.



(1976 Code, § 5-624)



   (D)   Provisions temporarily effective to take precedence. Any
provision of this section which becomes effective by declaration of the Mayor
and/or Street Commissioner upon the occurrence of a snow emergency, while
temporarily in effect, takes precedence over other conflicting provisions of
law; except that, it shall not take precedence over provisions of law
relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency
vehicles or emergency traffic directions by a police officer.



(1976 Code, § 5-632)



   (E)   Removal of stalled or parked vehicles; fees.



      (1)   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized
to remove or cause to be removed a vehicle from a street to another place or
location on a street or to a lot, garage, storage yard or other similar
facility designated by the Police Department when:



         (a)   The vehicle is parked on a snow emergency route on
which a parking prohibition is in effect;



         (b)   The vehicle is stalled on a snow emergency route
on which there is a parking prohibition in effect and the person who is
operating said vehicle does not appear to be removing it in accordance with
the provisions of this section; or



         (c)   The vehicle is parked on any street in violation
of any parking prohibition or provision of law contained in this section.



      (2)   (a)   Such vehicle removal may be made by towing to a
private lot, garage, storage yard or other similar facility. Any stored
vehicle shall not be released from storage, except upon payment by the owner
of the vehicle to the person or persons in charge of the lot, garage, storage
yard or other similar facility of the cost of towing and the cost of storage
during which time the vehicle remains stored.



         (b)   A receipt for such fees shall be issued to the
owner of the vehicle.



      (3)   It shall be the duty of the person or persons in charge
of the lot, garage, storage yard or other similar facility designated by the
Police Department for storage to keep a record of the name of the owner of
all vehicles towed in under these provisions, together with the license plate
number or VIN of each vehicle, and the nature of such, and the amount of fees
collected hereunder and to deliver a report of each day’s transactions to
the Chief of Police not later than one day following the day for which the
report is made.



(1976 Code, § 5-633)



(Ord. 650, passed 12-4-1980; Ord. 669, passed 9-17-1981; Ord. 956, passed
9-26-1988; Ord. 1181, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 1393, passed 2-5-2007)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-671, 39-697, 60-2401, 60-2402



§ 72.05  OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR VIOLATIONS.



   If the identity of the person who parked a vehicle in violation of any
provision of this chapter cannot be readily determined, the owner or person
in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible
for such violation and shall be guilty and subject to the penalties and
procedures described in this chapter and in § 70.99 of this code of
ordinances.



(1976 Code, § 5-634)  (Ord. 1086, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 1089, passed
4-12-1993)




REGULATIONS AND CONDITIONS




§ 72.20  UNATTENDED VEHICLES.



   No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such
vehicle to stand unattended on a highway without first doing the following:



   (A)   Stopping the motor of such vehicle;



   (B)   Except for vehicles equipped with motor starters that may be
actuated without a key, locking the ignition, removing the key from the
ignition;



   (C)   Effectively setting the brakes thereon; and



   (D)   When standing upon any roadway, turning the front wheels of
such vehicles to the curb or side of such roadway.



(1976 Code, § 5-601)  (Ord. 1479, passed 2-5-2018)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-674, 60-6,168



§ 72.21  PARKING GENERALLY.



   No person shall park any vehicles, or approach the curb with a vehicle,
except when headed in the direction of the traffic. Vehicles, when parked,
shall stand parallel with and adjacent to the curb or edge of the roadway, in
such manner as to have both right wheels within 12 inches of the curb or edge
of the roadway, and so as to leave at least four feet between the vehicle so
parked and any other parked vehicles, except where the governing body
designates that vehicles shall be parked at an angle so as to have the front
right wheel at the curb or edge of the roadway. Where stalls are designated
either on the curb or pavement, vehicles shall be parked within such stalls.
No vehicles shall be parked upon a roadway when there is a shoulder adjacent
to the roadway which is available for parking.



(1976 Code, § 5-602)  (Ord. 1138, passed 2-6-1995)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680, 60-6,167



§ 72.22  DESIGNATED PARKING.



   (A)   The governing body may, by resolution, designate any street,
or portion thereof, where vehicles shall be parked parallel with and adjacent
to the curb or at an angle so as to have the right front wheel at the curb.



(1976 Code, § 5-603)



   (B)   (1)   The governing body may, by resolution, set aside any
street, alley, public way, or portion thereof, where the parking of a
particular kind or class of vehicle shall be prohibited or where the parking
of any vehicle shall be prohibited.



      (2)   No vehicle prohibited from parking thereon shall stand
or be parked adjacent to the curb of said street, alley, public way or
portion thereof, longer than a period of time necessary to load and unload
freight or passengers.



(1976 Code, § 5-604)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-673, 39-697



§ 72.23  ALLEYS; OBSTRUCTION.



   (A)   No vehicle, while parked shall have any portion thereof
projecting into any alley entrance.



(1976 Code, § 5-605)



   (B)   (1)   No vehicle shall be parked in any alley, except for
the purpose of loading or unloading during the time necessary to load or
unload, which shall not exceed the maximum limit of one-half hour.



      (2)   Every vehicle while loading or unloading in any alley
shall be parked in such manner as will cause the least obstruction possible
to traffic in such alley.



(1976 Code, § 5-606)



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-697



§ 72.24  UNLAWFUL OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park
said vehicle within a street intersection, on a crosswalk, in front of a
private driveway or on a sidewalk.



(1976 Code, § 5-607)



   (B)   No person shall, except in case of an accident or emergency,
stop any vehicle in any location where such stopping will obstruct any
street, intersection or entrance to an alley or public or private drive.



(1976 Code, § 5-611)



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-697



§ 72.25  TRUCK PARKING.



   (A)   No semi-tractor, semi-trailer or combination of semi-trailer
and pup-trailer more than 30 feet in length, or truck having a gross vehicle
weight greater than 26,000 shall remain on any public street or alley between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any residential zoned district.



   (B)   No semi-trailer or a combination of semi-trailer and
pup-trailer more than 30 feet in length, shall remain on any private property
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any residential zoned
district.



   (C)   (1)   Vehicles may stop or stand for a period of time not
to exceed what is reasonably necessary to load or unload.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any
vehicle referenced in this section to park said vehicle within a street
intersection, on a crosswalk, in front of a private driveway or on a sidewalk
at any time.



      (3)   The governing body may, by resolution, provide truck
parking areas within the municipality and, when such parking areas are
provided, it shall be the duty of all truck operators and owners to use such
parking areas for all parking purposes.



   (D)   No tractors, farm machinery or construction equipment, except
those being used on work in the immediate vicinity, shall be permitted to
remain on any street or alley in any residential zoned district.



(1976 Code, § 5-608)  (Ord. 887, passed 11-25-1985; Ord. 1228, passed
3-24-1997)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680



§ 72.26  FIRE HYDRANTS AND STATIONS.



   No vehicle shall be parked within 15 feet in either direction of any
fire hydrant, nor within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station.



(1976 Code, § 5-609)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-672



§ 72.27  STREET INTERSECTIONS.



   Except in compliance with traffic-control devices, no vehicle shall be
parked or left standing for any purpose, except momentarily to load or
discharge passengers, within 25 feet of the intersection or curb lines or, if
none, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines.



(1976 Code, § 5-610)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-672



§ 72.28  CURBS; CURBSIDE PARKING.



   (A)   (1)   No vehicle shall park on any street with its left
side to the curb, unless said street has been designated to be a
“one-way” street by the governing body.



      (2)   Vehicles must not be parked at any curb in such a
position as to prevent another vehicle already parked at the curb from moving
away.



(1976 Code, § 5-612)



   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner to
cause the curb space to be painted and keep the same painted as provided in
this chapter.



      (2)   No person, firm or corporation shall paint the curb of
any street, or in any manner set aside, or attempt to prevent the parking of
vehicles in any street, or part thereof, except at such places where the
parking of vehicles is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   The marking or designating of portions of streets or
alleys where the parking of vehicles is prohibited or limited shall be done
only by the municipality through its proper officers, at the direction of the
City Administrator.



(1976 Code, § 5-613)



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-673, 39-697



§ 72.29  PARKING FOR DISPLAY OR REPAIR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon any street, alley or
public place within the municipality any vehicle displayed for sale. No
person shall adjust or repair any automobile or motorcycle, or race the motor
of same, while standing on the public streets or alleys of the municipality,
excepting in case of breakdown or other emergency requiring same. No person
or employee connected with a garage or repair shop shall use sidewalks,
streets or alleys in the vicinity of such garage or shop for the purpose of
working on automobiles or vehicles of any description.



(1976 Code, § 5-614)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-697



§ 72.30  TIME LIMIT PARKING.



   (A)   The governing body may, by resolution, entirely prohibit, or
fix a time limit for, the parking and stopping of vehicles on any street,
streets or district designated by such resolution, and the parking, or
stopping, of any vehicle in any such street, streets or district, for a
period of time longer than fixed in such resolution shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.



(1976 Code, § 5-615)



   (B)   The parking of any vehicle on a public street for over 72
consecutive hours is unlawful, except where a different maximum time limit is
posted.



(1976 Code, § 5-616)



(Ord. 983, passed 10-10-1989; Ord. 1298, passed 1-7-2002)  Penalty, see §
70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-697



§ 72.31  SNOW REMOVAL AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park or stand any vehicle on any
street in the Business District between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 4:30 a.m.,
except on Saturday and Sunday morning.



   (B)   The municipal police may order any street or alley, or portion
thereof, vacated for weather emergencies or street maintenance. Notice shall
be given by personally notifying the owner or operator  of a vehicle parked
on such street or alley, or by posting appropriate signs along such streets
or alleys. Such signs shall be posted not less than four hours prior to the
time that the vacation order is to be effective. Any person parking a vehicle
in violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in §
70.99 of this code of ordinances, and such vehicle may be removed and parked,
under the supervision of the municipal police, to a suitable nearby location.



(1976 Code, § 5-617)  (Ord. 708, passed 11-18-1982)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-557




PARKING FOR THE HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED




§ 72.45  ON-STREET PARKING SPACES; DISPLAY OF PERMITS.



   (A)   (1)   The governing body may designate parking spaces for
the exclusive use of:



         (a)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor
vehicles display the distinguishing license plates issued to handicapped or
disabled persons pursuant to Neb. RS 60-3,113;



         (b)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor
vehicles display a distinguishing license plate issued to a handicapped or
disabled person by another state;



         (c)   Such other handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the
municipality, whose motor vehicles display the permit specified in § 72.49
of this chapter; and



         (d)   Such other motor vehicles, as certified by the
municipality, which display the permit specified in § 72.49 of this chapter.



      (2)   All such permits shall be displayed by attaching the
permit to the motor vehicle’s rearview mirror so as to be clearly visible
through the front windshield. When there is no rearview mirror, the permit
shall be displayed on the dashboard.



   (B)   If the governing body so designates a parking space, it shall
be indicated by a sign which is in conformance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic-Control Devices. In addition to such sign, the space may also be
indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the
street adjacent to the space.



(1976 Code, § 5-621)  (Ord. 1139, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1197, passed
1-22-1996)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1736, 18-1737



§ 72.46  OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES.



   (A)   The governing body and any person in lawful possession of any
off-street parking facility may designate stalls or spaces in such facility
for the exclusive use of:



      (1)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose vehicles display
the distinguishing license plates issued to such individuals pursuant to Neb.
RS 60-3,113;



      (2)   Such other handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the governing
body, whose vehicles display the identification specified in § 72.49 of this
chapter; and



      (3)   Such other motor vehicles, as certified by the governing
body, which display such identification.



   (B)   Such designation shall be made by posting immediately adjacent
to and visible from each stall or space a sign which is in conformance with
the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, adopted pursuant to Neb. RS
60-6,118, as the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42
USC §§ 12101 et seq. and the federal rules and regulations adopted and
promulgated in response to the Act, as the Act and the rules and regulations
existed on 5-31-2001.



(1976 Code, § 5-621.01)  (Ord. 1140, passed 2-6-1995)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1737



§ 72.47  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON. Any individual with a severe visual or
physical impairment which limits personal mobility and results in an
inability to travel unassisted more than 200 feet without the use of a
wheelchair, crutch, walker or prosthetic, orthotic or other assistant device,
any individual whose mobility is limited as a result of respiratory problems
and any individual who has lost all or substantially all the use of one or
more limbs.



   HANDICAPPED PARKING INFRACTION. The violation of any section of this
subchapter regulating:



      (1)   The use of parking spaces designated for use by
handicapped or disabled persons; or



      (2)   The obstruction of any wheelchair ramps constructed or
created in accordance and in conformity with the Federal Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 USC §§ 12101 et seq.



   TEMPORARILY HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON. Any handicapped or disabled
person whose personal mobility is expected to be limited in such a manner for
no longer than one year.



(1976 Code, § 5-621.02)  (Ord. 1141, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1198, passed
1-22-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1738, 18-1741.01



§ 72.48  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   (1)   The Municipal Clerk may take an application from a
handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person
or his or her parent, legal guardian or foster parent for a permit which will
entitle the holder thereof or a person driving a motor vehicle for the
purpose of transporting such holder to park in those spaces provided for by
this subchapter when the holder of the permit will enter or exit the motor
vehicle while it is parked in such areas. For purposes of this section, the
handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person
shall be considered the holder of the permit.



      (2)   A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a
permit shall complete an application, shall provide proof of identity and
shall submit a completed medical form signed by a physician, physician
assistant or nurse practitioner certifying that the person who will be the
holder meets the definition of handicapped or disabled person. In the case of
a temporarily handicapped or disabled person, the certifying physician,
physician assistant or nurse practitioner shall indicate the estimated date
of recovery or that the temporary handicap or disability will continue for a
period of six months, whichever is less. A person may hold only one permit
under this section or a permit under division (B) below, but not both.



      (3)   Before issuing a permit, the Municipal Clerk shall enter
all information required in the manner prescribed in Neb. RS 18-1739. The
Municipal Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles the name,
address and license number of all persons receiving a permit pursuant to this
section.



(1976 Code, § 5-621.03)



   (B)   (1)   The Municipal Clerk shall take an application from
any person for a motor vehicle permit which will entitle the holder thereof
or a person driving the motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting
handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled
persons to park in those spaces provided by this subchapter, if the motor
vehicle is used primarily for the transportation of handicapped or disabled
persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons and such person will
enter or exit the motor vehicle while it is parked in such designated spaces.



      (2)   A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a
permit pursuant to this section shall apply for a permit for each motor
vehicle used for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, shall complete such forms as are
provided by the Department of Motor Vehicles and shall demonstrate to the
Municipal Clerk that each such motor vehicle is used primarily for the
transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped
or disabled persons. A person may hold either a permit under this section or
a permit under division (A) above, but not both.



      (3)   The Municipal Clerk shall issue a permit to an approved
applicant, and before issuing such permit, shall enter all information
required in the manner prescribed by Neb. RS 18-1739. The Municipal Clerk
shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles the name, address and
license number of all persons receiving a permit pursuant to this section.



(1976 Code, § 5-621.04)



(Ord. 1199, passed 1-22-1996; Ord. 1200, passed 1-22-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1738, 18-1738.01



§ 72.49  PERMIT CONTENTS; DUPLICATES.



   (A)   The permit issued by the Municipal Clerk shall be constructed
of a durable plastic designed to resist normal wear or fading for the term of
the permit’s issuance and printed so as to minimize the possibility of
alteration following issuance. The permit shall be of a design, size,
configuration, color and construction and contain such information as
specified in the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the United
States Department of Transportation in the Uniform System for Handicapped
Parking, 23 C.F.R. part 1235.



   (B)   In addition to the requirements of division (A) above, the
permit shall show such identifying information with regard to the handicapped
or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person to whom it
is issued as is necessary to the enforcement of this subchapter.



   (C)   (1)   No permit shall be issued to any person or for any
motor vehicle if any parking permit has been issued to such person or for
such motor vehicle and such permit has been suspended pursuant to § 72.51 of
this chapter.



      (2)   At the expiration of such suspension, a permit may be
renewed upon the payment of the permit fee.



   (D)   (1)   A duplicate permit may be provided by the Municipal
Clerk without cost if the original permit is destroyed, lost or stolen.



      (2)   Such duplicate permit shall be issued in the same manner
as the original permit and shall be valid for the remainder of the period for
which the original permit was issued.



(1976 Code, § 5-621.05)  (Ord. 1079, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 1201, passed
1-22-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1739



§ 72.50  PERMIT RENEWAL; PERIOD VALID.



   (A)   Permanently issued permits for handicapped or disabled parking
authorized by Neb. RS 18-1736 to 18-1741.07 issued prior to 8-1-2005, shall
be valid for a period ending on September 30 of the third year after the date
of issuance and shall expire on that date. Permanently issued permits issued
on or after 8-1-2005, shall be valid for a period ending on the last day of
the month of the applicant’s birthday in the third year after issuance and
shall expire on that day.



   (B)   All permits authorized under Neb. RS 18-1736 to 18-1741.07 for
temporarily handicapped or disabled parking shall be issued for a period
ending not more than six months after the date of issuance but may be renewed
one time for a period not to exceed six months. For the renewal period, there
shall be submitted an additional application with proof of a handicap or
disability.



(1976 Code, § 5-621.06)  (Ord. 1142, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1202, passed
1-22-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1740



§ 72.51  PERMITS NON-TRANSFERABLE; VIOLATION OR SUSPENSION.



   Permits issued under this subchapter shall not be transferable, and
shall be used only by the party to whom issued or for the motor vehicle for
which issued and only for the purposes for which it is issued. No person
shall alter or reproduce in any manner a permit issued pursuant to this
subchapter. Any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension of
such permit for a period of six months. At the expiration of such period, a
suspended permit may be renewed upon payment of the permit fee.



(1976 Code, § 5-621.07)  (Ord. 1203, passed 1-22-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1741



§ 72.52  REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES.



   (A)   The owner or person in lawful possession of an off-street
parking facility, after notifying the Police or Sheriff’s Department, and
the municipality providing on-street parking or owning, operating or
providing an off-street parking facility, may cause the removal, from a stall
or space designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, of any vehicle not displaying
the proper permit or the distinguishing license plates specified in this
subchapter if there is posted immediately adjacent to and visible from such
stall or space a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the area so
designated as a tow-in zone.



   (B)   Anyone parking in any on-street parking space which has been
designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the transportation of
such persons, or in any so exclusively designated parking space in any
off-street parking facility, without properly displaying the proper permit or
when the handicapped or disabled person to whom or for whom the license plate
or permit is issued will not enter or exit the vehicle while it is parked in
the designated space shall be guilty of a handicapped parking infraction, as
defined in § 72.47 of this chapter, and shall be subject to the procedures
as set forth in § 72.51 of this chapter and the penalty provided for in §
70.99 of this code of ordinances. The display on a motor vehicle of a
distinguishing license plate or permit issued to a handicapped or disabled
person by and under the duly constituted authority of another state shall
constitute a full and complete defense in any action for a handicapped
parking infraction. If the identity of the person who parked the vehicle in
violation of this section cannot be readily determined, the owner or person
in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible
for such violation and shall be guilty and subject to the penalty provided
for in § 70.99 of this code of ordinances.



   (C)   In the case of a privately owned off-street parking facility,
the owner or person in lawful possession of such facility shall not be
required to inform the municipality of a violation of this section prior to
the municipality issuing the violator a handicapped parking infraction
citation.



(1976 Code, § 5-621.08)  (Ord. 1080, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 1143, passed
2-6-1995; Ord. 1204, passed 1-22-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1737



§ 72.53  CITATIONS; ISSUANCE; COMPLAINT AND TRIAL.



   (A)   For any offense classified as a handicapped parking
infraction, a handicapped parking citation may be issued by any peace officer
or by any person designated by ordinance by the governing body to exercise
the authority to issue a citation for any handicapped parking infraction.



   (B)   (1)   When a handicapped parking citation is issued for a
handicapped parking infraction, the person issuing the handicapped parking
citation shall enter thereon all required information, including the name and
address of the cited person or, if not known, the license number and
description of the offending motor vehicle, the offense charged and the time
and place the person cited is to appear in court.



      (2)   Unless the person cited requests an earlier date, the
time of appearance shall be at least three days after the issuance of the
handicapped parking citation.



      (3)   One copy of the handicapped parking citation shall be
delivered to the person cited or attached to the offending motor vehicle.



   (C)   At least 24 hours before the time set for the appearance of
the cited person, either the Municipal Attorney or other person authorized by
law to issue a complaint for the particular offense shall issue and file a
complaint charging such person with a handicapped parking infraction or such
person shall be released from the obligation to appear as specified.



   (D)   The trial of any person for a handicapped parking infraction
shall be by the court without a jury. A person cited for a handicapped
parking violation may waive his or her right to trial.



(1976 Code, § 5-621.09)  (Ord. 1144, passed 2-6-1995)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1741.01, 18-1741.04, 18-1741.06



CHAPTER 73:  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section




Motorcycles




   73.01   Motorcycle helmet required



   73.02   Motorcycle lights




Bicycles and Toy Vehicles




   73.15   Bicycle operation



   73.16   Clinging to motor vehicle



   73.17   Mopeds



   73.18   Skateboards



   73.19   Utility vehicles




MOTORCYCLES




§ 73.01  MOTORCYCLE HELMET REQUIRED.



   A person shall not operate or be a passenger on a motorcycle or moped
on any highway unless such person is wearing a protective helmet of the type
and design manufactured for use by operators of such vehicles and unless such
helmet is secured properly on his or her head with a chin strap while the
vehicle is in motion. All such protective helmets shall be designed to reduce
injuries to the user resulting from head impacts and shall be designed to
protect the user by remaining on the user’s head, deflecting blows,
resisting penetration and spreading the force of impact. Each such helmet
shall consist of lining, padding and chin strap and shall meet or exceed the
standards established in the United States Department of Transportation’s
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 218, 49 C.F.R. § 571.218, for
motorcycle helmets.



(1976 Code, § 5-330)  (Ord. 1133, passed 2-6-1995)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,278 through 60-6,282



§ 73.02  MOTORCYCLE LIGHTS.



   No person shall operate a motorcycle upon the streets, alleys or
highways within the municipality from sunset to sunrise unless the same is
equipped with at least one and not more than two headlights and a taillight
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
rear of such motorcycle. The headlights shall comply with the requirements
and limitations set forth in the state’s Rules of the Road.



(1976 Code, § 5-333)  (Ord. 1132, passed 2-6-1995)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6, 219




BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES




§ 73.15  BICYCLE OPERATION.



   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle on a street or highway
within the municipality with another person on the handlebars or in any
position in front of the operator.



   (B)   No bicycle shall be operated faster than is reasonable and
proper, but every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the
safety of the operator and any other persons upon the streets and highways.



   (C)   Persons operating bicycles shall observe all traffic signs and
stop at all stop signs.



   (D)   No bicycle shall be operated on any street or highway from
sunset to sunrise without a headlight visible from the front thereof for not
less than 500 feet on a clear night and a red reflector on the rear of a type
which shall be visible on a clear night from all distances between 100 feet
and 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of
headlights on a motor vehicle. A red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear may be used in addition to such red reflector.



   (E)   Any person who operates a bicycle upon a street or highway
shall not ride more than single file, except on parts of streets or highways
set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.



   (F)   (1)   Any person who operates a bicycle upon a roadway at
less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under
conditions then existing shall ride as near to the right-hand curb or
right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable, except when:



         (a)   Overtaking and passing another bicycle or vehicle
proceeding in the same direction;



         (b)   Preparing for a left turn onto a private road or
driveway or at an intersection;



         (c)   Reasonably necessary to avoid conditions that make
it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or right-hand edge of the
roadway, including fixed or moving objects, stopped or moving vehicles,
bicycles, pedestrians, animals or surface hazards;



         (d)   Riding upon a lane of substandard width which is
too narrow for a bicycle and a vehicle to travel safely side by side within
the lane; or



         (e)   Lawfully operating a bicycle on the paved
shoulders of a highway included in the state highway system as provided in
Neb. RS 60-6,142.



      (2)   Any person who operates a bicycle upon a roadway with a
posted speed limit of 35 mph or less on which traffic is restricted to one
direction of movement and which has two or more marked traffic lanes may ride
as near to the left-hand curb or left-hand edge of the roadway as
practicable. Whenever a person operating a bicycle leaves the roadway to ride
on the paved shoulder or leaves the paved shoulder to enter the roadway, the
person shall clearly signal his or her intention and yield the right-of-way
to all other vehicles.



   (G)   No person shall park a bicycle on any sidewalk unless a
bicycle stand is located on said sidewalk.



   (H)   No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalks within the
Business District.



(1976 Code, § 5-501)  (Ord. 1131, passed 2-6-1995)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,315, 60-6,318



§ 73.16  CLINGING TO MOTOR VEHICLE.



   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skis
or toy vehicle shall attach himself or herself or the bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, skis or toy vehicle upon a roadway, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to suffer or permit any person riding
upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skis or toy vehicle to cling
to or attach himself or herself or the bicycle to such vehicle driven and
operated by him or her.



(1976 Code, § 5-502)  (Ord. 1127, passed 2-6-1995)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,316, 60-6,354



§ 73.17  MOPEDS.



   (A)   Defined. For the purposes of this section, MOPED shall mean a
bicycle with fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power, an
automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity not exceeding 50
cubic centimeters, which produces no more than two brake horsepower and is
capable of propelling the bicycle at a maximum design speed of no more than
30 mph on level ground. Mopeds, their owners and their operators shall be
subject to Neb. RS Ch. 60, Art. 4, and amendments thereto, but shall be
exempt from the requirements of Neb. RS Ch. 60, Art. 1, 3, 5 and 17, and
amendments thereto.



(1976 Code, § 5-503)



   (B)   Operator’s license required. No person shall operate a moped
upon the streets, alleys or highways within the municipality unless such
person has:



      (1)   A valid Class O operator’s license; or



      (2)   A valid school or learner’s permit.



(1976 Code, § 5-504)



   (C)   Traffic regulations applicable. Any person who rides a moped
upon a roadway shall have all the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle under the state’s Rules
of the Road, except for special moped regulations in the rules and except for
those provisions of the rules which, by their nature, can have no
application. Such regulations applicable to mopeds shall apply whenever a
moped is operated upon any street, alley or highway within the municipality
or upon any path set aside by the Department of Roads or the municipality for
the use of mopeds. Notwithstanding any established maximum speed limits in
excess of 25 mph, no person shall operate any moped at a speed in excess of
30 mph.



(1976 Code, § 5-505)



   (D)   Operation.



      (1)   Any person who operates a moped shall ride only upon a
permanent and regular seat attached to the moped. A person operating a moped
shall not carry any other person, nor shall any other person ride on a moped
unless such moped is designed by the manufacturer to carry more than one
person.



      (2)   A person shall ride upon a moped only while sitting
astride the seat, facing forward.



      (3)   No person shall operate a moped while carrying any
package, bundle or other article which prevents him or her from keeping both
hands on the handlebars.



      (4)   No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person
ride, in a position that interferes with the operation or control of the
moped or the view of the operator.



      (5)   Any moped which carries a passenger shall be equipped
with footrests for such passenger.



(1976 Code, § 5-506)



   (E)   Use of traffic lanes.



      (1)   A moped shall be entitled to full use of a traffic lane
or any of any highway with an authorized speed limit of 45 mph or less and no
vehicle shall be operated in such a manner as to deprive any moped of the
full use of such lane; except that, mopeds and motorcycles may be operated
two abreast in a single lane.



      (2)   No person shall operate a moped between lanes of traffic
or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles.



      (3)   Mopeds shall not be operated more than two abreast in a
single lane.



      (4)   Any person who operates a moped on a roadway with an
authorized speed limit of more than 45 mph shall ride as near to the right
side of the roadway as practicable and shall not ride more than single file.



      (5)   No person who rides upon a moped shall attach himself,
herself or the moped to any other vehicle on a roadway.



      (6)   Mopeds shall not be operated on the sidewalks.



(1976 Code, § 5-507)



   (F)   Equipment. Any moped which carries a passenger shall be
equipped with footrests for such passenger. No person shall operate any moped
with handlebars more than 15 inches above the mounting point of the
handlebars.



(1976 Code, § 5-508)



(Ord. 620, passed 8-23-1979; Ord. 1135, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1136, passed
2-6-1995; Ord. 1137, passed 2-6-1995)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-6,196, 39-6,203, 60-6,310, 60-6,311,
60-6,312, 60-6,313



§ 73.18  SKATEBOARDS.



   No person shall ride or operate a skateboard on sidewalks within the
Business District of the municipality between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m. No person shall ride or operate a skateboard on the viaduct located
within the municipality at any time. For the purposes of this section, the
BUSINESS DISTRICT OF THE MUNICIPALITY shall be considered to include Meridian
Avenue, between 6th Street and 10th Street, and 8th Street, between E Street
and J Street.



(1976 Code, § 5-509)  (Ord. 1009, passed 9-10-1990)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-668, 39-690, 39-691



§ 73.19  UTILITY VEHICLES.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, the term UTILITY VEHICLE shall
have the definition set forth in Neb. RS 60-6,355.



   (B)   Any person having a valid Class O operator’s license may
operate a utility vehicle on the streets and alleys of the city, between
sunrise and sunset.



   (C)   Any person operating a utility vehicle in the city shall
provide proof of insurance with coverage equal to that required by the state
for licensed motor vehicles to any peace officer within five days of a
request by such officer.



   (D)   All utility vehicles operated on the streets and alleys of the
city shall be equipped with a headlight and taillight. The headlight and
taillight of the vehicle shall be on and the vehicle shall be equipped with a
bicycle safety flag which extends not less than five feet above ground
attached to the rear of such vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be
triangular in shape with an area of not less than 30 square inches and shall
be day-glow in color.



(1976 Code, § 5-510)  (Ord. 1456, passed 3-9-2015)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Speed limits



      II.   Snow emergency routes



SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   General. No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any
street, alley or other place at a rate of speed greater than 25 mph within
the residential district, and 20 mph within the Business District, unless a
different rate of speed is specifically permitted by ordinance. In no
instance shall a person drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than
is reasonable and prudent under the conditions. Where a different maximum
speed is set by ordinance, appropriate signs shall be posted. No person shall
drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and
reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for
safe operation or in compliance with law.



(1976 Code, § 5-304)



   (B)   Posted limits. Speed limits for the following streets shall be
established as follows and said speed limits shall be appropriately posted.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on these streets at a speed greater
than the following speed limits:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Speed Limit




24th Street
 
Newell Street to O Street
 
40 mph


Alleys
 
 
 
15 mph


East 8th Street
 
From E Street to Locust Street
 
25 mph


From Locust Street to the east city limits
 
35 mph


East Monroe Street
 
From Meridian Avenue/State Highway 21 to U.S. Highway 30
 
35 mph


Newell Street
 
From 8th Street to 10th Street
 
25 mph


From 10th Street to 18th Street
 
35 mph


From 18th Street north to the intersection of the first country road
 
45 mph


O Street
 
19th Street north to city limits
 
35 mph


School crossings
 
16th Street from Meridian Avenue to C Street
 
20 mph while flashing lights are operating between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on
days city schools are in session; all school crossings shall have advance
warning crossing signs and all crosswalks shall have crossing signs


16th Street from Papio Lane to M Street


Meridian Avenue from 16th Street to 19th Street


C Street from 14th Street to 16th Street


14th Street from C Street to D Street


14th Street from K Street to M Street


M Street from 14th Street to 16th Street


State Highway 21
 
From south corporate limits of the city to 250 feet south of Monroe Street
 
45 mph


From 250 feet south of Monroe Street to 7th Street
 
35 mph


From 7th Street to 8th Street
 
25 mph


From E Street to F Street
 
25 mph


From 8th Street to U.S. Highway 30
 
25 mph


Swimming pool crossing
 
14th and O Streets
 
20 mph while flashing lights are operated between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
days when the swimming pool is open or youth recreation is scheduled; the
swimming pool crossing shall have advance warning crossing signs and the
crosswalk shall have a crossing sign


U.S. Highway 30
 
From O Street (west city limits) to K Street
 
40 mph


From K Street to D Street
 
35 mph


From D Street to 350 feet east of A Street
 
40 mph


From 350 feet east of A Street to the east city limits
 
55 mph


West 2nd Street
 
State Highway 21 to west city limits
 
35 mph




 



(1976 Code, § 5-305)



   (C)   Electronic detection.



      (1)   Determinations made regarding the speed of any motor
vehicle based upon the visual observation of any law enforcement officer may
be corroborated by the use of radio microwaves or other electronic device.
The results of such radio microwave or other electronic speed measurement may
be accepted as competent evidence of the speed of such motor vehicle in any
court or legal proceeding when the speed of the vehicle is at issue. Before
the municipality may offer in evidence the results of such radio microwave or
other electronic speed measurement for the purpose of establishing the speed
of any motor vehicle, the municipality shall prove the following:



         (a)   The measuring device was in proper working order
at the time of conducting the measurement;



         (b)   The measuring device was being operated in such a
manner and under such conditions so as to allow a minimum possibility of
distortion or outside interference;



         (c)   The person operating such device and interpreting
such measurement was qualified by training and experience to properly test
and operate the device; and



         (d)   The operator conducted external tests of accuracy
upon the measuring device, within a reasonable time both prior to and
subsequent to an arrest being made, and the measuring device was found to be
in proper working order.



      (2)   The driver of any such motor vehicle may be arrested
without a warrant under the authority herein granted if the arresting officer
is in uniform or  displays his or  her badge of  authority; provided that,
such officer shall have observed the recording of the speed of such motor
vehicle by the radio microwaves, or other electronic device or had received a
radio message from the officer who observed the speed of the motor vehicle
recorded by the radio microwaves or other electronic device. In the event of
an arrest based on such a message, such radio message must have been
dispatched immediately after the speed of the motor vehicle had been
recorded, and must include a description of the vehicle and the recorded
speed.



(1976 Code, § 5-306)



(Ord. 733, passed 9-15-1983; Ord. 892, passed 3-10-1986; Ord. 904, passed
6-9-1986; Ord. 1028, passed 3-18-1991; Ord. 1289, passed 4-9-2001; Ord. 1314,
passed 3-10-2003; Ord. 1390, passed 7-10-2006)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-662, 39-663, 39-664



SCHEDULE II. SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.



   (A)   Establishment of snow emergency routes. The following streets
are declared to be snow emergency routes within the city. The Mayor (or
someone designated by the Mayor, but always referred to herein as the Mayor)
shall, at the Mayor’s discretion, place appropriate signs or other
traffic-control devices indicating the existence of snow emergency routes. A
designation of any street, avenue, road or highway, or portion thereof as a
snow emergency route shall in no way affect any previous designation of that
street, avenue, road or highway for any other purposes, but shall be in
addition thereto. The following streets or highways are designated as
emergency snow arterial streets:



 

Street
 
Location




2nd Street
 
O Street to Meridian Avenue


8th Street
 
Highway 30 to H Street and F Street to the east city limit


9th Street
 
Meridian Avenue to L Street


12th Street
 
O Street to Newell Street


13th Street
 
E Street to Newell Street


14th Street
 
K Street to O Street and E Street to Newell


16th Street
 
O Street to Newell Street


18th Street
 
Meridian Avenue to Little Sioux


19th Street
 
O Street to B Street


A Street
 
Highway 30 to 8th Street


D Street
 
16th Street to 22nd Street


E Street
 
8th Street to 16th Street


F Street
 
Highway 30 to 7th Street


Highway 21
 
South city limit to 8th Street


Highway 30
 
 


K Street
 
8th Street to 16th Street


Meridian Avenue
 
9th Street to 24th Street


Newell Street
 
8th Street to north city limit


O Street
 
2nd Street to north city limit


Papio Lane
 
16th Street to 19th Street




 



(1976 Code, § 5-626)



   (B)   Declaration of emergency; prohibition of parking on snow
emergency routes. Whenever the Mayor and/or Street Commissioner shall
determine, on the basis of the falling snow, sleet or freezing rain, or on
the basis of an official forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau, of snow, sleet
or freezing rain, that eminent weather conditions will make it necessary that
parking on snow emergency routes as designated by division (A) above be
prohibited or restricted from snow plowing and other purposes, the Mayor
and/or Street Commissioner may place into effect a parking prohibition on all
snow emergency routes by declaring that such emergency conditions exist. In
such declaration of emergency conditions, the Mayor and/or Street
Commissioner shall state the time that the emergency shall become effective.
From the time so designated, all parking of vehicles on snow emergency
routes, shall be, and the same hereby is prohibited. While the prohibition is
in effect, no person shall park, or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any
portion of a snow emergency route. Once the emergency is in effect, the
parking prohibition imposed by this section shall remain in effect until
terminated by declaration of the Mayor and/or Street Commissioner. However,
nothing in this division (B) shall be construed to permit parking at any time
or place where it is forbidden by any other provision of law.



(1976 Code, § 5-627)



(Ord. 1073, passed 1-11-1993; Ord. 1393, passed 2-5-2007)  Penalty, see §
70.99



CHAPTER 75:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Robert Henri Museum parking



      II.   Parking during snow emergency



SCHEDULE I. ROBERT HENRI MUSEUM PARKING.



   (A)    The governing body of the city authorizes the installation of
“Visitor Parking” signs on the north side of Eighth Street, between E
Street and F Street adjacent to and south of land belonging to the Robert
Henri Museum, said land described as east 107 feet of the west 204 feet of
the south 150 feet of Block Four, Gatewood’s Addition to the city, said
signs to be installed with the following requirements and stipulations.



      (1)   The said “Visitor Parking” signs shall conform to
all traffic codes and regulations.



      (2)   The said “Visitor Parking” signs shall include the
wording: “Visitor Parking Only from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.”.



      (3)   The “Visitor Parking” signs shall remain in place
only during the months of May, June, July, August and September of each year
during what is considered to be the tourist season. Payment of expenses
involved for obtaining the signs and for the annual installation and removal
thereof will be the obligation of the Robert Henri Foundation.



   (B)   Any individual parking in the area marked for “Visitor
Parking” during such times as parking is prohibited who is not a visitor of
the Robert Henri Museum shall be subject to penalties provided in § 70.99 of
this code of ordinances.



(1976 Code, § 5-625)  (Ord. 1001, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 1073, passed
1-11-1993)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II. PARKING DURING SNOW EMERGENCY.



   (A)   Declaration of emergency; prohibition of parking on snow
emergency routes. Whenever the Mayor and/or Street Commissioner shall
determine, on the basis of the falling snow, sleet or freezing rain, or on
the basis of an official forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau, of snow, sleet
or freezing rain, that eminent weather conditions will make it necessary that
parking on snow emergency routes as designated by Ch. 74, Schd. II, of this
code of ordinances be prohibited or restricted from snow plowing and other
purposes, the Mayor and/or Street Commissioner may place into effect a
parking prohibition on all snow emergency routes by declaring that such
emergency conditions exist. In such declaration of emergency conditions, the
Mayor and/or Street Commissioner shall state the time that the emergency
shall become effective. From the time so designated, all parking of vehicles
on snow emergency routes, shall be, and the same hereby is prohibited. While
the prohibition is in effect, no person shall park or allow to remain parked
any vehicle on any portion of a snow emergency route. Once the emergency is
in effect, the parking prohibition imposed by this schedule shall remain in
effect until terminated by declaration of the Mayor and/or Street
Commissioner. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit
parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other provision of
law.



(1976 Code, § 5-627)



   (B)   Prohibition of parking on downtown commercial areas during
snow emergency. Upon declaration of snow emergency, such declaration may
include or may later be expanded to include a prohibition of parking on
downtown commercial areas. The declaration shall include a statement of the
hours during which parking shall be prohibited for the purpose of snow
removal from said downtown commercial area. Such prohibition shall not extend
beyond the time reasonably required for such snow removal. There shall be no
parking in the designated downtown areas from 1:00 a.m. to 4:00 a.m. The
areas included are:



 

Street
 
Location


7th Street
 
F Street to Highway 30


8th Street
 
F Street to H Street


9th Street
 
E Street to Meridian Avenue


F Street
 
7th Street to 9th Street


H Street
 
Highway 30 to 9th Street


Meridian Avenue
 
Highway 30 to 9th Street



 



(1976 Code, § 5-628)



(Ord. 1073, passed 1-11-1993; Ord. 1393, passed 2-5-2007)  Penalty, see §
70.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



      92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



      93.   FIREWORKS



      94.   RECREATION AND LEISURE



      95.   CEMETERY



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section




General Provisions




   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Rabies vaccination



   90.03   License and tax required; exemptions; tags



   90.04   Animals running at large



   90.05   Impounding; authority to kill



   90.06   Vicious animals



   90.07   Proclamation of dangerous animal



   90.08   Barking and offensive animals



   90.09   Fighting animals; pitting



   90.10   Liability of owner



   90.11   Animals banned from municipality



   90.12   Cruelty; killing and injuring



   90.13   Animal enclosures



   90.14   Abandonment, neglect and mistreatment



   90.15   Equines and bovines



   90.16   Restrictions on owning, keeping or harboring




Dangerous Dogs




   90.30   Definitions



   90.31   Restraint required



   90.32   Confinement required



   90.33   Failure to comply



   90.34   Additional regulations



 



   90.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Criminal mischief, see § 130.16



   Fences, see § 130.29



   Nuisances, see §§ 91.15 through 91.22



   Planning and Zoning, see Ch. 154




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAT. A cat which is a household pet.



   DEPARTMENT. The state’s Department of Health and Human Services.



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any dog or cat.



   HYBRID ANIMAL. Any animal which is the product of the breeding of a
domestic dog with a non- domestic canine species.



   OWN. To possess, keep, harbor or have control of, charge of or custody
of a domestic or hybrid animal. This term does not apply to domestic or
hybrid animals owned by other persons, which are temporarily maintained on
the premises of a veterinarian or kennel operator for a period of not more
than 30 days.



   OWNER.



      (1)   Any person possessing, keeping, harboring or having
charge or control of any domestic or hybrid animal or permitting any domestic
animal to habitually be or remain on or be lodged or fed within the
person’s houses, yard or premises. This term does not apply to
veterinarians or kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their premises
domestic or hybrid animals owned by other persons for a period of not more
than 30 days.



      (2)   Any OWNER shall be deemed to be liable for all penalties
herein prescribed.



   RABIES CONTROL AUTHORITY. City health and law enforcement officials who
enforce the provisions of this subchapter relating to the vaccination and
impoundment of domestic or hybrid animals. Such public officials shall not be
responsible for any accident or disease of a domestic or hybrid animal
resulting from the enforcement of such sections.



   VACCINATION AGAINST RABIES. The inoculation of a domestic or hybrid
animal with a rabies vaccine as approved by the rules and regulations adopted
and promulgated by the Department. The VACCINATION shall be performed by a
veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state.



(1976 Code, § 6-101)  (Ord. 1114, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 1230, passed
3-24-1997; Ord. 1240, passed 10-6-1997; Ord. 1401, passed 1-7-2008)



§ 90.02  RABIES VACCINATION.



   (A)   Vaccination required; cost; exemptions.



      (1)   Every domestic animal in the city shall be vaccinated
against rabies with a licensed vaccine and revaccinated at intervals
specified by rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the Department.
Young domestic animals shall be initially vaccinated at the age specified in
the rules and regulations. Unvaccinated domestic animals acquired or moved
into the city shall be vaccinated within 30 days after purchase or arrival
unless under the age for initial vaccination.



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (A)(2)(c) below,
every hybrid animal in the city shall be vaccinated against rabies and shall
be revaccinated at intervals specified by rules and regulations adopted and
promulgated by the Department. A young hybrid animal shall be initially
vaccinated at the age specified in such rules and regulations. An
unvaccinated hybrid animal acquired or moved into the city shall be
vaccinated within 30 after purchase or arrival unless under the age for
initial vaccination.



         (b)   The rabies vaccine used to vaccinate a hybrid
animal pursuant to this division (A) shall be sold only to licensed
veterinarians.



         (c)   An owner of a hybrid animal in the city prior to
the date of development of a licensed vaccine determined scientifically to be
reliable in preventing rabies in a hybrid animal shall have one year after
such date to comply with this section.



      (3)   The cost of rabies vaccination shall be borne by the
owner of the domestic or hybrid animal.



      (4)   (a)   The provisions of this subchapter with respect
to vaccination shall not apply to any domestic or hybrid animal owned by a
person temporarily remaining within the city for less than 30 days, to any
domestic or hybrid animal brought into the city for field trial or show
purposes, or to any domestic or hybrid animal brought into the city for
hunting purposes for a period of less than 30 days. Such domestic or hybrid
animals shall be kept under strict supervision of the owner. It shall be
unlawful to bring any domestic or hybrid animal into the city which does not
comply with the animal health laws and import rules and regulations of the
state which are applicable to domestic or hybrid animals.



         (b)   Domestic or hybrid animals assigned to a research
institution or a similar facility shall be exempt from this subchapter.



(1976 Code, § 6-103)



   (B)   Rabies vaccination certificates and tags.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of each veterinarian, at the time
of vaccinating any animal, to complete a certificate of rabies vaccination
which shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:



         (a)   The owner’s name and address;



         (b)   An adequate description of the animal including,
but not limited to, such items as the animal’s breed, sex, age, name and
distinctive markings;



         (c)   The date of vaccination;



         (d)   The rabies vaccination tag number;



         (e)   The type of rabies vaccine administered; and



         (f)   The manufacturer’s serial number of the vaccine
used.



      (2)   Such veterinarian shall issue a tag with the certificate
of vaccination.



      (3)   The cost of the rabies vaccination shall be borne by the
owner of the animal.



(1976 Code, § 6-104)



   (C)   Rabies suspected.



      (1)   (a)   Any dog suspected of being afflicted with
rabies, or any dog not vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter, which has bitten any person and caused an abrasion of the skin,
shall be seized and impounded under the supervision of the Police Department
for a period of not less than ten days.



         (b)   If, upon examination by a veterinarian, the dog
has no clinical signs of rabies at the end of such impoundment, it may be
released to the owner, or, in the case of an unlicensed dog, it shall be
disposed of in accordance with the provisions herein. If the owner of the
said dog has proof of vaccination, it shall be confined by the owner or some
other responsible person for a period of at least ten days, at which time the
dog shall be examined by a licensed veterinarian. If no signs of rabies are
observed, the dog may be released from confinement.



      (2)   If the ownership of any animal which has bitten a person
can be established, the owner shall be liable for the cost of confining for
such length of time as is necessary to establish whether the animal is rabid.
If the ownership of such animal cannot be determined, the person bitten shall
be liable for the cost of so confining it. The cost of confining an animal
whose ownership cannot be determined and is only suspected of having rabies,
shall be paid by the municipality.



      (3)   All costs incurred in the collection, submission and
sending to the Department of Health, of heads of animals that have or are
suspected of dying from rabies, shall be borne by the owner of such animal if
the ownership thereof can be established. If ownership of such animal cannot
be determined, then the person bitten by the animal shall be liable for the
cost of collection, submission and sending the head to the Department of
Health. The cost of sending the head of an animal whose ownership cannot be
determined, which has not bitten any persons and is only suspected of having
rabies, shall be paid by the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 6-113)  (Ord. 1230, passed 3-24-1997; Ord. 1395, passed
6-4-2007; Ord. 1401, passed 1-7-2008)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 71-4402, 71-4404, 71-4405, 71-4406



§ 90.03  LICENSE AND TAX REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS; TAGS.



   (A)   (1)   Any owner of a dog over the age of six months within
the municipality shall, within 30 days after acquisition of the dog, acquire
a license for the dog. annually by or before the January 1 of each year.
Licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk upon payment of a license tax in
the amount established by the governing body, plus the $1.25 fee required
under Neb. RS 54-603(3). It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog to
wrongfully and knowingly license an unsprayed female dog as a male or spayed
female dog if the governing body has established different license taxes for
such dogs.



      (2)   The tax shall be delinquent from and after May 10. The
owner of any dog brought into or harbored within the corporate limits
subsequent to May 1 of any year shall be liable for payment of the dog tax,
and such tax shall be delinquent if not paid within ten days thereafter. The
license shall not be transferable and no refund will be allowed in case of
death, sale or other disposition of the licensed dog.



      (3)   The owner shall state, at the time the application is
made and upon printed forms provided for such purpose, his or her name and
address and the name, breed, color and sex of each dog owned by him or her. A
certificate of rabies vaccination, effective for the ensuing year of the
license, shall be presented when application for a license is made, and no
license or tag shall be issued until the certificate is shown.



      (4)   Every service animal shall be licensed as required by
this section, but no license tax shall be charged. Upon the retirement or
discontinuance of the animal as a service animal, the owner of the animal
shall be liable for the payment of the required license tax.



      (5)   (a)   Upon the payment of the license tax, the Clerk
shall issue to the owner of the dog a license certificate and a metallic tag,
which shall be valid until April 30 following such licensing. The Clerk shall
issue tags of a suitable design that rare different in appearance each year.



         (b)   The metallic tag and the rabies tag shall be
properly attached to the collar or harness of the dog. It shall be unlawful
for the owner of any dog to permit or allow such dog to wear any licensing
identification other than the metallic tag issued by the Clerk.



         (c)   If a license tag is lost, upon satisfactory
evidence that the original tag was issued in accordance with the provisions
of this section, the Clerk shall issue a duplicate or new tag for the balance
of the year for which the license tax has been paid and shall charge and
collect a fee established by the governing body for each duplicate or new tag
so issued.



      (6)   All license taxes, fees and other collections shall be
credited to the General Fund of the city, except as otherwise provided by
Neb. RS 54-603.



(1976 Code, § 6-105)



   (B)   No owner, keeper or harborer of any dog shall permit or allow
such dog to wear any other license metallic tag than the original tag or
duplicate tag issued by the City Clerk for such dog and for the period of the
licensing year hereinbefore mentioned, nor shall the owner, keeper or
harborer wrongfully and knowingly license a male dog or barren female and use
a tag received therefor for an unspayed or intact female dog.



(1976 Code, § 6-106)



(Ord. 1114, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 1116, passed 12-5-1994; Ord. 1418, passed
12-20-2010; Ord. 1461, passed 2-8-2016)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 54-603



§ 90.04  ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.



   Any licensed or unlicensed animal found running at large within the
municipality shall be seized by any police officer or other officer
designated by the Mayor and Council and said animal shall be held in the
municipal animal shelter until claimed by the owner or destroyed as provided
in § 90.05(A) of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or
harborer of any animal regardless of age or sex to permit such animal to run
at large within the corporate limits of the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 6-107)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  IMPOUNDING; AUTHORITY TO KILL.



   (A)   General. It shall be the duty of the municipal police to
capture, secure and remove in a humane manner to the municipal animal shelter
any dog violating any of the provisions of this subchapter. The dogs so
impounded shall be treated in a humane manner and shall be provided with a
sufficient supply of food and fresh water each day. Each impounded dog shall
be kept and maintained at the pound for a period of not less than five days
after public notice has been given unless reclaimed earlier by the owner.
Notice of impoundment of all animals, including any significant marks or
identifications, shall be posted at the office of the Municipal Clerk within
24 hours after impoundment as public notification of such impoundment. Any
dog may be reclaimed by its owner during the period of impoundment by payment
of a general impoundment fee and daily board fee as set by resolution of the
governing body and on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk. The owner
shall then be required to comply with the licensing and rabies vaccination
requirements within 72 hours after release. If the dog is not claimed at the
end of required waiting period after public notice has been given, the
municipal police may dispose of the dog in accordance with the applicable
rules and regulations pertaining to the same; provided that, if, in the
judgment of the municipal police, a suitable home can be found for any such
dog within the municipality, the said dog shall be turned over to that person
and the new owner shall then be required to pay all fees and meet all
licensing and vaccinating requirements provided in this subchapter. The
municipality shall acquire legal title to any unlicensed dog impounded in the
animal shelter for a period longer than the required waiting period after
giving notice. All dogs shall be destroyed and buried in the summary and
humane manner as prescribed by the Board of Health unless a suitable home can
be found for such dog.



(1976 Code, § 6-108)



   (B)   Interference with pound authorities. It shall be unlawful for
any person to hinder, delay, interfere with or obstruct the police or any
assistants while performing said duty enjoined upon him, her or them by the
provisions of this subchapter or while engaged in the capturing, securing or
taking to the animal shelter, any animal subject to be impounded. In such a
case, none of these officials shall be responsible for any accident or
disease of any animal resulting from the enforcement of the provisions of
this subchapter.



(1976 Code, § 6-109)



   (C)   Destruction; abandonment. Any person who owns, harbors or in
any way sustains an animal that he or she wishes to be destroyed may place
the same in the animal shelter to be destroyed and disposed of according to
the provisions contained in this subchapter. Any animal which is abandoned
shall be placed in the municipal animal shelter for a period of not less than
five days after public notice has been given, unless reclaimed earlier by the
owner. Notice of impoundment of all abandoned animals shall be given in a
manner as prescribed in division (A) above and said abandoned animals shall
be destroyed and buried as provided in said section.



(1976 Code, § 6-110)



   (D)   Unlawful tampering with pound.



      (1)   No person, except authorized personnel, shall open or
attempt to open or in any manner tamper with any padlock or other device
securing any enclosure owned or operated by the municipality; nor shall any
unauthorized person be allowed to break open or in any manner directly or
indirectly to aid, counsel or advise the breaking open of any animal shelter,
or any other vehicle used for collecting, or conveying of animals to the
shelter.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to cut,
saw, break, bend or in any manner damage or destroy any enclosure for animals
owned or operated by the municipality.



      (3)   No person, except authorized personnel, shall remove or
attempt to remove any animal kept or harbored in any enclosure for animals
owned or operated by the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 6-114)



   (E)   Capture impossible. The municipal police shall have the
authority to kill any animals showing vicious tendencies or characteristics
of rabies which make capture impossible because of the danger involved.



(1976 Code, § 6-122)



(Ord. 641, passed 5-10-1980; Ord. 670, passed 9-17-1981; Ord. 1373, passed
1-24-2005; Ord. 1395, passed 2-4-2007)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-548, 54-605, 71-4408



§ 90.06  VICIOUS ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor, within the
corporate limits of the municipality, or within territory adjacent to the
corporate limits within one mile thereof, any dangerous or ferocious animal
which habitually snaps or manifests a disposition to bite, or commits injury
to persons or property, or is offensive or unhealthy. If any vicious or
dangerous animal is allowed to run at large within said area, the municipal
police shall have the authority to put the said animal to death. If any
animal bites or injures any person, or kills a domesticated animal, while
said animal is outside the boundaries of the property occupied by its owner,
the court shall as part of any judgment of conviction for either animal
running at large or vicious animal order that said animal shall be destroyed.
The cost of destroying said animal shall be the obligation of the owner. At
the direction of the police, said animal can be placed in the municipal
animal shelter pending determination of the court proceeding instituted
pursuant to this provision and the costs of any placement shall be borne by
the owner.



(1976 Code, § 6-111)  (Ord. 896, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. 1395, passed
6-4-2007; Ord. 1400, passed 12-17-2007)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  PROCLAMATION OF DANGEROUS ANIMAL.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department whenever, in its
opinion, the danger to the public safety from rabid dogs is great or
imminent, to issue a proclamation ordering all persons owning, keeping or
harboring any dog to muzzle the same, or to confine it for a period of not
less than 30 days or more than 90 days from the date of such proclamation, or
until such danger is passed.



   (B)   The dogs may be harbored by any good and sufficient means in a
house, garage or yard on the premise wherein the said owner may reside.



   (C)   Upon issuing the proclamation, it shall be the duty of all
persons owning, keeping or harboring any dog to confine the same, as herein
provided.



(1976 Code, § 6-112)  (Ord. 1395, passed 6-4-2007)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-526



§ 90.08  BARKING AND OFFENSIVE ANIMALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to own, keep or harbor any animal which, by loud, continued or
frequent barking, howling or yelping, shall annoy or disturb any person or
neighborhood, or which habitually barks at or chases persons or vehicles
while they are on any public sidewalks, streets or alleys in the municipality.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply
to the municipal animal shelter.



(1976 Code, § 6-115)  (Ord. 1026, passed 1-21-1991; Ord. 1101, passed
11-8-1993)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-526



§ 90.09  FIGHTING ANIMALS; PITTING.



   (A)   Fighting. It shall be unlawful for any person, by agreement or
otherwise, to set animals to fighting or by any gesture or word to encourage
the same to fight.



(1976 Code, § 6-116)



   (B)   Pitting; definitions.



      (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         BEARBAITING. The pitting of any animal against a bear.



         COCKFIGHTING. The pitting of a fowl against another fowl.



         DOGFIGHTING. The pitting of a dog against another dog.



         PITTING. Bringing animals together in combat.



(1976 Code, § 6-123)



      (2)   (a)   No person shall knowingly:



            1.   Promote, engage in or be employed at
dogfighting, cockfighting, bearbaiting or pitting an animal against another;



            2.   Receive money for the admission of another
person to a place kept for such purpose;



            3.   Own, use, train, sell or possess an animal
for such purposes; and



            4.   Permit any act as described in this division
(B) to occur on any premises owned or controlled by him or her.



         (b)   No person shall knowingly and willingly be present
at and witness as a spectator dogfighting, cockfighting, bearbaiting or the
pitting of an animal against another as prohibited in this division (B).



         (c)   No person shall knowingly or intentionally own or
possess animal fighting paraphernalia with the intent to commit a violation
of this division (B).



            1.   For purposes of this section, ANIMAL FIGHTING
PARAPHERNALIA means equipment, products and materials of any kind that are
used, intended for use or designed for use in the training, preparation,
conditioning or furtherance of the pitting of an animal against another, as
defined in this division (B). ANIMAL FIGHTING PARAPHERNALIA includes, but is
not limited to, the following:



               a.   A breaking stick, which means a device
designed for insertion behind the molars of a dog for the purpose of breaking
the dog’s grip on another animal or object;



               b.   A cat mill, which means a device that
rotates around a central support with one arm designed to secure a dog and
one arm designed to secure a cat, rabbit or other small animal beyond the
grasp of the dog;



               c.   A treadmill, which means an exercise
device consisting of an endless belt on which the animal walks or runs
without changing place;



               d.   A fighting pit, which means a walled
area designed to contain an animal fight;



               e.   A springpole, which means a biting
surface attached to a stretchable device, suspended at a height sufficient to
prevent a dog from reaching the biting surface while touching the ground;



               f.   A heel, which means any edged or
pointed instrument designed to be attached to the leg of a fowl;



               g.   A boxing glove or muff, which means a
fitted protective covering for the spurs of a fowl; and



               h.   Any other instrument commonly used in
the furtherance of pitting an animal against another.



            2.   ANIMAL FIGHTING PARAPHERNALIA does not
include equipment, products or materials of any kind used by a veterinarian
licensed to practice veterinary medicine and surgery in the state.



(1976 Code, § 6-124)



(Ord. 957, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 1019, passed 1-21-1991; Ord. 1418, passed
12-20-2010)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1004, 28-1005



§ 90.10  LIABILITY OF OWNER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a animal owned, kept or
harbored by him or her, or under his or her charge or control, to injure or
destroy any real or personal property of any description belonging to another
person. The owner or possessor of any such animal, in addition to the usual
judgment upon conviction, may be made to be liable to the persons so injured
in an amount equal to the value of the damage so sustained.



(1976 Code, § 6-117)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 54-601, 54-602



§ 90.11  ANIMALS BANNED FROM MUNICIPALITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the
corporate limits any horse, mule, sheep, cow, goat, swine, llama, ostrich,
alpaca, emu or other livestock, any chicken, turkey, peacock, guinea, duck,
goose, pigeon or other fowl, any snake, lizard or other large reptile.



(1976 Code, § 6-118)  (Ord. 1413, passed 4-19-2010)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-547



§ 90.12  CRUELTY; KILLING AND INJURING.



   (A)   No person shall cruelly or unnecessarily beat, abuse, overwork
or insufficiently shelter, feed or water any animal within the municipality.
If there has been a previous conviction pursuant to this section, the person
so convicted shall be prohibited from owning, possessing, keeping, harboring
or having control of, charge of or custody of any animal from and after the
date of that conviction. If said person violates said prohibition, law
enforcement shall be permitted to enter upon the real estate of the person so
violating and deliver the animal or animals in question to the municipal
animal shelter. All costs for boarding the animal or animals and for the
placement or destruction of the animal or animals shall be borne by and shall
be the responsibility of the person in violation of this section.



(1976 Code, § 6-119)



   (B)   No person shall kill or injure any animal by the use of
firearms, stones, clubs, poisons or any other manner unless the animal is
vicious or dangerous and cannot be captured without danger to the persons
attempting to effect a capture of the said animal.



(1976 Code, § 6-120)



(Ord. 1389, passed 6-19-2006; Ord. 1411, passed 11-23-2009)  Penalty, see §
90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-552, 28-553



§ 90.13  ANIMAL ENCLOSURES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or
harboring any animal to fail, refuse or neglect to provide such animal with
adequate food, water, shade, shelter, living environment or veterinarian care
as may be necessary for diseased or injured animals. Any animal habitually
kept outside or repeatedly left unattended outside shall be provided with a
structurally sound, moisture-proof and wind-proof shelter large enough to
accommodate and keep the animal reasonably clean, dry and comfortable.



   (B)   ADEQUATE FOOD, WATER, SHADE, SHELTER, LIVING ENVIRONMENT AND
CARE shall mean:



      (1)   Each animal at suitable intervals, at least every 24
hours, receive a quantity of wholesome food sufficient to maintain an
adequate level of nutrition for the animal;



      (2)   Each animal shall at all times have access to an
adequate supply of clean, fresh water and such water shall be provided either
free flowing or in a receptacle. Snow or ice shall not be considered an
acceptable water source. If water pans or dishes are used, such pans or
dishes shall have weighted bottoms or be mounted or secured in a manner that
prevents tipping; and



      (3)   Each animal shall have convenient access to adequate
shelter throughout the year. Any artificial shelter shall be structurally
sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animal from injury and
from the elements, and shall be of sufficient size to permit the animal to
enter, stand, turn around and lie down in a natural manner. Any shelter which
is not protecting the animal from temperature extremes, or precipitation, or
which does not provide adequate ventilation or drainage does not comply with
this section. The shelter and any other spaces accessible to the animal and
all bedding for the animal shall be maintained in a manner which minimizes
the risk to the animal of contracting disease, being injured or becoming
infested with parasites.



(1976 Code, § 6-121)  (Ord. 1413, passed 4-19-2010)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.14  ABANDONMENT, NEGLECT AND MISTREATMENT.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ABANDON. To leave any animal in one’s care, whether as owner or
custodian, for any length of time without making effective provision for its
food, water or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal’s
health.



      ANIMAL. Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom. ANIMAL does
not include an uncaptured wild creature or a livestock animal, as defined in
this section.



      BOVINE. A cow, an ox or a bison.



      CRUELLY MISTREAT. To knowingly and intentionally kill, maim,
disfigure, torture, beat, mutilate, bum, scald, otherwise inflict harm upon
any animal.



      CRUELLY NEGLECT. To fail to provide any animal in one’s care,
whether as owner or custodian, with food, water or other care as is
reasonably necessary for the animal’s health.



      HUMANE KILLING. The destruction of an animal by a method which
causes the animal a minimum of pain and suffering.



      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any member of the State Patrol, any
County or Deputy Sheriff, any member of the police force of the municipality
or any other city or village, or any other public official authorized by the
municipality or any other city or village to enforce state or local animal
control laws, rules, regulations or ordinances. LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER also
includes a special investigator appointed as a deputy state sheriff as
authorized pursuant to Neb. RS 81-201 while acting within the authority of
the Director of Agriculture.



      LIVESTOCK ANIMAL. Any bovine, equine, swine, sheep, goats,
domesticated corvine animals, ratite birds or poultry.



      OWNER or CUSTODIAN. Any person owning, keeping, possessing,
harboring or knowingly permitting an animal to remain on or about any
premises owned or occupied by such person.



      POLICE ANIMAL. A horse or dog owned or controlled by the state or
any county, city or village for the purpose of assisting a law enforcement
officer in the performance of his or her official enforcement duties.



(1976 Code, § 6-131)



   (B)   Enforcement powers; immunity.



      (1)   A law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that
an animal has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly
mistreated may seek a warrant authorizing entry upon private property to
inspect, care for or impound the animal.



      (2)   A law enforcement office who has reason to believe that
an animal has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly
mistreated may issue a citation to the owner or custodian as prescribed in
Neb. RS 29-422 to 29-429.



      (3)   Any law enforcement office acting under this section
shall not be liable for damage to property if such damage is not the result
of the officer’s negligence.



(1976 Code, § 6-132)



   (C)   Violation.



      (1)   A person who intentionally, knowingly or recklessly
abandons, cruelly neglects or cruelly mistreats an animal is guilty of an
offense.



      (2)   A person commits harassment of a police animal if he or
she knowingly and intentionally teases or harasses a police animal in order
to distract, agitate or harm the police animal for the purpose preventing
such animal from performing its legitimate official duties.



(1976 Code, § 6-133)



(Ord. 1018, passed 1-21-1991; Ord. 1418, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1433A,
passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 1461, passed 2-8-2016; Ord. 1468, passed 2-16-2017) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1008, 28-1009, 28-1012



§ 90.15  EQUINES AND BOVINES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall intentionally trip or cause to fall,
or lasso or rope the legs of, any equine by any means for the purpose of
entertainment, sport, practice or contest.



      (2)   The intentional tripping or causing to fall, or lassoing
or roping the legs of, any equine by any means for the purpose of
entertainment, sport, practice or contest shall not be considered a commonly
accepted practice occurring in conjunction with sanctioned rodeos, animal
racing or pulling contests.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall intentionally trip, cause to fall or
drag any bovine by its tail by any means for the purpose of entertainment,
sport, practice or contest.



      (2)   The intentional tripping, causing to fall or dragging of
any bovine by its tail by any means for the purpose of entertainment, sport,
practice or contest shall not be considered a commonly accepted practice
occurring in conjunction with sanctioned rodeos, animal racing or pulling
contests.



(1976 Code, § 6-134)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1009.02, 28-1009.03, 28-1013.01,
28-1013.02



§ 90.16  RESTRICTIONS ON OWNING, KEEPING OR HARBORING.



   (A)   No person, who shall have been convicted at anytime of a
violation of §§ 90.09(A) and (C) and 90.12 of this chapter, shall be
allowed to own, keep or harbor any animal within the city limits.



   (B)   Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a new
violation hereof every 24 hours.



(1976 Code, § 6-135)  (Ord. 1433B, passed 2-18-2013)  Penalty, see § 90.99




DANGEROUS DOGS




§ 90.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. An entity authorized to enforce the animal
control laws of the city and includes any local law enforcement agency or
other agency designated by the city to enforce the animal control laws of the
city.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any individual employed, appointed, or
authorized by an animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the
enforcement of this act or any other law or ordinance relating to the
licensing of animals, control of animals or seizure and impoundment of
animals and shall include any state or local law enforcement or other
employee whose duties in whole or in part include assignments that involve
the seizure and impoundment of any animal.



   DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that, according to the records of an animal
control authority of the city, which:



      (1)   Has killed a human being;



      (2)   Has inflicted injury on a human being that requires
medical treatment;



      (3)   Has killed a domestic animal without provocation;



      (4)   Has been previously determined to be a potentially
dangerous dog by an animal control authority, the owner has received notice
of such determination from an animal control authority or an animal control
officer and such dog inflicts an injury on a human being that does not
require medical treatment, injures a domestic animal, or threatens the safety
of humans or domestic animals;



      (5)   The dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG if the
individual was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog at the time of the
injury or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented,
abused or assaulted the dog;



      (6)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG if the
injury, damage or threat was sustained by an individual who, at the time, was
committing a willful trespass as defined in Neb. RS 20-203, 28-520 or 28-521
RS Neb. was committing any other tort upon the property of the owner of the
dog, was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or has, in the past, been
observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was
committing or attempting to commit a crime; and



      (7)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG if the dog
is a police animal, as defined in Neb. RS 28-1008.



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL.



      (1)   A cat, a dog or livestock.



      (2)   Livestock includes buffalo, deer, antelope, fowl and any
other animal in any zoo, wildlife park, refuge, wildlife area or nature
center intended to be on exhibit.



   MEDICAL TREATMENT. Treatment administered by a physician or other
licensed health care professional that results in sutures or surgery or
treatment for one or more broken bones.



   OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, organization, political
subdivision or department possessing, harboring, keeping or having control or
custody of a dog.



   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.



      (1)   Any dog that when unprovoked;



         (a)   Inflicts an injury on a human being that does not
require medical treatment;



         (b)   Injures a domestic animal; or



         (c)   Chases or approaches a person upon streets,
sidewalks or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of
attack.



      (2)   Any specific dog with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack when unprovoked, to cause injury or to threaten the
safety of humans or domestic animals.



(1976 Code, § 6-126)  (Ord. 992, passed 12-18-1989)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 54-617



§ 90.31  RESTRAINT REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   A dangerous dog that has been declared as such shall
be spayed or neutered and implanted with a microchip identification number by
a licensed veterinarian within 30 days after such declaration.



      (2)   The cost of both procedures is the responsibility of the
owner of the dangerous dog.



      (3)   Written proof of both procedures and the microchip
identification number shall be provided to the animal control authority after
the procedures are completed.



   (B)   No owner of a dangerous dog shall permit the dog to go beyond
the property of the owner unless the dog is restrained securely by a chain or
leash.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) below or for a reasonable
veterinary purpose, no owner of a dangerous dog shall transport such dog or
permit such dog to be transported to another county, city or village in the
state.



   (D)   (1)   An owner of a dangerous dog may transport such dog or
permit such dog to be transported to another county, city or village in the
state for the purpose of permanent relocation of the owner if the owner has
obtained written permission prior to such relocation from the animal control
authority of the county, city or village in which the owner resides and from
the county, city or village in which the owner will reside. Each animal
control authority may grant such permission based upon a reasonable
evaluation of both the owner and the dog, including if the owner has complied
with the laws of the state and of the county, city or village in which he or
she resides with regard to dangerous dogs after the dog was declared
dangerous.



      (2)   An animal control authority shall not grant permission
under this section if the county, city or village has an ordinance or
resolution prohibiting the relocation of dangerous dogs. After the permanent
relocation, the animal control authority of the county, city or village in
which the owner resides shall monitor the owner and such dog for a period of
at least 30 days, but not to exceed 90 days, to ensure the owner’s
compliance with the laws of the state and of such county, city or village
with regard to dangerous dogs.



      (3)   Nothing in this division (D) shall permit the
rescindment of the declaration of dangerous dog.



(1976 Code, § 6-127)  (Ord. 992, passed 12-18-1989)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 54-618



§ 90.32  CONFINEMENT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person, firm, partnership, limited liability company or
corporation shall own, keep or harbor or allow to be in or on any premises
occupied by him, her or it or under his, her or its charge or control any
dangerous dog without such dog being confined so as to protect the public
from injury.



   (B)   (1)   While unattended on the owner’s property, a
dangerous dog shall be securely confined, in a humane manner, indoors or in a
securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitably designed to prevent
the entry of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping. The pen or
structure shall have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure
has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be embedded into the
ground at least one foot. The pen or structure shall also protect the dog
from the elements. The pen or structure shall be at least ten feet from any
property line of the owner.



      (2)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall post warning signs on
the property where the dog is kept that are clearly visible from all areas of
public access and that inform persons that a dangerous dog is on the
property. Each warning sign shall be no less than ten inches by 12 inches and
shall contain the words warning and dangerous animal in high-contrast
lettering at least three inches high on a black background.



(1976 Code, § 6-128)  (Ord. 992, passed 12-18-1989)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 54-619



§ 90.33  FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   (A)   (1)   Any dangerous dog may be immediately confiscated by
an animal control officer if the owner is in violation of this section.



      (2)   The owner shall be responsible for the reasonable costs
incurred by the animal control authority for the care of a dangerous dog
confiscated by an animal control officer or for the destruction of any
dangerous dog if the action by the animal control authority is pursuant to
law and if the owner violated this section.



   (B)   In addition to any other penalty, a court may order the animal
control authority to dispose of a dangerous dog in an expeditious and humane
manner.



   (C)   (1)   Any owner whose dangerous dog inflicts on a human
being a serious bodily injury, as defined in Neb. RS 28-109, is guilty of a
Class I misdemeanor for the first offense, whether or not the same dangerous
dog is involved.



      (2)   It is a defense to a violation of division (C)(1) above
that the dangerous dog was, at the time of the infliction of the serious
bodily injury, in the custody of or under the direct control of a person
other than the owner or the owner’s immediate family.



   (D)   If a dangerous dog of an owner with a prior conviction under
this section attacks or bites a human being or domestic animal, in addition
to any other penalty, the dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by
an animal control authority, placed in quarantine for the proper length of
time and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.



(1976 Code, § 6-129)  (Ord. 992, passed 12-18-1989)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 54-620, 54-621, 54-622.01, 54-623



§ 90.34  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to restrict or prohibit
any governing body of the city from establishing and enforcing laws or
ordinances at least as stringent as the provisions of this subchapter.



(1976 Code, § 6-130)  (Ord. 992, passed 12-18-1989)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 54-624



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violation; penalty.



      (1)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500
for each offense.



      (2)   A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of such failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 6-401)



   (B)   Abatement of nuisance.



      (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists, as defined in this chapter,
the municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the
same, in the manner provided by law.



      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(1976 Code, § 6-402)



   (C)   Violation of specific ordinances; penalty.



      (1)   Any person who shall violate § 90.14(C) of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined as follows:



         (a)   First violation: $100;



         (b)   Second violation: $250; and



         (c)   Third and all subsequent violations: $500.



      (2)   A new violation shall deem to have been committed every
24 hours of such failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 6-403)



(Ord. 1372, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 1449, passed 12-23-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722



CHAPTER 91:  HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



Section




General Provisions




   91.01   General health and safety regulations



   91.02   Enforcement official; County Health Board



   91.03   State rules




Nuisances




   91.15   Generally defined nuisances



   91.16   Specifically defined nuisances



   91.17   Abatement procedure



   91.18   Jurisdiction



   91.19   Air pollution



   91.20   Noxious use of building or premises



   91.21   Water pollution



   91.22   Dead or diseased trees



Cross-reference:



   Animals, see Ch. 90



   Planning and Zoning, see Ch. 154



   Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, see Ch. 151




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 91.01  GENERAL HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATIONS.



   For the purpose of promoting the health and safety of the residents of
the municipality, the Board of Health shall, from time to time, adopt such
rules and regulations relative thereto and shall make such inspections,
prescribe such penalties and make such reports as may be necessary toward
that purpose.



(1976 Code, § 4-101)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-121



§ 91.02  ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL; COUNTY HEALTH BOARD.



   (A)   The Police Chief, as the Quarantine Officer, shall be the
Chief Health Enforcement Officer of the municipality. It shall be his or her
duty to notify the governing body and the Board of Health of health nuisances
within the municipality and its zoning jurisdiction.



(1976 Code, § 4-102)



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to work closely
with the county’s Health Board in protecting the health and welfare of the
residents of the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 4-104)  (Ord. 1024, passed 1-21-1991)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-121



§ 91.03  STATE RULES.



   The “Rules and Regulations Relating to Public Health”, Department
of Health of the state are hereby incorporated by reference when the same are
applicable to the municipality, in their present form and as they may
hereafter be amended. Three copies of the said pamphlet are filed at the
office of the Municipal Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at
any reasonable time.



(1976 Code, § 4-103)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-132, 19-902




NUISANCES




§ 91.15  GENERALLY DEFINED NUISANCES.



   A nuisance consists in doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a
duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which
act, omission, condition or thing either:



   (A)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of
others;



   (B)   Offends decency;



   (C)   Is offensive to the senses;



   (D)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct or
renders dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square,
street or highway in the municipality;



   (E)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use
of property; or



   (F)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life
and property or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.



(1976 Code, § 4-301)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720



§ 91.16  SPECIFICALLY DEFINED NUISANCES.



   The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting of
any of the following specific acts, omissions, places, conditions and things
are hereby declared to be nuisances:



   (A)   Any odorous, putrid, unsound or unwholesome grain, meat,
hides, skins, feathers, vegetable matter or the whole or any part of any dead
animal, fish or fowl;



   (B)   Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits or like places which
are not securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or
malodorous;



   (C)   Filthy, littered or trash-covered cellars, houseyards,
barnyards, stable-yards, factory-yards, mill yards, vacant areas in rear of
stores, granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings or premises;



   (D)   Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected
from flies and the elements, or which is kept or handled in violation of any
ordinance of the municipality;



   (E)   Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher’s
trimmings and offal, parts of fish or any waste vegetable or animal matter in
any quantity; provided, nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary
retention of waste in receptacles in a manner provided by the health officer
of the municipality, nor the dumping of non-putrefying waste in a place and
manner approved by the Health Officer;



   (F)   Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap
iron, wire metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken
crockery, broken glass, broken plaster and all trash or abandoned material,
unless the same be kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles;



   (G)   Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates,
packing crates, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw or other
packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal not
neatly piled, old automobiles or parts thereof, or any other waste materials
when any of said articles or materials create a condition in which flies or
rats may breed or multiply, or which may be a fire danger or which are so
unsightly as to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof;



   (H)   Any unsightly building, billboard or other structure, or any
old, abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure or any building
or structure commenced and left unfinished, which said buildings, billboards
or other structures are either a fire hazard, a menace to the public health
or safety, or are so unsightly as to depreciate the value of property in the
vicinity thereof;



   (I)   All places used or maintained as junk yards, or dumping
grounds, or for the wrecking and dissembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors
or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked
or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or of
any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or
equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons, which said
places are kept or maintained so as to essentially interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others, or which are so
unsightly as to tend to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof;



   (J)   Stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of
ground;



   (K)   Stockyards, granaries, mills, pig pens, cattle pens, chicken
pens or any other place, building or enclosure, in which animals or fowls of
any kind are confined or on which are stored tankage or any other animal or
vegetable matter, or on which any animal or vegetable matter including grain
is being processed, when said places in which said animals are confined, or
said premises on which said vegetable or animal matter is located, are
maintained and kept in such a manner that foul and noxious odors are
permitted to emanate therefrom, to the annoyance of inhabitants of the
municipality, or are maintained and kept in such a manner as to be injurious
to the public health; and



   (L)   All other things specifically designated as nuisances
elsewhere in this code.



(1976 Code, § 4-302)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720



§ 91.17  ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The owner or occupant of any real estate within the corporate
limits or zoning jurisdiction of the municipality shall keep such real estate
free of nuisances. Except to the extent that conflicting procedures are
otherwise provided, the procedures in this section shall apply to abatement
of nuisances.



   (B)   Upon determination by the Board of Health or designated
official that the owner or occupant of any such real estate has failed to
keep the real estate free of nuisances, notice to abate and remove such
nuisance and notice of the right to a hearing before the governing body and
the manner in which it may be requested shall be given to each owner or
owner’s duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any, by personal
service or by certified mail. If notice by personal service or certified mail
is unsuccessful, notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality or by conspicuously posting the
notice on the real estate upon which the nuisance is to be abated and
removed. The notice shall describe the condition as found by the Board of
Health or designated official and state that the condition has been declared
a nuisance and must be remedied at once.



   (C)   If, within five days after receipt of such notice or
publication or posting, whichever is applicable, the owner or occupant of the
real estate does not request a hearing with the municipality may have such
work done.



   (D)   If, within five days after receipt of such notice or
publication or posting, which ever is applicable, the owner or occupant
requests in writing a hearing with the governing body shall fix a time and
place at which hearing will be held. Notice of the hearing shall be given by
personal service or certified mail and require the owner or occupant to
appear before the governing body to show cause why such condition should not
be found to be a nuisance and remedied. The notice shall be given not less
than seven, nor more than 14, days before the time of the hearing. Upon the
date fixed for the hearing and pursuant to the noticed, the governing body
shall hear all objections made by the owner or occupant and shall hear
evidence submitted by the Board of Health or designated official. If, after
consideration of all the evidence, the governing body finds that the
condition is a nuisance, it shall, by resolution, order and direct the owner
or occupant to remedy the nuisance at once. If the owner or occupant refuses
or neglects to promptly comply with the order to abate and remove the
nuisance, the governing body may have such work done.



   (E)   The costs and expenses of any such work shall be paid by the
owner. If unpaid for two months after such work is done, the municipality may
either:



      (1)   Levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon
the real estate so benefited as a special assessment in the same manner as
other special assessments for improvements are levied and assessed; or



      (2)   Recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the
work upon the real estate and the adjoining streets and alleys.



(1976 Code, § 4-303)  (Ord. 1461, passed 2-8-2016)



§ 91.18  JURISDICTION.



   The Mayor, City Administrator and Chief of Police of the municipality
are directed to enforce this municipal code against all nuisances. The
jurisdiction of the Mayor, City Administrator, Chief of Police and court
shall extend to, and the territorial application of this chapter shall
include, all territory adjacent to the limits of the municipality within one
mile thereof and all territory within the corporate limits.



(1976 Code, § 4-304)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720



§ 91.19  AIR POLLUTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the
emission of smoke from any source that is injurious or offensive to the
residents of the municipality in the judgment of the Board of Health. Air
shall be considered to be polluted when the discharge into the open air of
dust, fumes, gases, mist, odors, smoke or any combination thereof is of such
character and in a quantity which to any group of persons interferes with
their health, repose or safety, or causes severe annoyance or discomfort or
is offensive and objectionable to normal persons and causes injury to real
and personal property of any kind. The standards for air pollution
established or adopted by the state shall be presumptive evidence as to when
the air is deemed to be polluted under this section. It is hereby unlawful
for any such person, firm or corporation to permit or cause the escape of the
aforesaid nuisances and the escape of the said dust, fumes, gases, mists,
odors and smoke is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be summarily
abated upon written notice by the Board of Health to the violator. Such
abatement may be in addition to the penalty for air pollution in the
municipality.



(1976 Code, § 4-305)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1016



§ 91.20  NOXIOUS USE OF BUILDING OR PREMISES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a building or premise in any
part of the municipality for any trade, industry or other purpose that is
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. Such a noxious or
offensive use is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance.



(1976 Code, § 4-306)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 28-1321



§ 91.21  WATER POLLUTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
obstruct or impede without legal authority any river or collection of water,
or to corrupt and render unwholesome or impure any watercourse, stream or
other water. The standards for water quality established or adopted by the
state shall be presumptive evidence as to when the water is deemed to be
polluted under this section.



   (B)   Such a corruption of the water in or about the municipality
shall constitute a nuisance and shall be summarily abated upon written notice
to the violator by the Board of Health. The said abatement may be in addition
to the penalty for water pollution.



(1976 Code, § 4-307)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1012, 28-1016



§ 91.22  DEAD OR DISEASED TREES.



   (A)   (1)   It is hereby declared a nuisance for a property owner
to permit, allow or maintain any dead or diseased trees within the
right-of-way of streets within the corporate limits of the city or within its
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.



      (2)   Notice to abate and remove such nuisance and notice of
the right to a hearing and the manner in which it may be requested shall be
given to each owner or owner’s duly authorized agent and to the occupant,
if any. The city shall give notice by first class mail, such mail shall be
conspicuously marked as to its importance. Within five days after receipt of
such notice, the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground may request
a hearing with the city to appeal the decisions to abate or remove the
nuisance by filing a written appeal with the office of the City Clerk. A
hearing on the appeal shall be held within 14 days after the filing of the
appeal and shall be conducted by an elected or appointed officer as
designated in the ordinance. The Hearing Officer shall render a decision on
the appeal within five business days after the conclusion of the hearing. If
the appeal fails, the city may have the work done to abate and remove the
dead or diseased trees. If the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of
ground does not request a hearing with the city within five days after
receipt of such notice or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove
the nuisance, the city may have such work done, the city may levy and assess
all or any portion of the costs and expense of the work upon the lot or piece
of ground so benefitted as a special assessment.



   (B)   It is hereby declared a nuisance for a property owner to
permit, allow or maintain any dead or diseased trees on private property
within the corporate limits of the city or within its extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction. The provisions in division (A)(2) above shall apply to such
nuisance for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section, the
city police shall have the authority to enter upon private property to
inspect the trees thereon.



(1976 Code, § 4-308)  (Ord. 1153, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1461, passed
2-8-2016; Ord. 1468, passed 2-16-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-555



CHAPTER 92:  FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section




General Provisions




   92.01   Preservation of property



   92.02   Disorderly spectator



   92.03   Equipment



   92.04   Interference



   92.05   Obstruction



   92.06   Assistance



   92.07   Driving over fire hose



   92.08   Traffic



   92.09   False alarms




Fire Prevention




   92.20   Fire Code enforcement



   92.21   Lawful entry



   92.22   Violation notice



   92.23   Fire limits



   92.24   Fires regulated



   92.25   Flammable gases



   92.26   Rural Fire District; merger



   92.27   Open burning ban; waiver



   92.28   Explosives



 



   92.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 92.01  PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.



   The Fire Chief, or any officer in charge of the Fire Department, shall
have the authority and power to cause the removal of property whenever it
shall become necessary for the preservation of more valuable property, the
protection of human life or to prevent the spreading of fire to adjoining
property. The Fire Chief may direct the municipal firefighters to remove any
building, structure or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any
fire. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to blow up, or cause to be
blown up, with explosives any building or structure during the progress of a
fire for the purpose of checking the progress of the same.



(1976 Code, § 7-101)



§ 92.02  DISORDERLY SPECTATOR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person during the time of a fire and for a
period of 36 hours after its extinguishment to hinder, resist or refuse to
obey the Municipal Fire Chief, or to act in a noisy or disorderly manner. The
Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power and authority during
such time to arrest or command any such person to assist them in the
performance of their official duties.



(1976 Code, § 7-102)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-908



§ 92.03  EQUIPMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, except the Fire Chief and the
members of the Municipal Fire Department, to molest, destroy, handle or in
any other way to interfere with the use and storage of any of the fire trucks
and other apparatus belonging to the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 7-103)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-519



§ 92.04  INTERFERENCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hinder or obstruct
the Municipal Fire Chief or the members of the Fire Department in the
performance of their duty.



(1976 Code, § 7-104)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-908



§ 92.05  OBSTRUCTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the use of a fire
hydrant, or have or place any material within three feet of a hydrant, or
within an area extending 15 feet from any outlet of a hydrant. Any vehicle or
material found as an obstruction may be immediately removed by the Fire Chief
or any member of the Fire Department, at the risk, cost and expense of the
owner or claimant.



(1976 Code, § 7-105)  (Ord. 1177, passed 10-9-1995)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,166



§ 92.06  ASSISTANCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, after the command of the
Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, to aid in extinguishing a fire or to
assist in the removal and protection of property.



(1976 Code, § 7-106)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-908



§ 92.07  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the Fire
Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, to drive any vehicle over unprotected hose of
the Fire Department.



(1976 Code, § 7-107)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-682



§ 92.08  TRAFFIC.



   No vehicle shall follow, approach or park closer than 500 feet to any
fire vehicle, or to any fire hydrant to which a hose is connected. Nothing
herein shall be construed to apply to vehicles carrying doctors, members of
the Fire Department, or emergency vehicles.



(1976 Code, § 7-108)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 39-681



§ 92.09  FALSE ALARMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without good
and reasonable cause raise any false alarm of fire.



(1976 Code, § 7-109)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-907, 35-520




FIRE PREVENTION




§ 92.20  FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Incorporated by reference into this code or ordinances are the
standards recommended by the 2012 International Fire Code and all subsequent
amendments. This code shall have the same force and effect as if set out
verbatim herein. One copy of the International Fire Code is on file with the
Municipal Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at any
reasonable time.



(1976 Code, § 7-201)



   (B)   It shall be the duty of all municipal officials to enforce the
incorporated Fire Code provisions and all infractions shall be immediately
brought to the attention of the Fire Chief.



(1976 Code, § 7-202)



(Ord. 573, passed 4-20-1978)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-132, 19-902, 81-502



§ 92.21  LAWFUL ENTRY.



   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of any building
or structure, except the interiors of private dwellings, to allow the Fire
Chief to inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as necessary the said
structure for the purpose of ascertaining and enumerating all conditions
therein that are likely to cause fire, or any other violations of the
provisions of the municipal ordinances affecting the hazard of fire.



(1976 Code, § 7-203)



§ 92.22  VIOLATION NOTICE.



   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of any building
or structure that was lawfully inspected as hereinbefore prescribed, and who
receives written or verbal notice of a violation of any of the provisions of
the municipal ordinances to correct the condition that violates the said
ordinance or ordinances within five days from the date of receipt of such
notice.



(1976 Code, § 7-204)



§ 92.23  FIRE LIMITS.



   The following described territory in the municipality shall be and
constitute the fire limits: beginning at a point of the intersection of
Highway 30 and A Street; thence north one block to Third Street; thence west
one block to B Street; thence north one half block to the alley in Block 53
of the original townsite of the city; thence west one block to C Street;
thence north one block to the alley in Block 47 of the original townsite of
the city; thence west one block to D Street; thence north one and one-half
blocks to Sixth Street; thence west two blocks to F Street; thence north one
block to Seventh Street; thence east one block to E Street; thence north two
blocks to Ninth Street; thence west five blocks to K Street; thence north one
block to Tenth Street; thence west on the extended line of Tenth Street to O
Street; thence south along the line of the corporate limits of the
municipality to the south boundary of the main right-of-way of the Union
Pacific Railroad; thence southeasterly following the line of the corporate 
limits of the municipality and the south boundary of the main right-of-way of
the Union Pacific Railroad to the western boundary of the corporate limits of
the municipality; thence south following the line of the corporate limits of
the municipality to the southern boundary of the corporate limits of the
municipality; thence east following the line of the corporate limits of the
municipality to G Street; thence north to the south boundary of the main
right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad; thence southeasterly following
the south boundary of the main right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad to
an extension of the line of A Street; thence north to the place of beginning.



(1976 Code, § 7-205)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-550



§ 92.24  FIRES REGULATED.



   (A)   It shall be lawful to build or set out certain fires; provided
that, the person building such fires shall have the substance to be burned in
a fire-proof trash burner or incinerator with a metal fire-proof screen of
not more than one-inch mesh and located at least 20 feet from any building.
The incinerator shall be built in such a way as to not permit the escape of
burning paper or other substance. If any person shall require a fire in the
course of his or her trade as a blacksmith or mechanic, such fire shall be
built and maintained in the manner prescribed by the Fire Chief. All fires
shall be built after 7:00 a.m. and completely extinguished by 8:00 p.m.,
except the aforesaid fires used in the course of a trade which shall be
allowed during such hours as the Fire Chief shall prescribe. It shall be
unlawful for any person to set fire to, burn or cause to be burned any
garbage, animal matter or vegetable matter.



   (B)   The burning of straw, hay, leaves or brush in the open air is
hereby permitted and allowed; provided that, the person setting out the same
request permission and receive an open burning permit in writing, signed by
the local Fire Chief, on a form provided by the state’s Fire Marshal; and,
provided further that, any such burning shall be done while the said fire is
attended by the person setting out the same at all times; and, further
provided that, the said fire shall be located at least 20 feet from any
building.



(1976 Code, § 7-201)  (Ord. 675, passed 9-21-1981; Ord. 683, passed
6-24-1982; Ord. 701, passed 8-5-1982)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provision, see Neb. RS 17-549, 17-556, 81-520.01



§ 92.25  FLAMMABLE GASES.



   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to store or keep above ground
in the residential district of the municipality for any period of time any
form of flammable gas or liquefied petroleum gas in excess of five gallons,
or add to, enlarge or replace any facility used for the storage of such
gases, must first obtain a permit from the governing body. The governing body
shall require the name of the gas, the place of storage and the amount of gas
stored. If the permit is granted, the governing body shall prescribe such
rules, regulations and precautionary actions as it may deem necessary. Permit
requirements for the initial construction or location of storage facilities
shall not apply to those facilities in existence on the effective date of
this subchapter; provided, any such present use that is discontinued for a
period of 60 days shall not be revived without a permit.



(1976 Code, § 7-207)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-549



§ 92.26  RURAL FIRE DISTRICT; MERGER.



   (A)   The Municipal Fire Department may be merged with the Rural
Fire Protection District. The proceedings for the merger may be initiated by
the presentation to the County Clerk of a petition, signed by 60% or more of
the electors who are owners of any interest in real or personal property
assessed for taxation in the territory to be merged and who are residing
within the boundaries of such territory, stating the desires and purposes of
such petitioners. The petition shall contain a description of the boundaries
of the territory proposed to be merged and it shall be accompanied by a map
or plat and a deposit for publication costs.



   (B)   (1)   The County Clerk shall examine the tax schedules in
the office of the County Assessor and determine and certify whether or not
such petition complies with the requirements of this section and that the
persons signing the petition appear to reside within the boundaries described
by such petition. Thereafter, the County Clerk shall forward such petition,
map or plat, and certificate to the Board of Directors of the District and
the governing body affected by such merger.



      (2)   Within 30 days after receiving the petition, map or
plat, and certificate of the County Clerk, in accordance with this section,
the Board of Directors and governing body shall transmit the petition, map or
plat, and certificate to the proper County Board, accompanied by a report in
writing approving or disapproving the proposal contained in the petition, or
approving such proposal in part and disapproving it in part.



      (3)   The County Clerk shall designate a time and place for a
hearing before a joint meeting of the county boards of all counties in which
the proposed district is to be situated and shall give notice of such hearing
by publication two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the
county, the last publication appearing at least seven days prior to said
hearing. At the time and place so fixed, the county board or boards shall
meet and said hearing shall be held respecting the merger or location of the
boundaries of the district. Thereupon, the county board shall determine the
boundaries of the proposed District, whether as suggested in the petition or
otherwise, and make a written order of such determination which shall
describe the boundaries of the District and be filed in the office of the
County Clerk.



      (4)   If the report of the Board of Directors and the
governing body require under this section disapproves the proposal, the
petition shall be rejected. If the report is favorable to such proposal,
either in whole or in part, the County Board shall promptly designate a time
and place for a hearing upon the petition and shall give notice of the
hearing by publication two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within
the county, the last publication appearing at least seven days prior to said
hearing.



      (5)   The County Board shall, at or shortly after the hearing,
determine whether such territory shall be merged and shall fix the boundaries
of the territory to be merged. The determination of the County Board shall be
set forth in a written order which shall describe the boundaries determined
upon and shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk. The County Clerk
shall then fix a time and place for a public meeting of all electors who are
owners of any interest in real or personal property assessed for taxation in
the District who are residing within the boundaries. A Board of Directors
shall be elected consisting of five residents of the District.



      (6)   Such merged District shall operate under the same mill
levy limit as the Rural Fire Protection District.



(1976 Code, § 7-208)  (Ord. 580, passed 9-21-1978)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 35-504, 35-506, 35-508, 35-509, 35-511,
35-530 through 35-536



§ 92.27  OPEN BURNING BAN; WAIVER.



   (A)   There shall be an open burning ban on all bonfires, outdoor
rubbish fires and fires for the purpose of clearing land.



   (B)   The Fire Chief may waive an open burning ban under division
(A) above for an area under the Municipal Fire Department’s jurisdiction by
issuing an open burning permit to a person requesting permission to conduct
open burning. The permit issued by the Fire Chief to a person desiring to
conduct open burning shall be in writing, signed by the Fire Chief and on a
form provided by the state’s Fire Marshal.



   (C)   The Fire Chief may waive the open burning ban in the Municipal
Fire Department’s jurisdiction when conditions are acceptable to the Chief.
Anyone intending to burn in that jurisdiction when the open burning ban has
been waived shall notify the Fire Chief of his or her intention to burn prior
to starting the burn.



   (D)   The Fire Chief may adopt standards listing the conditions
acceptable for issuing a permit to conduct open burning under division (B)
above.



   (E)   The Fire Department may charge a fee not to exceed $10 for
each such permit issued. This fee shall be remitted to the governing body for
inclusion in the general funds allocated to the Fire Department. These funds
shall not reduce the tax requirements for the Fire Department. No such fee
shall be collected from any state or political subdivision to which such a
permit is issued to conduct open burning under division (B) above in the
course of that state’s or political subdivision’s official duties.



(1976 Code, § 7-209)  (Ord. 1156, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1426B, passed
12-5-2011)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 81-520.01



§ 92.28  EXPLOSIVES.



   In addition to notifying the Municipal Fire Department pursuant to Neb.
RS 28-1233(3), any person desiring to discharge explosive materials, as
defined in Neb. RS 28-1213, within the municipality, shall apply for and
secure a permit from the governing body 24 hours prior to such discharge, and
shall discharge such explosive materials in conformance with the conditions
specified in the permit. In no case shall any person perform blasting
operations unless operating under the direct supervision of a person in
possession of a valid user’s permit issued by the State Patrol.



(1976 Code, § 7-301)  (Ord. 993,passed 12-18-1989; Ord. 1146, passed
2-6-1995)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-549, 17-556, 28-1229, 28-1233



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such
failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 7.401)  (Ord. 1449, passed 12-23-2013)



CHAPTER 93:  FIREWORKS



Section



   93.01   Definition



   93.02   Permitted fireworks



   93.03   Permitted uses



   93.04   Sale; vendor license



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  DEFINITION.



   FIREWORKS are hereby defined as “consumer fireworks”, as defined by
Neb. RS 28-1241(6) and DISPLAY FIREWORKS, as defined by Neb. RS 28-1241(7).



(1976 Code, § 10-701)  (Ord. 959, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 1417, passed
11-22-2010)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1241



§ 93.02  PERMITTED FIREWORKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize ignite or cause to be
exploded fireworks of any description whatsoever, except those defined as
consumer fireworks in § 93.01 of this chapter. Display fireworks, as defined
in § 93.01 of this chapter, may be utilized only for the purpose of public
exhibitions or displays under the authorization of the governing body and the
state.



(1976 Code, § 10-701)  (Ord. 985, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 1417, passed
11-22-2010)  Penalty, see § 93.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-556, 28-1241, 28-1244, 28-1245



§ 93.03  PERMITTED USES.



   Permitted fireworks shall be defined as consumer fireworks, as defined
in § 93.01 of this chapter; consumer fireworks may be utilized beginning on
June 25 of each year and ending on July 4 of each year to be ignited or
caused to be exploded between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. of each
day with the exception of July 4 of each year when fireworks may be ignited
or caused to be exploded between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and midnight, and
beginning on December 29 of each year and ending on January 1 of each year,
and to be ignited or caused to be exploded between the hours of 12:00 noon
and 9:00 p.m. of each day with the exception of December 31 and January 1 of
each year when fireworks may be ignited or caused to be exploded between the
hours of 12:00 noon and 12:30 a.m.



(1976 Code, § 10-703)  (Ord. 1273, passed 11-22-1999; Ord. 1417, passed
11-22-2010)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-134



§ 93.04  SALE; VENDOR LICENSE.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, hold for
sale or offer for sale as distributor, jobber or retailer any fireworks
unless such person has first obtained a license as a distributor, jobber or
retailer. Application for each such license shall be made to the state’s
Fire Marshal on forms prescribed by him or her. If the applicant is an
individual, each application shall include the applicant’s Social Security
number. Each application shall be accompanied by the required fee, which
shall be $500 for a distributor’s license, $200 for a jobber’s license
and $100 for a retailer’s license. All licenses shall be good only for the
calendar year in which issued and shall at all times be displayed at the
place of business of the holder thereof.



      (2)   Before any permissible fireworks may be sold, held for
sale or offered for sale in the state, they shall first be submitted to the
state’s Fire Marshal for examination to determine their compliance with
Neb. RS 28-1241(7) and their safety for general use. Fireworks not
specifically listed therein may be added to the list of permissible fireworks
by the state’s Fire Marshal, by rule or regulation, after having been
submitted to him or her and tested to determine their safety for general use.



         (3)   Consumer fireworks, as defined in § 93.01 of this
chapter, may be sold at retail only on those dates of each year when the sale
of such fireworks is permitted by Neb. RS 28-1249 and by regulations of the
state’s Fire Marshal.



(1976 Code, § 10-704)



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to sell any fireworks within the
city unless a license is first obtained from the governing body. Application
shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk upon forms supplied by the
municipality, which forms may request such information and documents as the
governing body may deem necessary to consider said application. No license
shall be granted without the following provisions.



         (a)   No fireworks vendor’s stands, tables, displays
or signs shall be permitted in any residentially zoned district.



         (b)   No fireworks vendor’s stands, tables, displays
or signs shall protrude past the lot line of the property upon which the
display is primarily located, nor shall any fireworks vendor’s stands,
tables, displays or signs protrude into any public way, including, but not
limited to, sidewalks.



         (c)   All structures, vehicles, stands, tables, displays
or signs used for or relating to the sale of fireworks shall be completely
removed from public view on any property within the city, prior to July 10 of
each year.



         (d)   The license fee for engaging in the sale of
display of fireworks within the city shall be $100 annually for each location
wherein such activity is conducted.



      (2)   Upon the determination to grant the license, the
governing body shall direct the Municipal Clerk to collect the appropriate
fee and issue said license. Any license so issued may be revoked at any time
by the governing body upon proper notice and hearing if one is requested by
the licensee.



(1976 Code, § 10-705)



(Ord. 1273, passed 11-22-1999; Ord. 1294, passed 8-20-2001)  Penalty, see §
93.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-137



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such
failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 10-1201)  (Ord. 1449, passed 12-23-2013)



CHAPTER 94:  RECREATION AND LEISURE



Section



   94.01   Municipal swimming pool



   94.02   Municipal library



   94.03   Municipal parks



§ 94.01  MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL.



   (A)   Operation and funding. The municipality owns and manages the
municipal swimming pool. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying the
cost of the management, maintenance and improvements of the swimming pool
may, each year, levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by
state law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property
within the municipality that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the
said tax shall be known as the “Swimming Pool Fund” and shall include all
gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests or other valuable
income-producing personal property and real estate from any source for the
purpose of endowing the swimming pool. The Swimming Pool Fund shall at all
times be in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. The Board of Park
Commissioners shall manage the swimming pool. The Board shall have the power
and authority to hire and supervise the Swimming Pool Manager and such
employees as it may deem necessary and shall pass such rules and regulations
for the operation of the swimming pool as may be proper for its efficient
operation. All actions by the Board shall be under the supervision and
control of the governing body.



(1976 Code, § 3-601)



   (B)   Admission charge. The Board of Park Commissioners may, for the
purpose of defraying the expenses involved in maintaining, improving,
managing and beautifying the swimming pool, make a reasonable admission
charge for the use by any person of the municipal swimming pool. The said
charges shall be on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and shall also
be posted in a conspicuous place at the municipal swimming pool for public
inspection. Such rates may be structured for classes of persons in a
reasonable manner; provided that, nothing herein shall be construed to permit
or allow discrimination on the basis of race, creed, color or national origin
in the classification of persons for admission charges.



(1976 Code, § 3-602)



   (C)   Rentals. The Board of Park Commissioners shall have the
authority to rent the municipal swimming pool to such organizations and other
persons as it may, in their discretion, see fit, subject to the review of the
governing body. The Board shall prescribe rules and regulations for such
rentals and shall require an appropriate number of qualified lifeguards to be
in attendance during the rental period. Such fees and other costs shall be on
file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and posted in a conspicuous place
at the municipal swimming pool.



(1976 Code, § 3-603)



   (D)   Rules and regulations. The Board of Park Commissioners shall
have the power and authority to enact bylaws, rules and regulations for the
protection of those using the swimming pool and for the efficient management
thereof. They may provide suitable penalties for the violation of such
bylaws, rules and regulations subject to the review and supervision of the
governing body.



(1976 Code, § 3-604)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-948, 17-949, 17-951, 17-952



§ 94.02  MUNICIPAL LIBRARY.



   (A)   Operation and funding. The municipality owns and manages the
municipal library through the Library Board. The governing body, for the
purpose of defraying the cost of the management, purchases, improvements and
maintenance of the library may, each year, levy a tax not exceeding the
maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the actual valuation of all real
estate and personal property within the municipality that is subject to
taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the “Library
Fund” and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests or
other valuable income-producing personal property and real estate from any
source for the purpose of endowing the municipal library. The Library Fund
shall at all times be in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. The Board
shall have the power and authority to appoint the librarian and to hire such
other employees as it may deem necessary and may pass such other rules and
regulations for the operation of the Library as may be proper for its
efficient operation. All actions by the Board shall be under the supervision
and control of the governing body.



(1976 Code, § 3-701)



   (B)   Books. The Library Board may authorize the sale, exchange or
disposal of any surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete or duplicate books in
the library. Records shall be kept of any such surplus, damaged, defective,
obsolete or duplicate books so disposed of.



(1976 Code, § 3-702)



   (C)   Rules and regulations. The Library Board shall establish rules
and regulations for the governing of the municipal library for the
preservation and efficient management thereof. It shall fix and impose by
general rules, penalties and forfeitures for injury to the library grounds,
rooms, books or other property or for failure to return a book. All fees,
penalties and forfeitures may be collected in civil action in the event of
failure, neglect or refusal to pay the said assessments.



(1976 Code, § 3-703)



   (D)   Damaged and lost books. Any person who injures or fails to
return any book taken from the library shall forfeit and pay to the library
not less than the value of the book in addition to any replacement costs and
penalty which the Library Board may assess.



(1976 Code, § 3-704)



   (E)   Book removal. It shall be unlawful for any person not
authorized by the regulations made by the Library Board to take a book from
the library, without the consent of the librarian, or an authorized employee
of the library. Any person removing a book from the library without properly
checking it out shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1976 Code, § 3-705)



   (F)   Cost of use. The municipal library shall be free for the use
of the inhabitants of the municipality. The librarian may exclude from the
use of the library and reading rooms any person who shall willfully violate
or refuse to comply with the rules and regulations established for the
government thereof.



(1976 Code, § 3-706)



   (G)   Money collected. Any money collected by the library shall be
turned over monthly by the librarian to the Municipal Treasurer along with a
report of the sources of the revenue.



(1976 Code, § 3-707)



   (H)   Annual report. The Library Board shall, on or before the
second Monday in February in each year, make a report to the City Council of
the condition of its trust on the last day of the prior fiscal year. The
report shall show all money received and credited or expended; the number of
materials held, including books, video and audio materials, software programs
and materials in other formats; the number of periodical subscriptions on
record, including newspapers; the number of materials added and the number
withdrawn from the collection during the year; the number of materials
circulated during the year; and other statistics, information and suggestions
as the Library Board may deem of general interest or as the City Council may
require. The report shall be verified by affidavit of the President and
Secretary of the Library Board.



(1976 Code, § 3-708)



(Ord. 1358, passed 11-8-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 51-201, 51-202, 51-205, 51-207, 51-209,
51-211, 51-212, 51-213, 51-214



§ 94.03  MUNICIPAL PARKS.



   (A)   Operation and funding. The municipality owns and operates the
municipal parks and other recreational areas through the Board of Park
Commissioners. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of
the care, management and maintenance of the municipal park may, each year,
levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the
actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the
corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax
shall be known as the “Park Fund” and shall remain in the custody of the
Municipal Treasurer. The Board shall have the authority to adopt rules and
regulations for the efficient management of the Municipal Parks and other
recreational areas of the municipality. The Board shall not enter into a
contract of any nature which involves an expenditure of funds, except for
ordinary operating expenses, unless the contract has been approved by
resolution of the majority of the members of the governing body prior to the
contractual agreement.



(1976 Code, § 3-501)



   (B)   Injury to property. It shall be unlawful for any person to
maliciously or willfully cut down, injure or destroy any tree, plant, or
shrub. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or destroy any sodded or
planted area, or injure or destroy any building, structure, equipment, fence,
bench, table or any other property of the municipal parks and recreational
areas. No person shall commit any waste on or litter the municipal parks or
other public grounds.



(1976 Code, § 3-502)



   (C)   Exercise trail; restricted use. No person shall ride or propel
any wheeled vehicle, whether licensed or unlicensed, including motorcycles,
bicycles, roller skates or skateboards, upon the exercise trail or exercise
track located in Muny Park in the city.



(1976 Code, § 3-503)



(Ord. 745, passed 6-7-1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-948 through 17-952, 60-2106



CHAPTER 95:  CEMETERY



Section



   95.01   Operation and funding



   95.02   Sexton



   95.03   Conveyance of lots



   95.04   Forfeiture of lots



   95.05   Lot transfers



   95.06   Destruction of property



   95.07   Reclamation



§ 95.01  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   (A)   The municipality owns and manages the municipal cemetery
through the Cemetery Board. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying
the cost of the care, management, maintenance and beautification of the
cemetery may, each year, levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit
prescribed by state law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and
personal property within the municipality that is subject to taxation. The
revenue from the said tax shall be known as the “Cemetery Fund” and shall
include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests, money, stocks,
bonds or other valuable income-producing personal property and real estate
from any source for the purpose of endowing the cemetery. The Cemetery Fund
shall at all times be in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer.



   (B)   The Board shall have the power and authority to hire and
supervise such employees as it may deem necessary and to pass such rules and
regulations for the operation of the cemetery as may be proper for its
efficient operation. All actions by the Board shall be under the supervision
and control of the governing body.



(1976 Code, § 3-801)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 12-301 through 12-403



§ 95.02  SEXTON.



   (A)   The Cemetery Board, subject to the approval of the governing
body, shall have the authority to appoint a Sexton, who shall perform such
duties and make such reports as the Cemetery Board shall direct.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Sexton, upon receiving a burial
permit to locate and direct the party named in the permit to the lot
mentioned therein and to dig and excavate, or cause the same to be dug or
excavated, in compliance with the rules and regulations of the Cemetery Board.



(1976 Code, § 3-802)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 12-403



§ 95.03  CONVEYANCE OF LOTS.



   (A)   The governing body may convey cemetery lots by certificate
signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Municipal Clerk under the
municipal seal specifying that the person to whom the same is issued is the
owner of the lot described therein by number for the purpose of interment.



   (B)   The said certificate shall give a right in fee simple to the
proprietor, his or her heirs and assigns.



   (C)   The certificate shall then be recorded in the office of the
County Clerk.



(1976 Code, § 3-803)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-941



§ 95.04  FORFEITURE OF LOTS.



   (A)   If, for three consecutive years, all charges and liens are not
paid by the holders of the lot certificates, the said certificates shall be
declared forfeited and subject to resale.



   (B)   All certificates sold shall contain a forfeiture clause to the
effect that, if no interment is made on the said lot and all liens paid, the
certificate and the rights under the same may, at the option of the Cemetery
Board, with the sanction of the governing body, be declared null and void and
the lot shall be subject to resale.



(1976 Code, § 3-804)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-938



§ 95.05  LOT TRANSFERS.



   Any person who wishes to transfer a certificate may do so by
surrendering the original certificate to the Municipal Clerk, who shall issue
a new certificate upon the receipt of the recording fee set by resolution of
the governing body.



(1976 Code, § 3-805)



§ 95.06  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   Any person who shall willfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or
remove any tomb, monument or gravestone placed in the cemetery, or any fence,
railing or other work for the protection or ornamentation of the cemetery, or
who shall willfully destroy, cut, break or injure any tree, shrub or plant
shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1976 Code, § 3-806)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-519



§ 95.07  RECLAMATION.



   When any lot has been transferred by warranty deed or by a deed
conveying a fee simple title, but there has been no burial in any such lot or
subdivision thereof and no payment of annual assessments for a period of
three years, the Cemetery Board with the sanction of the governing body, may
reclaim the unused portion of such lot or subdivision after notifying the
record owner or his or her heirs or assigns, if known, by certified mail and
publishing notice of its intention to do so. Such notice shall be published
once each week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
throughout the county in which the cemetery is located, shall describe the
lot or subdivision proposed to be reclaimed and shall be addressed to the
person in whose name such portion stands of record or, if there is no owner
of record, to all persons claiming any interest in such lot or subdivision.
If no person appears to claim such lot or subdivision and pay all delinquent
assessments with interest within 15 days after the last date of such
publication, the Cemetery Board may by resolution reclaim such lot or
subdivision. Such reclamation shall be complete upon a filing of a verified
copy of such resolution, together with proof of publication, in the office of
the Register of Deeds.



(1976 Code, § 3-807)  (Ord. 914, passed 10-20-1986)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      111.   AMUSEMENTS



      112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      113.   ITINERANT MERCHANTS



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




Occupation Taxes




   110.01   Tax and levies authorized; amounts



   110.02   Collection date



   110.03   Certificates



   110.04   Failure to pay




Specific Businesses




   110.15   Tobacco and cigarettes



   110.16   Fire insurance companies



   110.17   Games of chance and/or lotteries



   110.18   Cable television



 



   110.99   Penalty




OCCUPATION TAXES




§ 110.01  TAX AND LEVIES AUTHORIZED; AMOUNTS.



   (A)   The city shall have power to raise revenue by levying and
collecting a license tax on any occupation or business within the limits of
the city and regulate such occupation or business by ordinance. Any
occupation tax imposed pursuant to this section shall make a reasonable
classification of businesses, users of space or kinds of transactions for
purposes of imposing such tax; except that, no occupation tax shall be
imposed on any transaction which is subject to tax under Neb. RS 53-160,
66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140, 66-4,145, 66-4,146,77-2602 or 77-4008 or which
is exempt from tax under Neb. RS 77-2704-24. The occupation tax shall be
imposed in the manner provided in Neb. RS 18-1208; except that, Neb. RS
18-1208 does not apply to an occupation tax subject to Neb. RS 86-704. All
such taxes shall be uniform in respect to the classes upon which they are
imposed. All scientific and literary lectures and entertainments shall be
exempt from such taxation, as well as concerts and other musical
entertainments given exclusively by the citizens of the city.



   (B)   The City Council shall have authority, by ordinance, to impose
an occupation tax of not more than $5 per annum on each fire insurance
corporation, company or association, doing business in the city, for the use,
support and benefit of volunteer fire departments, regularly organized under
the laws of the state regulating the same. The City Clerk shall collect with
diligence the occupation tax so imposed. Upon the receipt of the tax, the
Clerk shall pay over the proceeds thereof to the City Treasurer who shall
credit the same to a fund to be known as the “Special Occupation Tax
Fund” for benefit of the Volunteer Fire Department. Upon proper claim filed
by the Chief of the Fire Department and allowed by the City Council, the
Treasurer shall pay over the proceeds of the tax in the fund from time to
time for the use of the Fire Department, as hereinbefore provided.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to the
contrary, the city shall not impose an occupation tax on the business of any
person, firm or corporation licensed under the state’s Liquor Control Act,
being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122 and doing business within the corporate
limits of the city in any sum which exceeds two times the amount of the
license fee required to be paid under the Act to obtain such license.



   (D)   For the purpose of raising revenue, occupation tax is hereby
levied on the following licensee holders and business operations in the
following amounts:



 



Alcoholic beverages



   Class A beer on sale

 

$200




   Class B beer off sale

 

$200




   Class D liquor/beer off sale

 

$400




   Class I bottle club

 

$500




   Class K catering

 

$200




   Designated permit

 

$40



Fire insurance companies
 

$5





 



(1976 Code, § 10-801)  (Ord. 906, passed 8-4-1986; Ord. 1294, passed
8-20-2001; Ord. 1385, passed 4-24-2006; Ord. 1433A, passed 1-7-2013; Ord.
1455B, passed 2-9-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-525, 35-106, 53-132



§ 110.02  COLLECTION DATE.



   All occupation taxes shall be due, and payable on May 1 of each year;
except, in the event that said tax is levied daily, and upon the payment
thereof by any person or persons to the Municipal Clerk, said Clerk shall
give a receipt, properly dated and specifying the person paying the said tax
and the amount paid; provided, occupation taxes collected from Class C liquor
licensees shall be due and payable on November 1. The revenue collected shall
then be immediately deposited into the General Fund by the Municipal
Treasurer. The Municipal Treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all
revenue turned over to him or her. All forms and receipts herein mentioned
shall be issued in duplicate. One copy shall then be kept by each party in
the transaction.



(1976 Code, § 10-803)  (Ord. 562, passed 9-22-1977)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-525



§ 110.03  CERTIFICATES.



   The receipt issued after the payment of any occupation tax shall be the
occupation tax certificate. The said certificate shall specify the amount of
the tax and the name of the person and business that paid the said tax. The
occupation tax certificate shall then be displayed in a prominent place, or
carried in such a way as to be easily accessible, while business is being
conducted.



(1976 Code, § 10-804)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-525



§ 110.04  FAILURE TO PAY.



   If any person, company or corporation fails or neglects to pay the
occupation taxes as provided herein on the day it becomes due and payable,
the municipality shall then proceed by civil suit to collect the amount due.
All delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month until
paid.



(1976 Code, § 10-805)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-525




SPECIFIC BUSINESSES




§ 110.15  TOBACCO AND CIGARETTES.



   (A)   General. Licenses for the sale of cigars, tobacco, cigarettes,
cigarette material, vapor products or alternative nicotine products to
persons over the age of 18 years shall be issued to individuals,
partnerships, limited liability companies and corporations by the City Clerk
upon application duly made as provided in this section.



   (B)   License application. Every person, partnership, limited
liability company or corporation desiring a license under Neb. RS 28-1420 to
28-1429 shall file with the City Clerk a written application stating the name
of the person, partnership, limited liability company or corporation for whom
the license is desired and the exact location of the place of business and
shall deposit with the application the amount of the license fee provided in
this section. If the applicant is an individual, the application shall
include the applicant’s Social Security number.



   (C)   License term; fees.



      (1)   The term for which a license shall run shall be from the
date of filing the application and paying the license fee to and including
December 31 of the calendar year in which application for the license is made.



      (2)   The license fee for any person, partnership, limited
liability company or corporation selling at retail shall be $30.



      (3)   Any person, partnership, limited liability company or
corporation selling annually in the aggregate more than 150,000 cigars,
packages of cigarettes and packages of tobacco in any form, at wholesale,
shall pay a license fee of $100, and if such combined annual sales amount to
less than 150,000 cigars, packages of cigarettes and packages of tobacco, the
annual license fee shall be $15. No wholesaler’s license shall be issued in
any year on a less basis than $100 per annum unless the applicant shall file
with the application a statement duly sworn to by himself or herself, or if
the applicant is a partnership, by a member of the firm, or if a limited
liability company, by a member or manager of the company, or if a
corporation, by an officer or manager thereof, that in the past such
wholesaler’s combined sales of cigars, packages of cigarettes and packages
of tobacco in every form have not exceeded, in the aggregate, 150,000
annually and that such sales will not exceed such aggregate amount for the
current year for which the license is to issue. Any person swearing falsely
in such affidavit shall be guilty of an offense, and such wholesaler’s
license shall be revoked until the full license fee of $100 is paid.



      (4)   If application for the license is made after July 1 of
any calendar year, the fee shall be one-half of the fee provided in this
section.



   (D)   Rights of licensee.



      (1)   The license, provided for in this section, when issued,
shall authorize the sale of cigars, tobacco, cigarettes, cigarette material,
vapor products or alternative nicotine products by the licensee and
employees, to persons over the age of 18 years, at the place of business
described in the license for the term therein authorized, unless the license
is forfeited as a result of court action as provided in Neb. RS 28-1425.



      (2)   If the license is revoked and forfeited pursuant to Neb.
RS 28-1425, all rights under the license shall at once cease and terminate.



   (E)   Disposition of fees. Ten dollars of the funds collected as
license fees under the provisions of this section shall be paid over by the
City Clerk to the Treasurer of the School Fund for the city.



   (F)   Transfer of license. In case of the sale of a business where
the owner has a licensee hereunder, the City Clerk may authorize such license
to be transferred to the purchaser. In case of a change of location by any
licensee hereunder, the Clerk may transfer such license to the new location.



   (G)   Reissuance of revoked or forfeited license. In the event that
the license of a licensee hereunder shall be revoked and forfeited as
provided in Neb. RS 28-1425, no new license shall be issued to such licensee
until the expiration of one year from the date of such revocation and
forfeiture.



(1976 Code, § 10-801.01)  (Ord. 1455B, passed 2-9-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Licenses required, see Neb. RS 28-1420



   Prohibited sales, see Neb. RS 28-1421



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1422, 28-1423, 28-1426, 28-1428,
28-1429



   Sale to person under 18, see Neb. RS 28-1425



§ 110.16  FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES.



   For the use, support and maintenance of the Municipal Fire Department
all revenue realized from the occupation tax on fire insurance companies
shall be appropriated to the Fire Department Fund.



(1976 Code, § 10-802)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 35-106



§ 110.17  GAMES OF CHANCE AND/OR LOTTERIES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DISTRIBUTOR. Any person or organization which engages in the
business of selling, leasing or delivering possession or custody of gambling
devices for consideration to a person or organization which engages in the
occupation of conducting games of chance and/or lotteries.



      GAMBLING DEVICE. Any and all machines or devices used in the
occupation of conducting games of chance and/or lotteries.



      GAMES OF CHANCE and/or LOTTERIES. Those forms of gambling
authorized by the state, pursuant to Art. III, § 24, of the Constitution of
the state.



      PERSON ENGAGED IN THE OCCUPATION OF CONDUCTING GAMES OF CHANCE
AND/OR LOTTERIES. Any person or organization which operates, owns or is the
lessee of a place of business where any game of chance and/or lottery
activity is conducted, whether or not any other type of business is conducted
on the premises; or, any person or organization which either directly
controls or manages the games of chance and/or lotteries, or owns any machine
or device used to engage in the occupation of games of chance and/or
lotteries, but does not sell, lease or deliver possession or custody of such
a device to other persons.



(1976 Code, § 10-806)



   (B)   License required; occupation fee.



      (1)   Every person or organization to engage in the occupation
of conducting games of chance or lottery activities without first obtaining a
license to do so.



      (2)   Every person or organization desiring a license required
by the provisions of this section shall make application to the Municipal
Clerk. Accompanying each application shall be:



         (a)   A sworn statement by each designated supervising
member that such member will be responsible for compliance with rules and
regulations for each occasion of games of chance and/or lotteries which he or
she supervises; and



         (b)   A sworn statement by the member designated as
responsible for the proper utilization of gross receipts that no commission,
rent, seller profits, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any
person or organization not sanctioned by the laws of the state and the city
and that all profits will be spent for a lawful purpose.



      (3)   Every license under the provisions of this division (B)
shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where the game of chance and/or
lottery activity is conducted at all times during the conduct thereof.



      (4)   The license fee for engaging in the occupation of
conducting games of chance and lotteries with the city shall be $10 for each
location wherein such activity is conducted.



      (5)   Non-profit organizations that desire to participate in
games of chance and/or lotteries which comply with the Small Lotteries and
Raffles Act, being Neb. RS 9-501 through 9-513 of the state are exempt from
the provisions hereof.



(1976 Code, § 10-807)



(Ord. 1011, passed 10-22-1990; Ord. 1178, passed 10-24-1995)



§ 110.18  CABLE TELEVISION.



   The city granted a cable television franchise to Cable USA, Inc.,
formerly known as Metro Enterprises, Inc. The franchise provisions are hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(1976 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 11)  (Ord. 963, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 1475, passed
12-4-2017)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this title, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such
failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 10-1201)  (Ord. 1449, passed 12-23-2013)



CHAPTER 111:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



   111.01   Bowling



   111.02   Pool and billiards



§ 111.01  BOWLING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to own, maintain or
operate any bowling alley for profit without having first obtained a license
from the municipality. Any person desiring a license to operate, maintain or
own a bowling alley shall file a written application with the Municipal
Clerk. Said application form shall contain such information and documents or
copies thereof, as the governing body deems necessary to determine whether to
grant or reject the application. Upon determination that the granting of the
license would be beneficial to the municipality, the governing body shall
immediately direct the Municipal Clerk to issue the said license to the
applicant upon the payment of a $10 license fee per bowling lane set by
ordinance of the governing body. Said license shall be subject to revocation
at any time for good and sufficient cause by the governing body upon the
issuance of proper notice and a hearing if the licensee should make such a
request. Any person or persons so licensed shall be subject to any bond, fees
or other rules and regulations as may be set by resolution of the governing
body for the benefit of the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 10-301)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 111.02  POOL AND BILLIARDS.



   (A)   The term POOL AND BILLIARDS shall mean a game played on a
table in which the object is to drive balls into the pockets, and which is
conducted for profit or gain. All ordinances relating to pool and billiards
shall apply to the municipality, stating his or her willingness to be
governed by the rules and regulations now or to be hereafter adopted by the
City Council concerning his or her business. Before receiving a license, he
or she shall also file in the office of the City Clerk a bond with two or
more sureties, to be approved by the City Council in the sum of $1,000, which
bond shall be renewed annually, conditioned that he or she will indemnify and
keep harmless the city and the City Clerk from all liability from accidents
and damages arising from any negligence or unskillfulness in doing or
protecting his or her work, or from any unfaithful or inadequate work done in
pursuance of his or her license; and that he or she will pay all fines
imposed upon him or her for the violation of any rules and regulations in
force during the term of his or her license. The license herein mentioned
shall be issued by the Clerk, on a calendar year basis, under the seal of the
city, when ordered by the Council. The annual fee for obtaining said license
shall be $10. The obligee in said bond shall be the city and an action may be
maintained on said bond by anyone injured by a breach of its conditions.



(1976 Code, § 10-306)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to own,
maintain or operate any game of pool or billiards for profit or gain without
having first obtained a license from the municipality. Any person desiring a
license to operate, maintain or own a pool or billiard game or hall shall
file a written application with the Municipal Clerk. Said application form
shall contain such information and documents, or copies thereof, as the
governing body deems necessary to determine whether to grant or reject the
application. Upon the determination that the granting of the license would be
beneficial to the municipality, the governing body shall immediately direct
the Municipal Clerk to issue the license to the applicant upon the payment of
a $10 license fee, per table, set by ordinance of the governing body. Said
license shall be subject to revocation at any time for good and sufficient
cause by the governing body upon the issuance of proper notice, and a hearing
if the licensee should make such a request. Any person or persons so licensed
shall be subject to any bond, fees or other rules and regulations as may be
set by resolution of the governing body for the benefit of the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 10-307)



Penalty, see § 110.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-120



CHAPTER 112:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   License required; city powers and duties



   112.03   Location



   112.04   Dwellings; access



   112.05   License displayed



   112.06   License, licensee requirements



   112.07   Examinations; municipal powers and duties



   112.08   Owner of premises; employer



   112.09   Clear view



   112.10   Sales



   112.11   Sanitary conditions



   112.12   Hiring minors



   112.13   Consumption in public places; restrictions



   112.14   Acquisition, possession and manufacture



   112.15   Intoxicated persons



   112.16   Retail licensing standards; binding recommendations



   112.17   Liquor application; hearing



   112.18   Catering licenses



   112.19   Keg sales



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, words shall be defined as in Neb. RS
53-103.01 through 53-103.42.



(1976 Code, § 10-101)  (Ord. 1418, passed 12-20-2010)



§ 112.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; CITY POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture for sale,
sell, keep for sale or to barter any alcoholic liquors within the
municipality unless said person shall have in full force and effect a license
as provided by the state’s Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through
53-1,122.



(1976 Code, § 10-102)



   (B)   (1)   The City Council is authorized to regulate by
ordinance, not inconsistent with the state’s Liquor Control Act, being Neb.
RS 53-101 through 53-1,122, the business of all retail, craft brewery and
microdistillery licenses carried on within the corporate limits of the city.



      (2)   During the period of 45 days after the date of receipt
by mail or electronic delivery from the state’s Liquor Control Commission
notice and a copy of an application tor a new license to sell alcoholic
liquor at retail, a craft brewery or a microdistillery license, the City
Council may make and submit to the Commission recommendations relative to the
granting or refusal to grant the license to the applicant.



      (3)   The City Council, with respect to license within the
corporate limits of the city, has the following powers, functions and duties
with respect to retail, craft brewery and microdistillery licenses:



         (a)   To cancel or revoke for cause retail, craft
brewery or microdistillery licenses to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor
issued to persons for premises within its jurisdiction, subject to the right
of appeal to the state’s Liquor Control Commission;



         (b)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement
officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed under the state’s
Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122 to determine
whether any provisions of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and
promulgated to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation
adopted by the City Council has been or is being violated, and at that time
examine the premises of the license in connection with such determination.
Any law enforcement officer who determines that any provision of the Act, any
rule or regulation adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation adopted by the local governing body
has been or is being violated shall repost such violation in writing to the
Executive Director or the Commission:



            1.   Within 30 days after determining that such
violation has occurred;



            2.   Within 30 days after the conclusion of an
ongoing police investigation; or



            3.   Within 30 days after the verdict in a
prosecution related to such an ongoing police investigation of the
prosecuting attorney determines that reporting such violation prior to the
verdict would jeopardize such prosecution, whichever is later.



         (c)   To receive a signed complaint from any citizen
within its jurisdiction that any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation
adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution,
rule or regulation relating to alcoholic liquor has been or is being violated
and to act upon these complaints in the manner provided in the Act;



         (d)   To receive retail, craft brewery and
microdistillery license fees as provided in Neb. RS 53-124.01 and pay the
same, after the license has been delivered to the applicant, to the City
Treasurer;



         (e)   To examine or cause to be examined any applicant
or any retail, craft brewery or microdistillery license upon whom notice of
cancellation or revocation has been served as provided in the Act, to examine
or cause to be examined the books and records of any applicant or licensee,
and to hear testimony and to take proof for its information in the
performance of its duties. For purpose of obtaining any of the information
desired, the City Council may authorize its agent or attorney to act on its
behalf;



         (f)   To cancel or revoke, on its own motion, any
license if, upon the same notice and hearing as provided in division
(B)(3)(e) above, it determines that the licensee has violated any of the
provisions of the state’s Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through
53-1,122 or a valid and subsisting ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation
duly enacted, adopted and promulgated relating to alcoholic liquor. The order
of cancellation or revocation maybe appealed to the Commission within 30 days
after the date of the order by filing a notice of appeal with the Commission.
The Commission shall handle the appeal in the manner provided for hearing on
an application in Neb. RS 53-133; and



         (g)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and
copy of application as provided in Neb. RS 53-131, to fix a time and place
for a hearing at which the City Council shall receive evidence, either orally
or by affidavit from the applicant and any other person, bearing upon the
propriety of the issuance of a license. Notice of the time and place of the
hearing shall be published in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation
in the city, one time not less the seven and not more than 14 days before the
time of the hearing. The notice shall include, but not limited to, a
statement that all persons desiring to give evidence before the City Council
in support of or in protest against the issuance of the license may do so at
the time of the hearing. The hearing shall be held not more than 45 days
after the date of receipt of the notice from the Commission and, after the
hearing, the City Council shall cause to be recorded in the minute record of
its proceedings a resolution recommending either issuance or refusal of the
license. The City Clerk shall mail to the Commission by first class mail,
postage prepaid, a copy of the resolution which shall state the cost of the
published notice; except that, failure to comply with this provision shall
not void any license issued by the Commission. If the Commission refuses to
issue such license, the cost of publication of notice shall be paid by the
Commission from the security for costs.



      (4)   (a)   When the state’s Liquor Control Commission
mails or delivers to the City Clerk a retail, craft brewery or
microdistillery license or renewed by the Commission, the Clerk shall deliver
the license to the licensee upon receipt from the licensee of proof of
payment of:



            1.   The license fee of by the terms of Neb. RS
53-124 the fee is payable to the City Treasurer;



            2.   Any fee for publication of notice of hearing
before the City Council upon the application for the license;



            3.   The fee for publication of notice of renewal,
if applicable, as provided in Neb. RS 53-135.01; and



            4.   Occupation taxes, if any, imposed by the
city, except that Class J retail licensees shall not be subject to occupation
taxes.



         (b)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to
the contrary, the city shall not impose an occupation tax on the business of
any person, firm or corporation licensed under the state’s Liquor Control
Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122 and doing business within the
corporate limits of the city in any sum which exceeds two times the amount of
the license fee required to be paid under the Act to obtain that license.



(Ord. 1468, passed 2-6-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-102, 53-131, 53-132, 53-134,
53-134.03



§ 112.03  LOCATION.



   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) below,
no license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
within 150 feet of any church, school, hospital or home for indigent persons
or for veterans and their wives or children.



      (2)   This prohibition does not apply to any location within
such distance of 150 feet:



         (a)   For which a license to sell alcoholic liquor at
retail has been granted by the state’s Liquor Control Commission for two
years continuously prior to making of application for license;



         (b)   To hotels offering restaurant service, to
regularly organized clubs or to restaurants, food shops or other places where
sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on, if such
place of business so exempted was established: for such purposes prior to
5-24-1935; or



         (c)   To a college or university in the state which is
the subject to Neb. RS 53-177.01.



   (B)   If a proposed location for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor is within 150 feet of any church, a license may be issued if the
Commission gives notice to the affected church and holds a hearing as
prescribed in Neb. RS 53-133 if the affected church submits a written request
for a hearing.



   (C)   No alcoholic liquor, other than beer, shall be sold for
consumption on the premises within 300 feet from the campus of any college or
university within the municipality; except that, this section:



      (1)   Does not prohibit a nonpublic college or university from
contracting with an individual or corporation holding a license to sell
alcoholic liquor at retail for the purpose of selling alcoholic liquor at
retail on the campus of such college or university at events sanctioned by
such college or university, but does prohibit the sale of alcoholic liquor at
retail by such licensee on the campus of such non-public college or
university at student activities or events; and



      (2)   Does not prohibit sales of alcoholic liquor by a
community college culinary education program pursuant to Neb. RS 53-124.15.



(1976 Code, § 10-103)  (Ord. 1418, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1426B, passed
12-5-2011; Ord. 1461, passed 2-8-2016)  Penalty, see § 110.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-177, 53-177.01



§ 112.04  DWELLINGS; ACCESS.



   Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be
manufactured or sold at retail or wholesale upon any premises which have any
access which leads from the premises to any other portion of the same
building or structure used for dwelling or lodging purposes and permitted to
be used or kept accessible for use by the public. This section does not
prevent any connection between the premises and such other portion of the
building or structure which is used only by the licensee, his or her family
or personal guests.



(1976 Code, § 10-104)  (Ord. 1468, passed 2-6-2017)  Penalty, see § 110.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-178



§ 112.05  LICENSE DISPLAYED.



   Every licensee under the state’s Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS
53-101 through 53-1,122 shall cause his or her license to be framed and hung
in plain public view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.



(1976 Code, § 10-105)  Penalty, see § 110.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-148



§ 112.06  LICENSE, LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No license shall be issued to:



      (1)   A person who is not a resident of the state, except in
case of railroad, airline or boat license;



      (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in
the community in which he or she resides;



      (3)   A person who is not a resident of the state and legally
able to work in the state;



      (4)   A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty
to a felony under the laws of the state, any other state or the United States;



      (5)   A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty
to any Class I misdemeanor pursuant Neb. RS Ch. 28, Art. 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11
or 12, or any similar offense under a prior criminal statute or in another
state; except that, any additional requirements imposed by this division
(A)(5) on 5-18-1983, shall not prevent any person holding a license on that
date from retaining or renewing that license if the conviction or plea
occurred prior to 5-18-1983;



      (6)   A person whose license issued under the state’s Liquor
Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122 has been revoked for cause;



      (7)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of
any license issued under the Act would not be eligible for that license upon
initial application;



      (8)   A partnership, unless one of the partners is a resident
of the state and unless all the members of that partnership are otherwise
qualified to obtain a license;



      (9)   A limited liability company, unless one of the members
is a resident of the state and unless all the members of that company are
otherwise qualified to obtain a license;



      (10)   A corporation, if any officer or director of the
corporation or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25% of the
stock of that corporation would be ineligible to receive a license under this
section for any reason other than the reasons stated in divisions (A)(1) and
(A)(3) above, or if a manager of a corporate license would be ineligible to
receive a license under this section for any reason. This division (A)(10)
shall not apply to railroad licenses;



      (11)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a
manager or agent, unless that manager or agent possesses the same
qualifications required of the licensee;



      (12)   A person who does not own the premises for which a
license is sought or does not have a lease or combination of leases on the
premises for the full period for which the license is to be issued;



      (13)   Except as provided in this division (A)(13), an
applicant whose spouse is ineligible under this section to receive and hold a
liquor license shall be ineligible for a liquor lincese. Such an applicant
shall become eligible for a liquor license only if the state’s Liquor
Control Commission finds from the evidence that the public interest will not
be infringed upon if the license is granted. It shall be prima facie evidence
that when a spouse is ineligible to receive a liquor license, the applicant
is also ineligible to receive a liquor license. The prima facie evidence
shall be overcome if it is shown to the satisfaction of the Commission:



         (a)   The license business will be the sole property of
the applicant; and



         (b)   The license premises will be properly operated.



      (14)   A person seeking a license for premises which do not
meet standards for fire safety as established by the state’s Fire Marshal;



      (15)   A law enforcement officer; except that, this division
(A)(15) shall not prohibit a law enforcement officer from holding membership
in any non-profit organization holding a liquor license or from participating
in any manner in the management or administration of a non-profit
organization; or



      (16)   A person less than 21 of age.



   (B)   When a trustee is the licensee, the beneficiary or
beneficiaries of the trust shall comply with the requirements of this
section, but nothing in this section shall prohibit any such beneficiary from
being a minor or person who is mentally incompetent.



(1976 Code, § 10-106)  (Ord. 724, passed 9-1-1983; Ord. 1418, passed
12-20-2010; Ord. 1468, passed 2-6-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-125



§ 112.07  EXAMINATIONS; MUNICIPAL POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Liquor application; municipal examination.



      (1)   Any person or persons desiring to obtain a license to
sell alcoholic liquor at retail shall file an application with the Liquor
Control Commission. Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy
of the application as provided in Neb. RS 53-131, the governing body shall
fix a time and place at which a hearing will be held, and at which time the
governing body shall receive evidence, under oath, either orally, or in
writing, from the applicant and any other person concerning the propriety of
the issuance of such license. Such hearing shall be held not more than 45
days after the receipt of notice from the commission. The governing body may:
examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant; examine or cause
to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant; to hear
testimony; and to take proof for its information in the performance of its
duties. For purposes of obtaining any of the information desired, the
governing body may authorize its agent, the Municipal Clerk or the Municipal
Attorney, to act on its behalf.



      (2)   Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be
published in a legal newspaper in, or of general circulation in, the
municipality one time not less than seven, nor more than 14, days before the
time of the hearing. Such notice shall include, but not be limited to, a
statement that all persons desiring to give evidence before the governing
body in support of or in protest against the issuance of such license may do
so at the time of the hearing.



      (3)   The governing body shall, after the hearing provided in
division (A)(1) above, approve or deny the application within 45 days of
receipt of such application from the Commission, and shall cause to be spread
at large in the minute record of its proceedings a resolution approving or
denying such application. The Municipal Clerk shall thereupon mail or deliver
to the Commission a copy of the resolution within ten days of the decision to
approve or deny the application.



      (4)   Any resolution denying an application rendered by the
governing body shall be in writing or stated in the record and shall be
accompanied by findings. The findings shall consist of concise statements of
the conclusions upon each contested issue. The applicant shall be notified of
the decision in person or by mail.



(1976 Code, § 10-107)



   (B)   License renewal; powers and duties.



      (1)   A retail license issued by the state’s Liquor Control
Commission and outstanding may be automatically renewed by the Commission in
the absence of a written request by the governing body to require the
licensee to submit an application for renewal. Any licensed retail premises
located in an area which is annexed to the municipality shall file a formal
application for a license, and while such application is pending, the
licensee may continue all license privileges until the original license
expires or is canceled or revoked. If such license expires within 60 days
following the annexation date of such area, the license may be renewed by
order of the Commission for not more than one year.



      (2)   The Municipal Clerk shall cause to be published in a
legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the municipality, one time
between January 10 and January 30 of each year, individual notice in the form
prescribed by law of the right of automatic renewal of each retail liquor and
beer license within the municipality; except that, notice of the right of
automatic renewal of Class C licenses shall be published between the dates of
July 10 and July 30 of each year. If written protests to the issuance of
automatic renewal of a license are filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk
by three or more residents of the municipality on or before February 10 or
August 10 for Class C licenses, the governing body shall hold a hearing to
determine whether continuation of the license should be allowed. Upon the
conclusion of any hearing required by this section, the governing body may
request a licensee to submit an application as provided in Neb. RS 53-135.



(1976 Code, § 10-108)



   (C)   Municipal powers and duties.



      (1)   The governing body is authorized to regulate by
ordinance, not inconsistent with the state’s Liquor Control Act, being Neb.
RS 53-101 through 53-1,122, the business of all retail, craft brewery and
microdistillery licensees carried on within the corporate limits of the
municipality.



      (2)   During the period of 45 days after the date of receipt
by mail or electronic delivery from the state’s Liquor Control Commission
notice and a copy of an application for a new license to sell alcoholic
liquor at retail, a craft brewery license or a microdistillery license, the
governing body may make and submit to the Commission recommendations relative
to the granting or refusal to grant the license to the applicant.



      (3)   The governing body, with respect to licenses within the
corporate limits of the municipality, has the following powers, functions and
duties with respect to retail, craft brewery and microdistillery licenses:



         (a)   To cancel or revoke for cause retail, craft
brewery or microdistillery licenses to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor
issued to persons for premises within its jurisdiction, subject to the right
of appeal to the state’s Liquor Control Commission;



         (b)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement
officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed under the state’s
Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122 to determine
whether any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and
promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation adopted by the governing body has been or is being violated, and
at that time examine the premises of the licensee in connection with such
determination. Any law enforcement officer who determines that any provision
of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and promulgated pursuant to the
Act, or any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation adopted by the
governing body has been or is being violated shall report such violation in
writing to the Executive Director of the Commission:



            1.   Within 30 days after determining that such
violation has occurred;



            2.   Within 30 days after the conclusion of an
ongoing police investigation; or



            3.   Within 30 days after the verdict in a
prosecution related to such an ongoing police investigation if the
prosecuting attorney determines that reporting such violation prior to the
verdict would jeopardize such prosecution, whichever is later.



         (c)   To receive a signed complaint from any citizen
within its jurisdiction that any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation
adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution,
rule or regulation relating to alcoholic liquor has been or is being violated
and to act upon these complaints in the manner provided in the Act;



         (d)   To receive retail, craft brewery and
microdistillery license fees as provided in Neb. RS 53-124 and 53-124.01 and
pay the same, after the license has been delivered to the applicant, to the
Municipal Treasurer;



         (e)   To examine or cause to be examined any applicant
or any retail, craft brewery or microdistillery licensee upon whom notice of
cancellation or revocation has been served as provided in the Act, to examine
or cause to be examined the books and records of any applicant or licensee,
and to hear testimony and to take proof for its information in the
performance of its duties. For purposes of obtaining any of the information
desired, the governing body may authorize its agent or attorney to act on its
behalf;



         (f)   To cancel or revoke on its own motion any license
if, upon the same notice and hearing as provided for citizen complaints, it
determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the
state’s Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122 or any
valid and subsisting ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation duly enacted,
adopted and promulgated relating to alcoholic liquor. The order of
cancellation or revocation may be appealed to the Commission within 30 days
after the date of the order by filing a notice of appeal with the Commission.
The Commission shall handle the appeal in the manner provided for hearing on
an application in Neb. RS 53-133; and



         (g)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and
copy of application as provided in Neb. RS 53-131, to fix a time and place
for a hearing at which the governing body shall receive evidence, either
orally or by affidavit from the applicant and any other person, bearing upon
the propriety of the issuance of a license.



            1.   Notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be published in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the
municipality, one time not less than seven and not more than 14 days before
the time of the hearing. The notice shall include, but not be limited to, a
statement that all persons desiring to give evidence before the governing
body in support of or in protest against the issuance of the license may do
so at the time of the hearing.



            2.   The hearing shall be held not more than 45
days after the date of receipt of the notice from the Commission, and after
the hearing the governing body shall cause to be recorded in the minute
record of its proceedings a resolution recommending either issuance or
refusal of the license.



            3.   The Municipal Clerk shall mail to the
Commission by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy of the resolution
which shall state the cost of the published notice; except that, failure to
comply with this provision shall not void any license issued by the
Commission. If the Commission refuses to issue such a license, the cost of
publication of notice shall be paid by the Commission from the security for
costs.



      (4)   (a)   When the state’s Liquor Control Commission
mails or delivers to the Municipal Clerk a retail, craft brewery or
microdistillery license issued or renewed by the Commission, the Clerk shall
deliver the license to the licensee upon receipt from the licensee of proof
of payment of:



            1.   The license fee if, by the terms of Neb. RS
53-124, the fee is payable to the Municipal Treasurer;



            2.   Any fee for publication of notice of hearing
before the governing body upon the application for the license;



            3.   The fee for publication of notice of renewal,
if applicable, as provided in Neb. RS 53-135.01; and



            4.   Occupation taxes, if any, imposed by the
municipality.



         (b)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to
the contrary, the municipality shall not impose an occupation tax on the
business of any person, firm or corporation licensed under the state’s
Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122 and doing business
within the corporate limits of the municipality in any sum which exceeds two
times the amount of the license fee required to be paid under the Act to
obtain that license.



(1976 Code, § 10-109)



(Ord. 635, passed 12-6-1979; Ord. 724, passed 9-1-1983; Ord. 762, passed
9-6-1984; Ord. 915, passed 10-20-1986; Ord. 960, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 994,
passed 12-18-1989; Ord. 1055, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 1362, passed 11-8-2004;
Ord. 1364, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 1418, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1426B, passed
12-5-2011)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-131, 53-132, 53-134, 53-134.03,
53-135, 53-135.01



§ 112.08  OWNER OF PREMISES; EMPLOYER.



   (A)   The owner of any premise used for the sale at retail of
alcoholic beverages shall be deemed guilty of a violation of these laws to
the same extent as the said licensee if the owner shall knowingly permit the
licensee to use the said licensed premises in violation of any municipal code
section or state statute.



(1976 Code, § 10-110)



   (B)   The employer of any officer, director, manager or employees
working in a retail liquor establishment shall be held to be liable and
guilty of any act of omission or violation of any law or ordinance, and each
such act or omission shall be deemed and held to be the act of the employer,
and will be punishable in the same manner as if the said act or omission had
been committed by him or her personally.



(1976 Code, § 10-111) Penalty, see § 110.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-1,101, 53-1,102



§ 112.09  CLEAR VIEW.



   It shall be unlawful to use any screen, blind, curtain, partition,
article or other device in the windows or upon the doors of any retail liquor
establishment, other than restaurants, hotels and clubs, which will have the
effect of preventing a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises
from the street, road or sidewalk at all times. All licensed premises shall
be continuously lighted during business hours by natural or artificial white
lights to ensure the clear visibility into said establishment. Any licensee
who willfully violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to a
revocation of his or her license by the municipality, as provided herein.



(1976 Code, § 10-112)  Penalty, see § 110.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-167



§ 112.10  SALES.



   (A)   Sale or gift to minor or mentally incompetent person
prohibited. No person shall sell, furnish, give away, dispose of, exchange or
deliver, or permit the sale, gift or procuring of any alcoholic liquors, to
or for any minor or to any person who is mentally incompetent.



(1976 Code, § 10-113)



   (B)   Credit sales prohibited.



      (1)   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at
retail to any person on credit, on a passbook, on an order on a store, in
exchange for any goods, wares or merchandise, or in payment for any services
rendered, and if any person extends credit for any such purpose, the debt
thereby attempted to be created shall not be recoverable at law.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the following:



         (a)   Any club holding a Class C license from permitting
checks or statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona
fide guests of members and charged to the account of such members or guests
in accordance with the bylaws of such club;



         (b)   Any hotel or restaurant holding a retail license
from permitting checks or statements for liquor to be signed by regular
guests residing at such hotel or eating at such restaurant and charged to the
accounts of such guests; or



         (c)   Any licensed retailer engaged in the sale of wine
or distilled spirits from issuing tasting cards to customers.



(1976 Code, § 10-114)



   (C)   Original package. It shall be unlawful for any person or
persons who own, manage or lease any premise in which the sale of alcoholic
beverages is licensed, to have in their possession for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor contained in casks or other containers, except in the
original package. Nothing in this division (C) shall prohibit the refilling
of original packages of alcoholic liquor for strictly private use and not for
resale.



(1976 Code, § 10-116)



   (D)   Hours of sale.



      (1)   No alcoholic liquor, including beer, shall be sold at
retail or dispensed on any day between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful on property licensed to sell
alcoholic liquor at retail to allow alcoholic liquor in open containers to
remain or be in possession or control of any person for purposes of
consumption between the hours of 15 minutes after the closing hour applicable
to the licensed premises and 6:00 a.m. on any day.



      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
licensed premises from being open for other business on days and hours during
which the sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquor is prohibited by this
section.



(1976 Code, § 10-117)



(Ord. 581, passed 9-21-1978; Ord. 582, passed 9-21-1978; Ord. 626, passed
8-23-1979; Ord. 673, passed 9-17-1981; Ord. 681, passed 2-18-1982; Ord. 723,
passed 9-1-1983; Ord. 1050, passed 3-16-1992; Ord. 1053, passed 3-23-1992;
Ord. 1069, passed 12-21-1992; Ord. 1392, passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 1418, passed
12-20-2010; Ord. 1426B, passed 12-5-2011; Ord. 1433A, passed 1-7-2013; Ord.
1455B, passed 2-9-2015; Ord. 1457, passed 4-20-2015)  Penalty, see § 110.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-180, 53-183, 53-184



§ 112.11  SANITARY CONDITIONS.



   It shall be unlawful to open for public use any retail liquor
establishment that is not in a clean and sanitary condition. Toilet
facilities shall be adequate and convenient for customers and patrons and
said licensed premises shall be subject to any health inspections the
governing body or the municipal police may make or cause to be made. All
applications for liquor licenses shall be viewed in part from the standpoint
of the sanitary conditions, and a report concerning the said sanitary
conditions shall be made at all hearings concerning the application for, or
renewal of, a liquor license.



(1976 Code, § 10-118)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 112.12  HIRING MINORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hire a minor regardless of sex
under the age of 19 years to serve or dispense alcoholic liquors, including
beer, to said licensee’s customers.



(1976 Code, § 10-119)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 112.13  CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES; RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Except when the state’s Liquor Control Commission
has issued a license as provided in Neb. RS 53-186(2) or as provided in Neb.
RS 60-6,211.08, it is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor
upon property owned or controlled by the state or any governmental
subdivision thereof unless authorized by the governing bodies having
jurisdiction over such property.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person owning, operating,
managing or conducting any dance hall, restaurant, café or club or any place
open to the general public to permit or allow any person to consume alcoholic
liquor upon the premises, except as permitted by a license issued for such
premises pursuant to the state’s Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101
through 53-1,122. It is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor
in any dance hall, restaurant, café or club or any place open to the general
public except as permitted by a license issued for such premises pursuant to
the Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122. This division (A)(2) does not
apply to a retail licensee while lawfully engaged in the catering of
alcoholic beverages or to limousines or buses operated under Neb. RS
60-6,211.08.



(1976 Code, § 10-120)



   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.



            1.   Beer, ale, porter, stout and other similar
fermented beverages, including sake or similar products, of any name or
description, containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume, brewed or produced
from malt, wholly or in part, or from any substitute therefor;



            2.   Wine of not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume;



            3.   Distilled spirits, which is that substance
known as ethyl alcohol, ethanol or spirits of wine in any form, including all
dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process
produced; and



            4.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE does not include trace
amounts not readily consumable as a beverage.



         HIGHWAY. A road or street including the entire area within
the right-of-way.



         LIMOUSINE. A luxury vehicle used to provide prearranged
passenger transportation on a dedicated basis at a premium fare that has a
seating capacity of at least five and no more than 14 persons behind the
driver with a physical partition separating the driver seat from the
passenger compartment. LIMOUSINE does not include taxicabs, hotel or airport
buses or shuttles or buses.



         OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINER. Except as provided in
Neb. RS 53-123.04(3) and 53-123.11(1)(c), any bottle, can or other receptacle
that:



            1.   Contains any amount of alcoholic beverage; and



            2.   a.   Is open or has a broken seal; or



               b.   The contents of which are partially
removed.



         PASSENGER AREA. The area designed to seat the driver and
passengers while the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is
readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in their seating
positions, including any compartments in the area. PASSENGER AREA does not
include the area behind the last upright seat of the motor vehicle if the
area is not normally occupied by the driver or a passenger and the motor
vehicle is not equipped with a trunk.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is
unlawful for any person in the passenger area of a motor vehicle to possess
an open alcoholic beverage container while the motor vehicle is located in a
public parking area or on any highway in the municipality.



      (3)   Except as provided in division (A) above or division
(B)(4) below, it is unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage:



         (a)   In a public parking area or on any highway in the
municipality; or



         (b)   Inside a motor vehicle while in a public parking
area or on any highway in the municipality.



      (4)   This division (B) does not apply to persons who are
passengers of, but not drivers of, a limousine or bus being used in a charter
or special party service as defined by rules and regulations adopted and
promulgated by the state’s Public Service Commission and subject to Neb.
Admin. Code Ch. 75, Art. 3. Such passengers may possess open alcoholic
beverage containers and may consume alcoholic beverages while such limousine
or bus is in a public parking area or on any highway in the municipality if:



         (a)   The driver of the limousine or bus is prohibited
from consuming alcoholic liquor; and



         (b)   Alcoholic liquor is not present in any area that
is readily accessible to the driver while in the driver’s seat, including
any compartments in such area.



(1976 Code, § 10-128)



(Ord. 1065, passed 8-24-1992; Ord. 1426B, passed 12-5-2011)  Penalty, see §
110.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-186, 53-186.01, 60-6,211.08



§ 112.14  ACQUISITION, POSSESSION AND MANUFACTURE.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or purchase,
receive, acquire, accept or possess any alcoholic liquor acquired from any
other person other than one duly licensed to handle alcoholic liquor under
this chapter and the state’s Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101
through 53-1,122 unless within specific exemptions provided in this chapter
or the Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122.



      (2)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section,
it shall be unlawful for any person to transport, import, bring or cause to
be transported, imported, brought or shipped into the state for the personal
use of the possessor, his or her family, or guests a quantity of alcoholic
liquor in excess of nine liters in any one calendar month.



         (b)   Division (B)(1) above does not apply to a person
importing alcoholic liquor from a holder of a retail direct sales shipping
license or its equivalent, which alcoholic liquor is for personal use or for
use by such person’s family or guests, if the total amount imported by such
person in any one calendar year does not exceed 108 liters.



(1976 Code, § 10-121)



   (B)   (1)   No person shall manufacture, bottle, blend, sell,
barter, transport, deliver, furnish or possess any alcoholic liquor for
beverage purposes, except as specifically provided in this chapter and the
state’s Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122.



      (2)   Nothing is this chapter shall prevent:



         (a)   The possession of alcoholic liquor legally
obtained as provided in this chapter or the Act for the personal use of the
possessor and his or her family or guests;



         (b)   The making of wine, cider or other alcoholic
liquor by a person from fruits, vegetables or grains, or the product thereof,
by simple fermentation and without distillation, if made solely for the use
of the maker and his or her family and guests;



         (c)   Any duly licensed practicing physician or dentist
from possessing or using alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of his or
her profession, any hospital or other institution caring for the sick and
diseased persons from possessing and using alcoholic liquor for the treatment
of bona fide patients of that hospital or other institution, or any drug
store employing a licensed pharmacist from possessing or using alcoholic
liquor in the compounding of prescriptions of licensed physicians;



         (d)   The possession and dispensation of alcoholic
liquor by an authorized representative of any religion on the premises of a
place of worship, for the purpose of conducting any bona fide religious rite,
ritual or ceremony;



         (e)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from
carrying alcoholic liquor from licensed establishments when they are
accompanied by a person not a minor;



         (f)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from
handling alcoholic liquor containers and alcoholic liquor in the course of
their employment;



         (g)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from
removing and disposing of alcoholic liquor containers for the convenience of
the employer and customers in the course of their employment;



         (h)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from
completing a transaction for the sale of alcoholic liquor in the course of
their employment if they are not handling or serving alcoholic liquor; or



         (I)   Persons who are 19 years old or older from serving
or selling alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment.



(Ord. 1208, passed 1-22-1996; Ord. 1468, passed 2-6-2017)  Penalty, see §
110.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-168.06, 53-175, 53-194.03



§ 112.15  INTOXICATED PERSONS.



   (A)   (1)   Any  law  enforcement officer with  the power to
arrest for traffic violations may take a person who is intoxicated and in the
judgment of the officer dangerous to himself, herself or others, or who is
otherwise incapacitated, from any public or quasi-public property.



      (2)   An officer removing an intoxicated person from public or
quasi-public property shall make a reasonable effort to take such intoxicated
person to his or her home or to place such person in any hospital, clinic,
alcoholism center or with a medical doctor as may be necessary to preserve
life or to prevent injury.



      (3)   Such effort at placement shall be deemed reasonable if
the officer contacts those facilities or doctor which have previously
represented a willingness to accept and treat such individuals and which
regularly do accept such individuals. If such efforts are unsuccessful or are
not feasible, the officer may then place such intoxicated person in civil
protective custody; except that, civil protective custody shall be used only
as long as is necessary to preserve life or to prevent injury, and under no
circumstances longer than 24 hours. The placement of such person in civil
protective custody shall be recorded at the facility or jail at which he or
she is delivered and communicated to his or her family or next of kin, if
they can be located, or to such person designated by the person taken into
civil protective custody.



   (B)   (1)   The law enforcement officer who acts in compliance
with this section shall be deemed to be acting in the course of his or her
official duty and shall not be criminally or civilly liable for such actions.



      (2)   The taking of an individual into civil protective
custody under this section shall not be considered an arrest.



      (3)   No entry or other record shall be made to indicate that
the person has been arrested or charged with a crime.



   (C)   (1)   For purposes of this section, PUBLIC PROPERTY shall
mean any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park or other state,
county or municipally-owned property.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY
shall mean and include private or publicly-owned property utilized for
proprietary or business uses which invites patronage by the public or which
invites public ingress and egress.



(1976 Code, § 10-122)  (Ord. 625, passed 8-23-1979; Ord. 674, passed
9-17-1981)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-1,121



§ 112.16  RETAIL LICENSING STANDARDS; BINDING RECOMMENDATIONS.



   (A)   The governing body of the city shall have authority to approve
liquor license applications or to deny such applications pursuant to the
state’s Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122. The
governing body of the said city shall consider the following licensing
standards and criteria at any hearing for an evaluation of any applicant for
a retail alcoholic liquor license, for the upgrading of a license to sell
alcoholic liquor, or for the expansion or change in location of the premises
of a licensee, and for the purpose of formulating a recommendation from said
governing body to the state’s Liquor Control Commission in accordance with
the state’s Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122:



      (1)   The adequacy of existing law enforcement resources and
services in the area;



      (2)   The recommendation of the city’s Police Department or
any other law enforcement agency;



      (3)   Existing motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic flow in
the vicinity of the proposed licensed premises, potential traffic and parking
problems and the proximity and availability of on-street and off-street
parking;



      (4)   Zoning restrictions and city zoning and land-use
policies;



      (5)   Sanitation or sanitary conditions on or about the
proposed licensed premises;



      (6)   The existence of a citizen’s protest and similar
evidence in support of or in opposition to the application;



      (7)   The existing population and projected growth within the
jurisdiction of the city’s governing body and within the area to be served;



      (8)   The existing liquor licenses, the class of each such
license and the distance and times of travel between establishments that
issued such licenses;



      (9)   Whether the proposed license would be compatible with
the neighborhood or community where the proposed premises are located;



      (10)   Whether the type of business or activity proposed to be
operated or presently operated in conjunction with the proposed license is
and will be consistent with the public interest as declared in Neb. RS
53-101.01;



      (11)   Whether the applicant can ensure that all alcoholic
beverages, including beer and wine, will be handled by persons in accordance
with Neb. RS 53-102;



      (12)   Whether the applicant has taken every precaution to
protect against the possibility of shoplifting of alcoholic liquor, which
alcoholic liquor shall be displayed and kept in and sold from an area which
is reasonably secured;



      (13)   Whether the applicant is fit, willing and able to
properly provide the service proposed in conformance with all provisions and
requirements of and rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to
the state’s Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122;



      (14)   Whether the applicant has demonstrated that the type of
management and control exercised over the licensed premises will be
sufficient to ensure that the licensee can conform to all the provisions and
requirements of and rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to
the state’s Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 through 53-1,122;



      (15)   The background information of the applicant established
by information contained in the public records of the state’s Liquor
Control Commission and investigations conducted by law enforcement agencies;



      (16)   Past evidence of discrimination involving the applicant
as evidenced by findings of fact before any administrative board or agency of
the city’s governing body, any other governmental board or agency of the
city, any other governmental unit or any court of law;



      (17)   Whether the applicant or the applicant’s
representatives suppressed any fact or provided any inaccurate information to
the state’s Liquor Control Commission or the city’s governing body or the
employees of the state’s Liquor Control Commission or the city’s
governing body relative to the license application or liquor investigations.
The applicant shall be required to cooperate in providing a full disclosure
to the investigating agents of the governing body of the city;



      (18)   Proximity of and impact on schools, hospitals,
libraries, parks and public institutions;



      (19)   Whether activities proposed to be conducted on the
licensed premises or in adjacent related outdoor areas will create
unreasonable noise or disturbance; and



      (20)   Compliance with state laws, liquor rules and
regulations, and municipal ordinances and regulations and whether or not the
applicant has ever forfeited bond to appear in court to answer charges of
having committed a felony or charges of having violated any law or ordinance
enacted in the interest of good morals and decency or has been convicted of
violating or has forfeited bond to appear in court and answer charges for
violating any law or ordinance relating to alcoholic liquor.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be the liquor license applicant’s duty to
produce evidence pertaining to the designated criteria prescribed in this
division (A) above.



      (2)   The burden of proof and persuasion shall be on the party
filing the application.



(1976 Code, § 10-123)  (Ord. 900, passed 5-12-1986; Ord. 995, passed
12-18-1989)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-134



§ 112.17  LIQUOR APPLICATION; HEARING.



   (A)   Notice. Notice of a hearing held pursuant to Neb. RS 53-134
shall be given to the applicant by the City Clerk and shall contain the date,
time and location of the hearing. Two or more proceedings which are legally
or factually related may be heard and considered together unless any party
thereto makes a showing sufficient to satisfy the governing body that
prejudice would result therefrom.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   Hearings will be informal and conducted by the City
Attorney of the municipality. The intent is an inquiry into the facts, not an
adversative action. Each witness may present their testimony in narrative
fashion or by question and answer.



      (2)   Either the governing body or the applicant may order the
hearing to be recorded by the City Clerk, at the expense of the applicant(s).



      (3)   The city’s governing body may admit and give probative
effect to evidence which possesses probative value commonly accepted by
reasonably prudent individuals. The City Attorney may limit testimony where
it appears incompetent, irrelevant or unduly repetitious. If there is
opposition to any application and such opposition desires the opportunity to
present arguments and to cross-examine the applicant and any witnesses in
favor of such application, they shall choose a spokesperson to perform such
function who shall notify the City Attorney of such representation prior to
the start of the hearing.



      (4)   The order of the proceeding is as follows:



         (a)   Exhibits will be marked in advance by the City
Clerk and presented to the City Attorney prior to or during the hearing;



         (b)   Presentation of evidence, witnesses and arguments
by applicant;



         (c)   Testimony of any other citizens in favor of such
proposed license;



         (d)   Examination of applicant, witnesses or citizens by
City Attorney, governing body or duly appointed agent;



         (e)   Cross-examination of applicant, witnesses or
citizens by spokesperson for opposition, if any;



         (f)   Presentation of evidence and witnesses by
opposition;



         (g)   Testimony of any other citizens in opposition to
such proposed license;



         (h)   Presentation of evidence by the city and law
enforcement personnel;



         (i)   Cross-examination by applicant;



         (j)   Rebuttal evidence by both parties and by city
administration and agent; and



         (k)   Summation by applicant and opposition
spokesperson, if any.



      (5)   In all cases, the burden of proof and persuasion shall
be on the party filing the application. Any member of the governing body and
the City Attorney may question any witness, call witnesses or request
information. All witnesses shall be sworn. The governing body may make
further inquiry and investigation following the hearing. The said governing
body or the applicant may order the hearing to be recorded by the City Clerk,
at the expense of the applicant(s).



(1976 Code, § 10-124)  (Ord. 916, passed 10-20-1986; Ord. 996, passed
12-18-1989)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-134



§ 112.18  CATERING LICENSES.



   (A)   The holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail
issued under Neb. RS 53-124 a craft brewery license, a microdistillery
license or a farm winery license  may obtain an annual catering license by
filing an application and license fee with the state’s Liquor Control
Commission.



   (B)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and a copy of
the application as provided in Neb. RS 53-124.12, the governing body shall
process the application in the same manner as provided for other alcoholic
liquor retail licenses.



   (C)   (1)   The governing body, with respect to catering
licensees within its corporate limits, may cancel a catering license for
cause for the remainder of the period for which that catering license is
issued.



      (2)   Any person whose catering license is canceled may appeal
to the District Court.



   (D)   The governing body may impose an occupation tax on the
business of a catering licensee doing business within the liquor license
jurisdiction of the governing body. The tax may not exceed double the license
fee for a catering license.



(1976 Code, § 10-125)  (Ord. 961, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 1054, passed
3-23-1992; Ord. 1159, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1365, passed 11-8-2004; Ord.
1418, passed 12-20-2010)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-124.12



§ 112.19  KEG SALES.



   (A)   When any person licensed to sell alcoholic liquor at retail
sells alcohol for consumption off the premises in a container with a liquid
capacity of five or more gallons or 18.92 or more liters, the seller shall
record the date of the sale, the keg identification number, the purchase’s
name and address and the number of the purchaser’s motor vehicle
operator’s license, state identification card or military identification,
if the military identification contains a picture of the purchaser, together
with the purchaser’s signature. This record shall be on a form prescribed
by the state’s Liquor Control Commission and shall be kept by the licensee
at the retail establishment where the purchase was made for not less than six
months. The records kept pursuant to this section shall be available for
inspection by any law enforcement officer during normal business hours or at
any other reasonable time. Any person violating this section shall be guilty
of an offense.



   (B)   Any person who unlawfully tampers with, alters or removes the
keg identification number from a container described in division (A) above or
is in possession of a contained described in division (A) above with an
altered or removed keg identification number after the container has been
taken from the licensed premises pursuant to a retail sale and before its
return to the licensed premises or other place where returned kegs are
accepted shall be guilty of an offense.



(1976 Code, § 10-126)  (Ord. 1481, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1461, passed
2-8-2016)  Penalty, see § 110.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-167.03



CHAPTER 113:  ITINERANT SALES AND VENDORS



Section




Itinerant Sales




   113.01   Definition



   113.02   License required



   113.03   Application



   113.04   Fee



   113.05   Bond



   113.06   Appointment of agent



   113.07   License expiration



   113.08   Appeal



   113.09   Police enforcement




Vendors




   113.20   Definitions



   113.21   License required



   113.22   Application



   113.23   License fee



   113.24   Occupation tax



   113.25   Insurance



   113.26   License and identification badges



   113.27   Restrictions applicable to all vendors



   113.28   License suspension or revocation



   113.29   Appeal



   113.30   Police enforcement




ITINERANT SALES




§ 113.01  DEFINITION.



   A TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT or ITINERANT VENDOR is defined
as any non-resident of the municipality and either a person, firm or
corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, who engages
temporarily within the city in the business of peddling, hawking, selling or
delivering goods, wares and merchandise or selling advertising, magazine
subscriptions or taking orders for goods, wares, merchandise, advertising or
magazine subscriptions, or soliciting donations for personal gain or for a
firm or corporation; provided, non-resident organizations formed for
charitable, education or religious purposes, and farmers’ markets or flea
markets sponsored and supervised by the local Chamber of Commerce shall not
be included in this definition of a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or
itinerant vendor.



(1976 Code, § 10-201)  (Ord. 1003, passed 6-25-1990)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-134, 75-323



§ 113.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant
merchant or itinerant vendor to engage in such business within the
municipality without first obtaining a license therefor.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any farmer, truck grower or others
who produce, hawk or peddle products of the farm, fruit or other staples of
food, or who peddle, sell or offer to sell any commodity or article of
commerce or trade to park their conveyances or erect a place of business for
the purpose of selling said products upon any street within the city zoned
for residential or commercial use, unless such sales are sponsored and
supervised by the local Chamber of Commerce as a farmers’ market or flea
market.



(1976 Code, § 10-202)  (Ord. 1003, passed 6-25-1990)  Penalty, see §
110.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-134, 75-323 through 75-335



§ 113.03  APPLICATION.



   Applicants for a license shall file a written sworn application signed
by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by
the president if a corporation, with the Municipal Clerk, showing:



   (A)   The name or names of the person or persons having the
management or supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that
it is proposed that it will be carried on in the municipality; the local
address or addresses of such person or persons while engaged in such
business; the permanent address or addresses of such person or persons; the
capacity in which such person or persons will act (that is, whether as
proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and address of the person, firm or
corporation for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and,
if a corporation, under the law of what state the same is incorporated;



   (B)   The place or places in the municipality where it is proposed
to carry on applicant’s business, and the length of time during which it is
proposed that such business shall be conducted;



   (C)   A statement of the nature of merchandise to be sold or offered
for sale by the applicant;



   (D)   A brief statement of the nature of the advertising done or
proposed to be done in order to attract customers;



   (E)   Credentials from the person for whom the applicant proposes to
do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative; and



   (F)   Such other reasonable information as to the identity or
character of the person or persons having the management or supervision of
the applicant’s business or the method or plan of doing such business as
the Municipal Clerk may deem proper.



(1976 Code, § 10-203)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-134



§ 113.04  FEE.



   The applicant shall pay a license fee of $50 to cover the cost of
processing the application and issuing the license.



(1976 Code, § 10-201)  (Ord. 1169, passed 8-21-1995; Ord. 1294, passed
8-20-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-134, 17-525



§ 113.05  BOND.



   (A)   Before any license shall be issued for engaging in an
itinerant business, such applicant shall file with the Municipal Clerk a bond
running to the municipality in the sum of $10,000 and executed by the
applicant as principal, and one corporate surety, or two individual sureties
upon whom service of process may be had in the county, such bond to be
approved by the Municipal Attorney, conditioned that such applicant shall
comply fully with all the provisions of this code, and the statutes of the
state, regulating and concerning the sale of goods, wares and merchandise,
and will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation
of this code or the statutes, or any of them, together with all judgments and
costs that may be recovered against him or her by any person for damage
growing out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person
transacting business with such applicant, either at the time of making the
sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever with reference
to the merchandise sold or any part thereof.



   (B)   Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the
municipality to the use of the aggrieved person.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to any itinerant
vender required to file a bond under the provisions of the statutes of the
state as a prerequisite of doing business within the state.



(1976 Code, § 10-205)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-134, 75-329



§ 113.06  APPOINTMENT OF AGENT.



   (A)   Before any license shall be issued, such applicant shall file
with the Municipal Clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the
Municipal Clerk, or the person performing the duties of such position, his or
her true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge
service of notice or process in respect to any matters connected with or
arising out of the business transacted under such license.



   (B)   (1)   Immediately upon being served with process, the
Municipal Clerk shall send to the licensee at his or her last known address,
by registered mail, a copy of such process.



      (2)   Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to any
itinerant vendor required to appoint a state official as an agent for the
purpose of receiving service of process as a prerequisite for doing business
within the state.



(1976 Code, § 10-206)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-134, 75-325



§ 113.07  LICENSE EXPIRATION.



   All licenses issued shall expire seven days after the date of issuance
thereof unless a prior date is fixed therein.



(1976 Code, § 10-206)  (Ord. 1169, passed 8-21-1995)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-134



§ 113.08  APPEAL.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Municipal Clerk in
regard to the denial of an application for a license or in connection with
the revocation of a license, shall have the right to appeal to the governing
body.



   (B)   Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk
within seven days after notice of the decision has been mailed to such
person’s last known address, a written statement setting forth the grounds
for appeal.



   (C)   The governing body shall set the time and place for a hearing
on such appeal and notice shall be given to such person by registered mail,
postage prepaid, at his or her last known address.



   (D)   The order of the governing body on such appeal shall be final.



(1976 Code, § 10-206)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-134



§ 113.09  POLICE ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the municipal police to examine all places of
business and persons subject to the provisions of this subchapter and to
enforce the provisions herein against any person found to be violating the
same.



(1976 Code, § 10-207)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-134, 75-334




VENDORS




§ 113.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC STREET OR SIDEWALK. Includes all areas legally open to public
use as public streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways, alleys and
any other public way.



   STAND. Any newsstand, table bench, booth, rack handcart, pushcart or
any other fixture or device that is not required to be licensed and
registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles, used for the display, storage
or transportation of articles offered for sale by a vendor.



   VENDOR.



      (1)   Any person, including an employee or agent of another,
who sells or offers to sell food, beverages, foods or merchandise on any
public street or sidewalk from a stand, motor vehicle or from his or her
person, or one who travels by foot, wagon, motor vehicle, pushcart or any
other method of transportation from house to house or street to street
selling or offering to sell food, beverages, goods or merchandise.



      (2)   In addition, the term shall not mean or include, and
there shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter those residents
of the county who are selling or delivering for sale fruits and vegetables.



(1976 Code, § 10-210)  (Ord. 1397, passed 9-24-2007)



§ 113.21  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell, display or offer for sale
any food, beverage, goods or merchandise without first obtaining a license
from the city.



(1976 Code, § 10-211)  (Ord. 1397, passed 9-24-2007)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 113.22  APPLICATION.



   The application for a vendor’s license shall contain all information
relevant and necessary to determine whether a particular license may be
issued, including, but not limited to:



   (A)   Proof of the identity and business of the applicant;



   (B)   A brief statement of the nature, character and quality of the
food, beverages, goods or merchandise to be sold;



   (C)   If employed by another, the name and business address of the
person;



   (D)   If a motor vehicle is to be used in the vending business, a
description of the vehicle together with the motor vehicle registration
number and the license number and a certificate of insurance on the vehicle;



   (E)   A description of the proposed location of the vending business
and the length of time during which it is proposed that the business shall be
conducted; and



   (F)   A sales tax permit as required by Neb. RS 77-2705.



(1976 Code, § 10-212)  (Ord. 1397, passed 9-24-2007)



§ 113.23  LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   The applicant for a vendor’s license shall pay a license fee
to cover the costs of processing the application and issuing the license and
enforcing the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The license fee shall be such amount as established by the
Council by resolution.



(1976 Code, § 10-213)  (Ord. 1397, passed 9-24-2007)



§ 113.24  OCCUPATION TAX.



   (A)   The applicant for a vendor’s license shall also pay an
occupation tax in such amounts as established by Council by resolution.



   (B)   All license fees and occupation taxes shall be paid for each
licensed therefor.



(1976 Code, § 10-214)  (Ord. 1397, passed 9-24-2007)



§ 113.25  INSURANCE.



   No license shall be issued to an applicant unless the applicant
furnishes proof to the city of a public liability bond or insurance policy in
an amount not less than $300,000 for property damage and injuries, including
injury resulting in death, caused by the operation of the vending business.



(1976 Code, § 10-215)  (Ord. 1397, passed 9-24-2007)



§ 113.26  LICENSE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGES.



   (A)   The license issued to a vendor shall be carried with the
vendor while he is engaged in the business of vending.



   (B)   In addition to the license, the city shall issue an
identification badge to every vendor. Vendors shall wear their badges in such
a way that the badges may be easily read while doing business. If a badge
becomes damaged or obscured, the vendor shall return it to the city and
receive another badge.



   (C)   Licenses and identification badges shall be used only by the
person to whom they were issued and may not be transferred to any other
person.



(1976 Code, § 10-216)  (Ord. 1397, passed 9-24-2007)



§ 113.27  RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL VENDORS.



   (A)   Stands. Vendor stands shall not:



      (1)   Impede access to the entrance of any adjacent building
or driveway; and/or



      (2)   Locate within 50 feet of a fire hydrant, fire escape,
bus stop, loading zone or driveway of a fire station or police station.



   (B)   Hours of operation. Vendors shall be allowed to engage in the
business of vending only between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; except that, those
vendors who conduct their business by going door to door shall be allowed to
operate only between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.



   (C)   Removal of trash. All trash or debris accumulating within 50
feet of any vending stand shall be collected by the vendor and deposited in a
trash container.



(1976 Code, § 10-217)  (Ord. 1397, passed 9-24-2007)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 113.28  LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   A vendor’s license issued may be revoked by the City Council
after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:



      (1)   Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for a
license;



      (2)   Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting
the business of vending;



      (3)   Conducting the business of vending contrary to the
conditions of the license; and



      (4)   Conducting the business of vending in such a manner as
to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health,
safety or welfare.



   (b)   Upon suspension or revocation the city shall deliver written
notice to the license holder stating the action taken and the reasons
supporting such action. The written notice shall be delivered to the license
holder’s place of business or mailed to the license holder’s last known
address.



(1976 Code, § 10-218)  (Ord. 1397, passed 9-24-2007)



§ 113.29  APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Clerk in regard to the
denial of an application for a vendor’s license or in connection with the
suspension or revocation of a license shall have the right to appeal to the
City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a written statement
setting forth the grounds for appeal with the City Council within seven days
after notice of the decision has been mailed to such person’s last known
address. The City Council shall set the time and place for a hearing on such
appeal and notice shall be given to such person by certified or registered
mail, postage prepaid, at his or her last known address. The order of the
City Council on such appeal shall be final.



(1976 Code, § 10-219)  (Ord. 1397, passed 9-24-2007)



§ 113.30  POLICE ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the police to examine all places of business
and persons subject to the provisions of this subchapter and to enforce the
provisions of this section against any person found to be violating this
subchapter.



(1976 Code, § 10-220)  (Ord. 1397, passed 9-24-2007)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section




Offenses Against Administration




   130.01   Impersonating an officer



   130.02   Refusing to assist officer



   130.03   Resisting or obstructing officer



   130.04   Abusing an officer




Offenses Against Public Morals, Health and Safety




   130.15   Trespassing



   130.16   Criminal mischief



   130.17   Drinking in public



   130.18   Toxic inhalants



   130.19   Prostitution



   130.20   Posted advertisements, other writing



   130.21   Assault and battery



   130.22   Disturbing the peace



   130.23   Disorderly conduct



   130.24   Malicious mischief



   130.25   Assemblies



   130.26   Rioting



   130.27   Window peeping



   130.28   Littering



   130.29   Fences



   130.30   Appliances in yard



   130.31   Obstructing streets, water flow



   130.32   Weeds, litter, stagnant water



   130.33   Abandoned automobiles



   130.34   Unlicensed, inoperable vehicles



   130.35   Curfew



   130.36   False reporting



   130.37   Shoplifting



   130.38   Tobacco; possession by minors



   130.39   Sexual predator residency requirements



   130.40   Minors; endangering, employment and the like




Offenses Against Property




   130.60   Larceny



   130.61   Concealing stolen property



   130.62   Arson



   130.63   Injury to trees



   130.64   Fire equipment



   130.65   Fire hose



   130.66   Trash or garbage



 



   130.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Animals, see Ch. 90



   Fireworks, see Ch. 93



   General code penalty, see § 10.99



   Nuisances, see §§ 91.15 through 91.22



   Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property, see Ch. 151




OFFENSES AGAINST ADMINISTRATION




§ 130.01  IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person other than a municipal or state
police officer to wear an official badge or uniform, or to falsely and
willfully impersonate the said officials.



(1976 Code, § 6-201)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-610



§ 130.02  REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to assist a municipal
police officer when lawfully requested to do so by him or her.



(1976 Code, § 6-202)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-728



§ 130.03  RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING OFFICER.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any municipal
police officer when such officer is in the lawful performance of his or her
duties.



(1976 Code, § 6-203)



   (B)   (1)   A person commits the offense of obstructing a police
officer when, by using or threatening to use violence, force, physical
interference or obstacle, he or she intentionally obstructs, impairs or
hinders:



         (a)   The enforcement of the penal law or the
preservation of the peace by a peace officer or judge acting under color of
his or her official authority; or



         (b)   A police animal assisting a peace officer acting
pursuant to the peace officer’s official authority.



      (2)   For purposes of this section, POLICE ANIMAL means a
horse or dog owned or controlled by the state or any county, city or village
for the purpose of assisting a peace officer acting pursuant to his or her
official authority.



(1976 Code, § 6-203.1)



(Ord. 1433A, passed 1-7-2013)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-729



§ 130.04  ABUSING AN OFFICER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to abuse a police officer or
municipal official in the execution of his or her office.



(1976 Code, § 6-204)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-729




OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS, HEALTH AND SAFETY




§ 130.15  TRESPASSING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon any private
grounds within the municipality, or to break, cut or injure any tree, shrub,
plant, flower or grass growing thereon, or without the consent of the owner
or occupant to enter upon an improved lot or grounds occupied for residence
purposes and to loiter about the same.



(1976 Code, § 6-205)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-588, 28-588.01



§ 130.16  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.



   (A)   A person commits criminal mischief if he or she:



      (1)   Damages property of another intentionally or recklessly;



      (2)   Intentionally tampers with property of another so as to
endanger person or property; or



      (3)   Intentionally or maliciously causes another to suffer
pecuniary loss by deception or threat.



   (B)   Criminal mischief is an offense:



      (1)   If the actor intentionally or maliciously causes
pecuniary loss of $500 or more, but less than $5,000; or



      (2)   If the actor intentionally, maliciously or recklessly
causes pecuniary loss in an amount of less than $500 or if his or her action
results in no pecuniary loss.



(1976 Code, § 6-206)  (Ord. 1461, passed 2-8-2016; Ord. 1468, passed
2-16-2017)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-519



§ 130.17  DRINKING IN PUBLIC.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages in
the public streets, alleys, roads, highways or upon any property owned by the
municipality or other governmental subdivision thereof, or inside vehicles
while upon the public streets, alleys, roads or highways, in theaters, dance
halls or any other place open to the public; provided, the provisions of this
section shall not apply to liquor establishments licensed by the state.



(1976 Code, § 6-215)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 53-186



§ 130.18  TOXIC INHALANTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to breathe or inhale any substance
for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication, depression,
exhilaration or in any other distorting or disturbing state which affects the
auditory, visual or nervous processes. Any person who shall sell or offer for
sale any container of a substance producing such an affect and having the
property of releasing toxic vapors shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if he or
she has cause to suspect that the product sold will be used in violation of
this section.



(1976 Code, § 6-216)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-4,109, 28-4,110



§ 130.19  PROSTITUTION.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) below, any person who
performs, offers or agrees to perform any act of sexual contact or sexual
penetration, as those terms are defined in Neb. RS 28-318, with any person
not his or her spouse, in exchange for money or other thing of value, commits
the offense of prostitution.



   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section
that such person was a trafficking victim, as defined in Neb. RS 28-830.



   (C)   If the law enforcement officer determines, after a reasonable
detention for investigative purposes, that a person suspected of or charged
with a violation of division (A) above is a person under 18 years of age,
such person shall be immune from prosecution for a prostitution offense under
this section and shall be subject to temporary custody under Neb. RS 43-248
and further disposition under the state’s Juvenile Code. A law enforcement
officer who takes a person under 18 years of age into custody under this
section shall immediately report an allegation of a violation of Neb. RS
28-831 to the Department of Health and Human Services which shall commence an
investigation within 24 hours under the Child Protection and Family Safety
Act.



(1976 Code, § 6-223)  (Ord. 1448, passed 12-23-2013; Ord. 1455B, passed
2-9-2015)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-801



§ 130.20  POSTED ADVERTISEMENTS, OTHER WRITING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully and
maliciously tear, deface, remove or cover up the posted advertisement or bill
of any person, firm or corporation when said bill or advertisement is
rightfully and lawfully posted, and the same remains of value.



(1976 Code, § 6-224)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paste or paint
any sign, advertisement or other writing of any nature upon a fence, pole,
building or other property without the written permission of the owner of the
said property.



(1976 Code, § 6-225)



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.21  ASSAULT AND BATTERY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to assault, threaten, strike or
injure any other person or persons. Any person who assaults or batters
another person or persons shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1976 Code, § 6-232)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-411



§ 130.22  DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to assemble or
gather within the municipality with the intent to do an unlawful or
disorderly act or acts, by force or violence against the municipality, or
residents therein, or who shall disturb the public peace, quiet, security,
repose or sense of morality.



   (B)   Any person or persons so assembled or gathered shall be deemed
to be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1976 Code, § 6-233)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-818



§ 130.23  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   Any person who shall knowingly start a fight, fight, commit assault or
battery, make unnecessary noise, or otherwise conduct themselves in such a
way as to breach the peace shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1976 Code, § 6-234)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-129, 17-556



§ 130.24  MALICIOUS MISCHIEF.



   It shall be deemed a misdemeanor for any person to willfully destroy,
mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb, monument, gravestone, structure
or thing of value which is located upon any government property, cemetery or
property of historic value.



(1976 Code, § 6-235)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 12-519



§ 130.25  ASSEMBLIES.



   (A)   Disturbing an assembly.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to
disturb, interrupt or interfere with any lawful assembly of people, whether
religious or otherwise, by loud and unnecessary noise, threatening behavior
or indecent and shocking behavior.



      (2)   Any person or persons so disturbing an assembly shall be
deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined in accord with state statute.



(1976 Code, § 6-236)



   (B)   Unlawful assembly. It shall be unlawful for three or more
persons to assemble together upon any sidewalk or street thereof, in front of
or adjacent to any store, shop or other place of business, so as to obstruct
the public right-of-way along said street or sidewalk, or entrance to said
place of business, or so as to obstruct or injure the carrying on or any
lawful business in any of the places aforesaid within the limits of the
municipality.



(1976 Code, § 6-237)



Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-804



§ 130.26  RIOTING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to congregate together
for the purpose of breaching the peace by rioting, or to induce others to
riot through words, actions or conduct and whosoever shall congregate with
others for the purpose of rioting, or inducing others to riot shall be deemed
to be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1976 Code, § 6-238)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-556, 28-804



§ 130.27  WINDOW PEEPING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon the private premises of
another to look or peep into any window, door or other opening in a building
occupied by any other person.



(1976 Code, § 6-240)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.28  LITTERING.



   (A)   Any person who deposits, throws, discards or otherwise
disposes of any litter on any public or private property or in any waters
commits the offense of littering unless:



      (1)   Such property is an area designated by law for the
disposal of such material and such person is authorized by the proper public
authority to so use such property; or



      (2)   The litter is placed in a receptacle or container
installed on such property for such purpose.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      LITTER. All waste material susceptible of being dropped,
deposited, discarded or otherwise disposed of by any person upon any property
in the state, but does not include wastes of primary processes of farming or
manufacturing.



      WASTE MATERIAL. Any material appearing in a place or in a context
not associated with that material’s function or origin.



   (C)   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from
any motor vehicle or watercraft in violation of this section, the operator of
such motor vehicle or watercraft commits the offense of littering.



(1976 Code, § 6-241)  (Ord. 1155, passed 2-6-1995)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-523



§ 130.29  FENCES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, or cause to be erected,
and maintain any barbed wire or electric fence within the corporate limits
except for underground or invisible electric fences made for the containment
of pets by use of a collar and not harmful to or affecting persons or other
animals.



(1976 Code, § 6-242)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.30  APPLIANCES IN YARD.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a refrigerator, icebox,
freezer or any other dangerous appliance to be in the open and accessible to
children whether on private or public property unless he or she shall first
remove all doors and make the same reasonably safe.



(1976 Code, § 6-243)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720



§ 130.31  OBSTRUCTING STREETS, WATER FLOW.



   (A)   Street games. It shall be unlawful for any person to play
catch, bat a ball, kick or throw a football, or to engage in any exercise or
sport upon the municipal streets and sidewalks. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit or prevent the governing body from ordering from time
to time certain streets and public places blocked off for the purpose of
providing a safe area to engage in such exercise and sport.



(1976 Code, § 6-244)



   (B)   Obstruction of public ways. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit, erect, maintain, allow or suffer to remain on any street,
alley, sidewalk or other public way within the municipality any obstruction,
stand, wagon, display or other obstacle inconvenient to, or inconsistent
with, the public use of the same.



(1976 Code, § 6-245)



   (C)   Obstructing water flow. It shall be unlawful for any person to
stop or obstruct the passage of water in a street gutter, culvert, water pipe
or hydrant.



(1976 Code, § 6-246)



(Ord. 973, passed 5-15-1989; Ord. 998, passed 1-22-1990)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 130.32  WEEDS, LITTER, STAGNANT WATER.



   (A)   Lots or pieces of ground within the municipality or within it
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction shall be drained or filled so as to
prevent stagnant water or any other nuisance accumulating thereon.



   (B)   The owner or occupant of any lot or piece of ground within the
municipality or within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction shall keep
the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys free of any
growth of 12 inches or more in height of weeds, grasses or worthless
vegetation.



   (C)   The throwing, depositing or accumulation of litter on any lots
or piece of ground within the municipality or within its extraterritorial
zoning jurisdiction is prohibited.



   (D)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance to permit or maintain
any growth of 12 inches or more in height of weeds, grasses or worthless
vegetation on any lots or piece of ground within the municipality or within
its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction or on the adjoining streets or
alleys or to litter or cause litter to be deposited or remain thereon, except
in proper receptacles.



   (E)   Any owner or occupant of a lot or piece of ground shall, upon
conviction of violating this section, be guilty of an offense.



   (F)   (1)   Notice to abate and remove such nuisance shall be
given to each owner or owner’s duly authorized agent and to the occupant,
if any. The municipality shall establish the method of notice by ordinance.
If notice is given by first class mail, such mail shall be conspicuously
marked as to it importance. Within five days after receipt of such notice,
the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground may request a hearing
with the municipality to appeal the decision to abate or remove a nuisance by
filing a written appeal with the office of the Clerk. A hearing on the appeal
shall be held within 14 days after the filing of the appeal and shall be
conducted by an elected or appointed officer as designated in the ordinance.
The hearing officer shall render a decision on the appeal within five
business days after the conclusion of the bearing. If the appeal fails, the
municipality may have such work done. Within five days after receipt of such
notice, if the owner of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing
with the municipality or fails to comply with the order to abate, and remove
the nuisance, the municipality may have such work done.



      (2)   The cost and expenses of any such work shall be paid by
the owner. If unpaid for two months after such work is done, the municipality
may either:



         (a)   Levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work
upon the lot or piece of ground so benefitted as a special assessment in the
same manner as other special assessments of improvements are levied and
assessed; or



         (b)   Recover in a civil action the costs and expenses
of the work upon the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and
alleys.



   (G)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      LITTER. Includes, but is not limited to:



         (a)   Trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, paper, rags and
ashes;



         (b)   Wood, plaster, cement, brick or stone building
rubble;



         (c)   Grass, leaves and worthless vegetation, except
when used as ground mulch or in a compost pile;



         (d)   Offal and dead animals; and



         (e)   Any machine or machines, vehicle or vehicles, or
parts of a machine or vehicle which have lost their identity, character,
utility or serviceability as, such through deterioration, dismantling or the
ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to perform their intended
functions or are cast off, discarded or thrown away or left as waste,
wreckage or junk.



      WEEDS. Include, but are not limited to, bindweed (Convolvulus
arvensis), puncture vine (Tribulus Terrestris), leafy spurge (Euphorbia
esula), Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), perennial peppergrass (Lepidium
draba), Russian knapweed (Centaurea picris), Johnson Grass (Sbrghum
halepense), nodding or musk thistle, quack grass (Agroyronrepens), perennial
sow thistle (Sonchu’s arvensis), horse nettle (Solanim carolinense), bull
thistle (Cirsium lanceolatum), buckthorn (Rhamnus sp.) (tourn), hemp plant
(Cannabis sativa) and ragweed (Ambrosiaceae).



(1976 Code, § 6-247)  (Ord. 687, passed 8-19-1982; Ord. 1042, passed
8-19-1991; Ord. 1164, passed 7-10-1995; Ord. 1367, passed 11-8-2004; Ord.
1412, passed 2-22-2010; Ord. 1446, passed 12-23-2013; Ord. 1461, passed
2-8-2016; Ord. 1479, passed 2-5-2018)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-563



§ 130.33  ABANDONED AUTOMOBILES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall cause any vehicle to be an abandoned
vehicle, as described in divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) below.



      (2)   No person other than one authorized by the municipality
or appropriate state agency shall destroy, deface or remove any part of a
vehicle which is left unattended on a highway or other public place without
license plates affixed or which is abandoned.



   (B)   (1)   A motor vehicle is an abandoned vehicle:



         (a)   If left unattended, with no license plates or
valid “In Transit” stickers issued pursuant to the Motor Vehicle
Registration Act affixed thereto, for more than six hours on any public
property;



         (b)   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any
public property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally
permitted;



         (c)   If left unattended for more than 48 hours after
the parking of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any
public property on which parking is legally permitted;



         (d)   If left unattended for more than seven days on
private property if left initially without permission of the owner, or after
permission of the owner is terminated;



         (e)   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a
law enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the
last-registered owner under Neb. RS 60-1903.01; or



         (f)   If removed from private property by a municipality
pursuant to a municipal ordinance.



      (2)   An all-terrain vehicle, a utility-type vehicle or a
minibike is an abandoned vehicle:



         (a)   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any
public property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally
permitted;



         (b)   If left unattended for more than 48 hours, after
the parking of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any
public property on which parking is legally permitted;



         (c)   If left unattended for more than seven days on
private property, if left initially without permission of the owner, or after
permission of the owner is terminated;



         (d)   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a
law enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the
last-registered owner under Neb. RS 60-1903.01; or



         (e)   If removed from private property by a municipality
pursuant to a municipal ordinance.



      (3)   A mobile home is an abandoned vehicle if left in place
on private property for more than 30 days after a local governmental unit,
pursuant to an ordinance or resolution, has sent a certified letter to each
of the last-registered owners and posted a notice on the mobile home, stating
that the mobile home is subject to sale or auction or vesting of title as set
forth in Neb. RS 60-1903.



      (4)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         MOBILE HOME. A moveable or portable dwelling constructed to
be towed on its own chassis, connected to utilities and designed with or
without a permanent foundation for year-round living. It may consist of one
or more units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for
additional capacity, or of two or more units, separately towable, but
designed to be joined into one integral unit, and shall include a
manufactured home as defined in Neb. RS 71-4603. MOBILE HOME does not include
a mobile home or manufactured home for which an affidavit of affixture has
been recorded pursuant to Neb. RS 60-169.



         PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any privately owned property which is not
included within the definition of public property.



         PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway,
alley or park or other state, county or municipally owned property.



      (5)   No motor vehicle subject to forfeiture under Neb. RS
28-431 shall be an abandoned vehicle under this section.



   (C)   If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment has no
license plates of the current year or valid “In Transit” stickers issued
pursuant to Neb. RS 60-376 affixed and is of a wholesale nature, taking into
consideration the condition of the vehicle, of $250 or less, title shall
immediately vest in the municipality.



   (D)   (1)   Except for vehicles governed by division (C) above,
the municipality shall make an inquiry concerning the last-registered owner
of an abandoned vehicle as follows:



         (a)   Abandoned vehicle with license plates affixed to
the jurisdiction which issued such license plates; or



         (b)   Abandoned vehicle with no license plates affixed
from Department of Motor Vehicles.



      (2)   The municipality shall notify the last-registered owner,
if any, that the vehicle in questions has been determined to be an abandoned
vehicle and that, if unclaimed, either:



         (a)   It will be sold or will be offered at public
auction after five days from the date such notice was mailed; or



         (b)   Title will vest in the municipality 30 days after
the date such notice was mailed.



      (3)   If the municipality is notified that a lien or mortgage
exists, the notice described in division (D)(2) above shall also be sent to
the lien holder or mortgagee. Any person claiming such vehicle shall be
required to pay the cost of removal and storage of such vehicle.



      (4)   Title to an abandoned vehicle, if unclaimed, shall vest
in the municipality:



         (a)   Five days after the date the notice is mailed if
the vehicle will be sold or offered at public auction under division
(D)(2)(a) above;



         (b)   Thirty days after the date the notice is mailed if
the municipality will retain the vehicle; or,



         (c)   If the last-registered owner cannot be
ascertained, when notice of such fact is received.



      (5)   After title to the abandoned vehicle vests pursuant to
division (D)(4) above, the municipality may retain for use, sale or auction
the abandoned vehicle. If the municipality has determined that the vehicle
should be retained for use, the municipality shall, at the same time that the
notice, if any, is mailed, publish in a newspaper of general circulation in
the jurisdiction an announcement that the municipality intends to retain the
abandoned vehicle for its use and that title will vest in the municipality 30
days after publication.



   (E)   (1)   If the municipal law enforcement agency has custody
of a motor vehicle for investigatory purposes and has no further need to keep
it in custody, it shall send a certified letter to each of the
last-registered owners stating that the vehicle is in the custody of the
agency, that the vehicle is no longer needed for law enforcement purposes and
that, after 30 days, the agency will dispose of the vehicle.



      (2)   This division (E) shall not apply to motor vehicles
subject to forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431.



      (3)   No storage fees shall be assessed against the registered
owner of a motor vehicle held in custody for investigatory purposes under
this division (E) unless the register owner or the person in possession of
the vehicle when it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or
misdemeanor related to the offense for which the law enforcement agency took
the vehicle into custody. If a registered owner or the person in possession
of the vehicle when it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or
misdemeanor, but is not convicted, the registered owner shall be entitled to
a refund of the storage fees.



   (F)   (1)   Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle,
less any expenses incurred by the municipality, shall be held by the
municipality without interest, for the benefit of the owner or lien holders
of such vehicle for a period of two years.



      (2)   If not claimed within such two-year period, the proceeds
shall be paid into the General Fund of the municipality.



   (G)   Neither the owner, lessee, nor occupant of the premises from
which any abandoned vehicle is removed, nor the municipality, shall be liable
for any loss or damage to such vehicle which occurs during its removal or
while in the possession of the municipality or its contractual agent or as a
result of any subsequent disposition.



   (H)   The last-registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be
liable to the municipality for the costs of removal and storage of such
vehicle.



   (I)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section is
guilty of an offense.



(1976 Code, § 6-248)  (Ord. 532, passed 4-21-1977; Ord. 982, passed
9-25-1989; Ord. 1454, passed 10-20-2014)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-1902, 60-1903, 60-1903.01, 60-1905,
60-1906, 60-1907, 60-1908, 60-1909



§ 130.34  UNLICENSED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person in charge or control of any property within the
municipality, other than municipal property, whether as owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled,
inoperable, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on such property
longer than ten days.



   (B)   When used in this section, VEHICLE shall include any motor
vehicle, trailer, camper, boat, boat trailer, personal water craft or other
apparatus usually towed by a motor vehicle and items which require licensing
to be utilized on any roadway or waterway.



   (C)   No unlicensed or inoperable vehicle shall be permitted to
remain on any private or public property for any length of time; provided,
this section shall not apply: to a vehicle in an enclosed building; to a
business enterprise, operated in a lawful place and manner, when such vehicle
is necessary to the lawful operation of the business; or to a vehicle in an
appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and
manner by the municipality. Any vehicle allowed to remain on property in
violation of this section shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated,
and any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (D)   Additionally, the municipality may enter upon the property and
cause said vehicle to be towed, with the owner of the property being
responsible for the costs thereof.



(1976 Code, § 6-249)  (Ord. 531, passed 4-21-1977; Ord. 1280, passed
9-11-2000; Ord. 1399, passed 12-4-2007)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.35  CURFEW.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any minor person to be upon
the public streets or other public places, vacant lots or other unsupervised
places, within the city between the hours of:



         (a)   Ten p.m. to 5:00 a.m. of the following day, of all
days of the week, for any person under the age of 16 years; and



         (b)   Twelve p.m. to 5:00 a.m. of the following day, of
all days of the week, for those persons of 16 and 17 years of age.



      (2)   Any person who would otherwise be in violation of
division (A)(1) above, shall not be in violation if any of the following
exceptions apply:



         (a)   When the minor person is accompanied by a parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care or custody of such minor
person;



         (b)   When the minor person is accompanied by an adult
authorized by a parent, guardian or other adult person having the care or
custody of such minor person, to take said person’s place in accompanying
said minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified
area;



         (c)   When the minor person is upon an emergency errand
or legitimate business as directed by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having the care or custody of such minor person;



         (d)   When the presence of such minor is as the result
of some legitimate employment, trade, profession or occupation in which the
minor person is engaged;



         (e)   When the minor person is upon the sidewalk or
property where the minor resides;



         (f)   When the minor person is returning home from a
school activity or an activity of a religious or other voluntary association,
or a place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play or sporting event
or any such activity of the kind normally attended by minors 17 years and
under; provided that, when such activity terminates after or less than one
hour prior to the respective curfews, the curfew shall commence one hour
after the termination of such activity;



         (g)   When the minor is, with parental consent, engaged
in normal interstate travel through the city, or originating or terminating
in the city; and



         (h)   When the minor is married or has been married
pursuant to state law, or is emancipated.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other
adult person having the care or custody of a minor person to allow or permit
such minor person to do any act which is prohibited by this division (A).



      (4)   No minor person, arrested under the provisions of this
division (A) shall be placed in confinement until he or she has been taken
home, or the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care or
custody of such minor person has been notified, and the arresting officer has
ascertained whether such minor person is within the control of his or her
parents, guardian or other adult person having the care or custody of said
minor person; and, if such parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care or custody of said minor person shall state to such arresting officer
that said minor cannot be controlled by him or her, then such minor may be
proceeded against. Otherwise, the parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care or custody of said minor person may also be proceeded against.



      (5)   Any minor under the age of 16 years of age violating the
provisions of this section shall be dealt with in accordance with the
Juvenile Court Law of the state and procedure thereunder.



(1976 Code, § 6-254)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years
to loiter, wander, stroll, drive, play or otherwise be in or upon any of the
streets, alleys, parks or other public places in the city on October 31 of
each year, commonly known as “Halloween Night”, after the hour of 8:00
p.m. and before the hour of 5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless said minor
is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person having the care or
custody or control of said individual under the age of 17 years; or unless
said individual is engaged in lawful employment, or is traveling to and from
such employment. This division (B) shall not apply in the event the
individual under the age of 17 years is engaged in an emergency errand. No
minor under the age of 17 years detained by city’s Police Department
personnel under the provisions of this division (B) shall be placed in
confinement until after efforts have been made to return said minor to his or
her home, or until after the parent, guardian or other adult person having
the obligation for the care, custody and control of said minor under the age
of 17 years have been notified of the detention of said minor child and said
parent, guardian or other adult person has informed the detaining police
officer that said minor cannot be controlled by said parent, guardian or
other adult person. Any individual under the age of 17 years violating the
terms of this division (B) may be charged and prosecuted as provided herein
notwithstanding that said minor has been taken to his or her home, or the
parent, guardian or other adult person having an obligation to the care,
custody and control of said individual has been informed as to the detention
of said minor individual as provided herein.



(1976 Code, § 6-255)



(Ord. 565, passed 10-20-1977; Ord. 1010, passed 10-8-1990; Ord. 1220, passed
7-8-1996)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.36  FALSE REPORTING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Furnish information he or she knows to be false to any peace
officer or other official with the intent to instigate an investigation or an
alleged criminal matter or impede the investigation of an actual criminal
matter;



   (B)   Furnish information he or she knows to be false alleging the
existence of an emergency in which human life or property are in jeopardy to
any hospital, ambulance company or other person or governmental agency which
deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property;



   (C)   Furnish any information, or cause such information to be
furnished or conveyed by electric, electronic, telephonic or mechanical
means, knowing the same to be false concerning the need for assistance of a
Fire Department or any personnel or equipment of such Department; or



   (D)   Furnish any information he or she knows to be false concerning
the location of any explosive in any building or other property to any person.



(1976 Code, § 6-253)  (Ord. 698, passed 8-5-1982)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-907



§ 130.37  SHOPLIFTING.



   (A)   A person commits the crime of theft by shoplifting when he or
she, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his or her own use
without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession of such
property or its retail value, in whole or in part, does any of the following:



      (1)   Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise
of any store or retail establishment;



      (2)   Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or
merchandise of any store or retail establishment;



      (3)   Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or
retail establishment from one container to another;



      (4)   Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of
merchandise with a label or price tag from another item of merchandise; or



      (5)   Causes the cash register or other sales recording device
to reflect less than the retail price of the merchandise.



   (B)   In any prosecution for theft by shoplifting, in order to allow
the owner of owners of shoplifted property the use of such property pending
criminal prosecutions, photographs of the shoplifted property may be accepted
as prima facie evidence as to the identity of the property. Such photograph
shall be accompanied by a written statement containing the following:



      (1)   A description of the property;



      (2)   The name of the owner or owners of the property;



      (3)   The time, date and location where the shoplifting
occurred;



      (4)   The time and date the photograph was taken;



      (5)   The name of the photographer; and



      (6)   Verification by the arresting officer.



   (C)   Prior to allowing the use of shoplifted property as provided
in this section, legal counsel for the alleged shoplifter shall have a
reasonable opportunity to inspect and appraise the property and may file a
motion for retention of the property, which motion shall be granted if there
is any reasonable basis for believing that the photographs and accompanying
affidavit may be misleading.



(1976 Code, § 6-254)  (Ord. 699, passed 8-5-1982)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-514



§ 130.38  TOBACCO; POSSESSION BY MINORS.



   (A)   Possession of tobacco products by minors.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18
years to possess any tobacco products; provided that, the possession by a
person under the age of 18 years under the direct supervision of the parent
or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent’s or guardian’s
home shall not be prohibited.



      (2)   TOBACCO PRODUCTS shall be defined to mean any substance
containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars,
pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.



(1976 Code, § 6-258)



   (B)   Minors.



      (1)   Use of tobacco by minors. Whoever, being a minor under
the age of 18 years, shall smoke cigarettes or cigars, use vapor products or
alternative nicotine products, or use tobacco in any form whatever, in the
city, shall be guilty of an offense. Any minor charged with a violation of
this section may be free from prosecution if he or she furnishes evidence for
the conviction of the person or persons selling or giving him or her the
cigarettes, cigars, vapor products, alternative nicotine products or tobacco.



      (2)   Sale of tobacco to minors. Whoever shall sell, give or
furnish in any way any tobacco in any form whatever, or any cigarettes or
cigarette paper, vapor products or alternative nicotine products, to any
minor under 18 years of age is guilty of an offense.



      (3)   Misrepresentation by minor to obtain tobacco. Any person
under the age of 18 years who shall obtain cigars, tobacco, cigarettes or
cigarette material, vapor products or alternative nicotine products from a
licensee hereunder by representing that he or she is the age of 18 years or
over is guilty of an offense.



(1976 Code, § 6-260)



(Ord. 1081, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 1237, passed 7-21-1997; Ord. 1455B, passed
2-9-2015)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1418, 28-1419, 28-1427, 28-1429.02



§ 130.39  SEXUAL PREDATOR RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Findings and intent.



      (1)   The state’s legislature has found that certain sex
offenders present a high risk to commit repeat offenses and has enabled
municipalities to restrict such persons’ place of residency as provided in
the Sexual Predator Residency Restriction Act.



      (2)   (a)   Sex offenders who prey on children and who are
high risks to repeat such acts present an extreme threat to public safety.



         (b)   The cost of sex offender victimization to these
children and to society at large, while incalculable, is exorbitant.



      (3)   It is the intent of this section to serve the city’s
compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city by creating certain areas around
locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers where
certain sexual predators cannot reside.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CHILD CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed pursuant to the Child
Care Licensing Act.



      RESIDE. To sleep, live or dwell at a place, which may include
more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.



      RESIDENCE. A place where an individual sleeps, lives or dwells,
which may include more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.



      SEX OFFENDER. An individual who has been convicted of a crime
listed in Neb. RS 29-4003 and who is required to register as a sex offender
pursuant to the Sex Offender Registration Act.



      SEXUAL PREDATOR. An individual who is required to register under
the Sex Offender Registration Act, who has committed an aggravated offense as
defined in Neb. RS 29-4001.01 and who has victimized a person 18 years of age
or younger.



      SCHOOL. A public, private, denominational or parochial school
which meets the requirements for state accreditation or approval.



   (C)   Sexual predator residency restrictions; penalties; exceptions.



      (1)   Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any
sexual predator to reside within 500 feet of a school or child care facility.



      (2)   Measure of distance. For purposes of determining the
minimum distance separation, the distance shall be measured by following a
straight line from the outer property line of the residence to the nearest
outer boundary line of the school or child care facility.



      (3)   Penalties. A person who violates this section shall be
punished as provided in § 130.99 of this chapter.



      (4)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a sexual
predator who:



         (a)   Resides within a prison or correctional or
treatment facility operated by the state or a political subdivision;



         (b)   Established a residence before 7-1-2006, and has
not moved from that residence; or



         (c)   Established a residence after 7-1-2006, and the
school or child care facility triggering the restriction was established
after the initial date of the sexual predator’s residence at that location.



(1976 Code, § 6-259)  (Ord. 1386, passed 5-22-2006; Ord. 1419, passed
2-7-2011)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.40  MINORS; ENDANGERING, EMPLOYMENT AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Endangering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
having the care, custody, control or confidence of or influence over any
child to allow such child to be endangered, or the health of such child
injured, or the morals of such child to be impaired, or to willfully cause or
permit such child to be placed in such a position, business or occupation
that his or her life, health or morals will be endangered; or to torture,
torment, cruelly punish or willfully or negligently deprive such child of
necessary food, clothing or shelter, or in any other manner injure such child
unnecessarily.



(1976 Code, § 6-301)



   (B)   Employment. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to take, receive, hire or employ any child under the age of 14
years to labor in any mill, factory or in or about any business or employment
whatever within the city, during the school hours of any school day.



(1976 Code, § 6-302)



   (C)   Presence in drinking establishments prohibited.



      (1)   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any proprietor or
keeper of a tavern or beer hall:



            1.   To employ any individual under the age of 19
years for serving or selling alcoholic beverages in the course of his or her
employment;



            2.   To employ any person under the age of 16
years for removing and disposing of alcoholic liquor containers for the
convenience of the employer and customers in the course of his or her
employment as servers or busers; and



            3.   To permit any individual under the age of 19
years to be in or about such place of business after 9:00 p.m., or to obtain
or to drink any alcoholic beverage in or about such place of business, or to
bet or wager with playing cards or other gambling devices in or about such
place of business.



         (b)   For the purpose of this section, a TAVERN or BEER
HALL is defined to be any establishment located within the corporate limits
of the city where alcoholic beverages are sold and served and in which the
service of good, if served at all, is incidental to the sale of such
beverages. Service of food shall be considered incidental if the food service
generates less than one-half of the gross revenue from the operation of said
business.



      (2)   Every owner or operator of any establishment offering
for sale alcoholic beverages shall, upon request of the Mayor, City Clerk or
Chief of Police, permit access to all records of said establishment, and upon
request, furnish, for official use only in ascertaining the type of business
operated, a certified statement of the type of business operated, a certified
statement of the alcoholic beverages sold, together with the amount of sales
tax, if any, collected and remitted to the state on such sales made during
any certain designated period.



      (3)   It shall be the duty of the person who is the proprietor
or keeper of a tavern or beer hall, as defined in this section, to post
conspicuously in his or her place of business the following sign,
“Individuals Under the Age of Nineteen Years Not Allowed After 9:00
p.m.”. Failure to post such a sign shall constitute an unlawful act.



(1976 Code, § 6-303)



   (D)   False credentials. It shall be unlawful for any minor child to
make false statements or to furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or
false registration card, identification card or note or other document, or to
furnish, present or exhibit such document or documents issued to a person
other than the one presenting the same, for the purpose of gaining admission
to any prohibited place or for the purpose of procuring the sale, gift or
delivery of prohibited articles, including liquor, beer or wine.



(1976 Code, § 6-304)



   (E)   Unlawful services of others.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to engage or to
utilize the services of any other person, whether for remuneration or not, to
procure for such minor any article which the minor himself or herself is
prohibited by this section from purchasing.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether for
remuneration or not, to procure for any minor any article which the minor is
forbidden by this section from purchasing.



(1976 Code, § 6-305)



(Ord. 528, passed 3-17-1977; Ord. 685, passed 7-8-1982; Ord. 689, passed
7-29-1982; Ord. 1299, passed 1-21-2002)  Penalty, see § 130.99




OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY




§ 130.60  LARCENY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate
limits to steal any money, goods or chattels of any kind whatever.



   (B)   Any person who shall steal property of any kind, whether the
same be entirely in money or entirely property of the value of less than $300
shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1976 Code, § 6-207)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-512, 28-514



§ 130.61  CONCEALING STOLEN PROPERTY.



   Any person who receives or conceals stolen property, goods or chattels
of any kind with the intent to defraud the owner, or whoever receives or
conceals any money or other accountable receipts and evidences of ownership
shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1976 Code, § 6-208)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-513



§ 130.62  ARSON.



   Any person who willfully or maliciously sets on fire any property when
the injury or damage therefrom shall be of a less value than $35, shall be
deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1976 Code, § 6-209)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-503



§ 130.63  INJURY TO TREES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to purposely or carelessly, and
without lawful authority, cut down, carry away, injure, break down or destroy
any fruit, ornamental, shade or other tree or trees standing or growing on
any land belonging to another person or persons or on any public land in the
corporate limits. Any public service company desiring to trim or cut down any
tree, except on property owned and controlled by it, shall make an
application to the governing body to do so, and the written permit of the
governing body in accordance with its decision to allow such an action shall
constitute the only lawful authority on the part of the company to do so.



(1976 Code, § 6-210)  (Ord. 533, passed 4-21-1977)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-565 through 28-567



§ 130.64  FIRE EQUIPMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an active member of the
Municipal Fire Department to deface, destroy, handle or loiter about the
equipment and property of the Fire Department.



(1976 Code, § 6-211)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.65  FIRE HOSE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the Fire
Chief, or the Assistant Fire Chief, to drive any vehicle over the unprotected
hose of the Fire Department at any time.



(1976 Code, § 6-212)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.66  TRASH OR GARBAGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or
negligently place or throw upon the premises of another any filth, garbage,
leaves, papers or other matter to the annoyance of the owner or occupant
thereon. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a resident of the
municipality to deposit or place trash, garbage, filth, leaves, papers or
other matters in trash receptacles located within the municipality with the
result being that such trash, garbage or other items are ultimately removed
and trucked or taken to a landfill site by municipality employees; it shall
also be unlawful for any person residing within the municipality to allow
non-residents of the municipality to deposit or place trash, garbage, filth,
leaves, papers or other matters in trash receptacles belonging to municipal
residents with the ultimate result being that such trash, garbage or other
items are removed and trucked or taken to a landfill site by municipal
employees.



(1976 Code, § 6-213)  (Ord. 974, passed 7-10-1989)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-523



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500
for each offense.



      (2)   A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of such failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 6-401)



   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this
chapter, the municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate
the same, in the manner provided by law.



      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(1976 Code, § 6-402)



   (C)   (1)   Conviction of a misdemeanor under § 130.24 of this
chapter shall be punishable by a fine not less than $5, nor more than $100.



      (2)   Any such offender shall also be liable, in an action for
trespass in the name of the beneficial holder of said property, for all
damages which arise from the commission of such unlawful act.



(1976 Code, § 6-235)



   (D)   Any other person violating § 130.35(A) of this chapter shall
be served with a citation to appear in court and, upon conviction, be fined
not more than $500 for each offense, or shall be imprisoned in jail for a
period not to exceed 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.



(1976 Code, § 6-254)



   (E)   Persons convicted of violating the provisions of § 130.38(A)
of this chapter shall be punished by a monetary fine of not less than $35 and
not more than $100.



(1976 Code, § 6-258)



(Ord. 1372, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 1449, passed 12-23-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



      151.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY



      152.   TRAILER AND MOBILE HOME COURTS



      153.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



      154.   PLANNING AND ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



Section




General Provisions




   150.001   Building Inspector



   150.002   Building permits




Plumbers and Electricians




   150.015   License required



   150.016   Electricians; quality of work; exam




National Construction Codes




   150.030   Building Code



   150.031   Residential Code



   150.032   Plumbing Code



   150.033   Electrical Code



   150.034   Mobile Home Building Code



   150.035   Rental Housing Standards Code



   150.036   Mechanical Code




Moving Buildings




   150.050   “Building” defined



   150.051   Permit required



   150.052   Permit; application



   150.053   Duties of Building Inspector



   150.054   Damage deposits



   150.055   Fees and deposits



   150.056   Duties of permit holder



   150.057   Enforcement



   150.058   General license not to be issued



   150.059   Consent of property owners




Unsafe Buildings




   150.070   Definition



   150.071   Prohibition



   150.072   Determination and notice



   150.073   Hearing and appeal



   150.074   Emergency



   150.075   Special assessments



   150.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 150.001  BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   (A)   Power and authority. The Building Inspector shall be the
municipal official who shall have the duty of enforcing all building and
housing regulations as herein prescribed. He or she shall inspect all
buildings repaired, altered, built or moved in the municipality as often as
necessary to ensure compliance with all municipal ordinances. He or she shall
have the power and authority to order all work stopped on any construction,
alteration or relocation which violates any provisions prescribed herein. He
or she shall issue permission to continue any construction, alteration or
relocation when the governing body is satisfied that no provision will be
violated. If the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written
stop order within 24 hours. Such written order may be served by any municipal
police officer.



(1976 Code, § 9-101)



   (B)   Right of entry. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse
to allow the Building Inspector entry into any building or structure where
the work of construction, alteration, repair or relocation is taking place
for the purpose of making official inspections at any reasonable hour.



(1976 Code, § 9-102)



   (C)   Appeal from decision. In the event it is claimed that the true
intent and meaning of this chapter has been wrongly interpreted by the
Building Inspector; that the time allowed for compliance with any order of
the Building Inspector is too short; or that conditions peculiar to a
particular building make it unreasonably difficult to meet the literal
requirements prescribed by this chapter and the Building Inspector, the
owner, his or her agent or the occupant may file a notice of appeal within
ten days after the decision or order of the Building Inspector has been made.
The governing body shall sit and act as the Municipal Board of Appeals and
shall have the power and authority, when appealed to, to modify the decision
or order of the Building Inspector. Such a decision shall be final, subject
only to any remedy which the aggrieved person may have at law or equity.



(1976 Code, § 9-103)



   (D)   Barricades and lights. It shall be the duty of the owner,
tenant or lessee causing the construction, demolition or moving of any
building or improvement within the municipality to have during such work all
excavations, open basements, building materials and debris protected by
suitable guards or barricades by day and by warning lights at night. The
failure, neglect or refusal of said persons to erect such guards shall
constitute a violation of this section and the municipal police or the
Building Inspector shall stop all work until guards are erected and
maintained as required.



(1976 Code, § 9-104)



Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.002  BUILDING PERMITS.



   (A)   Permit required. Any person desiring to commence or proceed to
erect, construct, repair, enlarge, demolish or relocate any building or
dwelling, or cause the same to be done, shall file with the Building
Inspector an application for a building permit. The application shall be in
writing on a form to be furnished by the Building Inspector for that purpose.
Every such application shall set forth the legal description of the land upon
which the construction or relocation is to take place, the nature of the use
or occupancy, the principal dimensions, the estimated cost, the names of the
owner, architect and contractor and such other information as may be
requested thereon. The application, plans and specifications so filed with
the Building Inspector shall be checked and examined by the governing body
and, if they are found to be in conformity with the requirements of this
chapter and all other ordinances applicable thereto, the Building Inspector
shall issue the said applicant a permit. Whenever there is a discrepancy
between permit application procedures contained herein and those contained in
any building code adopted by reference, the provisions contained herein shall
govern.



(1976 Code, § 9-201)



   (B)   Permit limitation.



      (1)   If the work for which a permit has been issued shall not
have begun within one year of the date thereof, or if the construction shall
be discontinued for a period of one year, the permit shall be void.



      (2)   Before work can be resumed, a new permit shall be
obtained in the same manner and form as an original permit.



(1976 Code, § 9-202)



   (C)   Duplicate to County Assessor. Whenever a building permit is
issued for the erection, alteration or repair, of any building within the
city’s jurisdiction, and the improvement is $2,500 or more, a duplicate of
such permit shall be issued to the County Assessor.



(1976 Code, § 9-203)



   (D)   Curb and gutter installation required. Any person applying for
a building permit with regard to a residential property or any other
structural improvement in a residential district shall first be required to
demonstrate that curb and gutter, meeting the requirements of the Building
Inspector, is installed for the property which is the subject of the building
permit application.



(1976 Code, § 9-204)



(Ord. 624, passed 8-23-1979; Ord. 1292, passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 1353, passed
8-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-130 through 17-132, 17-550, 17-1001,
18-1743




PLUMBERS AND ELECTRICIANS




§ 150.015  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any plumber wishing to do business in connection with the
water works or sewer system of the municipality shall, before receiving a
license, file in the office of the City Clerk an application in writing
asking to become a licensed plumber of the municipality, which application
shall set forth his or her name and the name of each member of his or her
firm, if any, his or her place of business and stating his or her willingness
to be governed by the rules and regulations now or to be hereafter adopted by
the City Council concerning his or her business. Before receiving a license,
he or she shall also file in the office of the City Clerk, proof of liability
insurance acceptable to the City Clerk, which liability insurance shall be
renewed annually. The licensee shall indemnify and keep harmless the city and
the City Clerk from all liability from accidents and damages arising from any
negligence or unskillfulness in doing or protecting his or her work, or from
any unfaithful or inadequate work done in pursuance of his or her license,
and that he or she will also restore the streets, sidewalks and pavement in
as good condition as he or she found them and keep and maintain the same in
good order to the satisfaction of the City Clerk and City Council for a
period of six months thereafter; and that he or she will pay all fines
imposed upon him or her for the violation of any rules and regulations
adopted by the said municipality and in force during the term of his or her
license. The license herein mentioned shall be issued by the Clerk, under the
seal of the City, when ordered by the Council. The fee charged by the City
Clerk for the issuance of said license shall be $25 annually, with the
effective date of the license being from January 1 to December 31 of each
year.



(1976 Code, § 10-401)



   (B)   Any electrician wishing to do business in the municipality
shall, before receiving a license, file in the office of the City Clerk an
application in writing asking to become a licensed electrician of the
municipality, which application shall set forth his or her name and the name
of each member of his or her firm, if any, his or her place of business, and
stating his or her willingness to be governed by the rules and regulations
now or to be hereafter adopted by the City Council concerning his or her
business. Before receiving a license, he or she shall also file in the office
of the City Clerk, proof of liability insurance acceptable to the City Clerk,
which liability insurance shall be renewed annually. The licensee shall
indemnify and keep harmless the city and the City Clerk from all liability
from accidents and damages arising from any negligence or unskillfulness in
doing or protecting his or her work, or from any unfaithful or inadequate
work done in pursuance of his or her license; and he or she will also restore
the streets, sidewalks and pavement in as good condition as he or she found
them and keep and maintain the same in good order to the satisfaction of the
City Clerk and City Council for a period of six months thereafter; and that
he or she will pay all fines imposed upon him or her for the violation of any
rules and regulations adopted by the said municipality and in force during
the term of his or her license. The license herein mentioned shall be issued
by the Clerk, under the seal of the city, when ordered by the Council. The
fee by the City Clerk for the issuance of said license shall be $25 annually,
with the effective date of the license being from January 1 to December 31 of
each year.



(1976 Code, § 10-402)



(Ord. 1274, passed 1-10-2000)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.016  ELECTRICIANS; QUALITY OF WORK; EXAM.



   (A)   Forfeiture of license. Any electrician who shall be guilty of
violation of any of the rules and regulations adopted by the City Council
shall forfeit his or her license, such violations shall be determined by the
City Council at a hearing to be held at any regular or special meeting. A
forfeiture of the license of any electrician shall operate as a suspension of
the license held by the co-partner in the same business, or by any person in
his, her or their employ.



(1976 Code, § 10-403)



   (B)   Quality of work. All electrical work shall be skillfully done
and in the manner required by the City Council and shall be subject to
inspection and approval; the quality and pattern of all appurtenances shall,
in like manner, be subject to approval.



(1976 Code, § 10-404)



   (C)   License required. No person shall install any electric
apparatus within the corporate limits without first having obtained a license
to do so as hereinafter provided. In addition, no licensed electrical
contractor, master electrician or journeyman electrician may lend his or her
license to any person or knowingly permit the use thereof by another. The
Electrical Inspector shall recommend and the Examining Board shall issue
licenses to those persons who have been issued a valid and unexpired
electrician’s license by the state; provided, said persons shall have
complied with the other terms and conditions precedent to the issuance of
licenses as required in this subchapter. In the event that the applicant
holds a license issued by the state, the license required herein shall be in
the form of an occupation tax certificate. Application for a license shall be
made to the Utilities Superintendent in writing showing the name and
residence of the applicant, the business location of the applicant and such
other information as may be required.



(1976 Code, § 10-405)



   (D)   Examination.



      (1)   In the event that the applicant is not a holder of a
valid and unexpired license issued by the state, or holds a current license
which is of a classification less than the classification needed to do the
work proposed, the applicant shall submit to an examination to determine his
or her fitness and competency for executing the work covered by the license
for which application is made, which examination shall be given by the
Examining Board for Electricians. Upon payment of the required fees, such
applicant shall receive such license, after having shown himself or herself
to be fit, competent and qualified to the satisfaction of the Examining Board
by said examination to receive such license. Any person who fails to pass the
required examination shall not be eligible to take the examination again
until six months have elapsed, but, within six months, he or she may take an
examination for a lesser grade of license.



      (2)   The examination shall consist of two parts:



         (a)   Written examination, which shall count as 50%; and



         (b)   Personal interview and past experience, which
shall count as 50%.



      (3)   The examination shall be passed to the satisfaction of
the Examining Board. A grade of 75% shall be considered as passing. An
examination fee set by resolution of the governing body shall be paid to the
Utilities Superintendent upon application for a license.



(1976 Code, § 10-406)



   (E)   Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration.
Registration certificates shall expire on December 31 of the year in which
they are issued and shall not be assignable. Certificates of registration, at
the time of their expiration, may be renewed upon recommendation of the
Examining Board, without an examination, upon payment of the required
registration fee. Any person registered as a master electrician who does not
renew his or her certificate of registration by July 1 after the expiration
of same, shall pay any registration fee required by this chapter for a master
electrician, and shall again prove his or her qualification to the Examining
Board before such person can again be registered hereunder.



(1976 Code, § 10-407)



(Ord. 703, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 704, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 705, passed
8-5-1982)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 81-566, 81-579, 81-586, 81-592, 81-5,100




NATIONAL CONSTRUCTION CODES




§ 150.030  BUILDING CODE.



   The International Building Code, 2012 Edition, including appendix
chapters applicable, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is
hereby adopted as the Building Code of the city for establishing the minimum
regulations governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; providing, the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and providing
for the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and use and for the demolition of such buildings and structures. Each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereby, as if
fully set out in this section with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in this section. The Building Code, printed in
book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all
amended editions as though printed in full herein insofar as such code does
not conflict with the statutes of the state. One copy of the Building Code is
on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and is available for public
inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of the Building Code shall
be controlling throughout the municipality and throughout its zoning
jurisdiction.



(1976 Code, § 9-501)  (Ord. 1352, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 1426A, passed
10-24-2011; Ord. 1436, passed 11-4-2013)



§ 150.031  RESIDENTIAL CODE.



   The International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, including appendix
chapters applicable, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is
hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the city for regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of one- and two- family dwellings and townhouses not
more than three stories in height in the city and providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor. Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Residential Code are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in this section. The Residential Code, printed in book or pamphlet
form, is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions
as though printed in full herein insofar as such code does not conflict with
the statutes of the state. One copy of the Residential Code is on file at the
office of the Municipal Clerk and is available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The provisions of the Residential Code shall be controlling
throughout the city and throughout the zoning jurisdiction.



(1976 Code, § 9-502)  (Ord. 1352, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 1426A, passed
10-24-2011; Ord. 1431, passed 5-21-2012; Ord. 1436, passed 11-4-2013)



§ 150.032  PLUMBING CODE.



   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for
safe and stable installation, methods of connection and uses of materials in
the installation of plumbing and heating, the International Plumbing Code,
2012 Edition, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and
printed in book or pamphlet form, together with a standard code to prevent
the backflow and backsiphonage of harmful material which can contaminate the
public water system, printed by the city in pamphlet form, are hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though
printed in full herein insofar as said codes do not conflict with the
statutes of the state. Copies of the Plumbing Code and a standard code to
prevent backflow and backsiphonage are on file at the office of the Municipal
Clerk and are available for public inspection during city office hours. The
provisions of the Plumbing Code and the standard code to prevent the backflow
and backsiphonage shall be controlling throughout the municipality and
throughout its zoning jurisdiction.



(1976 Code, § 9-503)  (Ord. 1427, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 947, passed
5-2-1988; Ord. 1027, passed 2-18-1991)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1001, 18-132, 19-902



§ 150.033  ELECTRICAL CODE.



   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for
safe and fire-proof installation, methods of connection and uses of materials
in the installation of electrical wiring and appliances, the National
Electrical Code, 2012 Edition, as recommended and published by the National
Fire Protection Association, and printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby
incorporated by reference, in addition to all amended editions as though
printed in full herein insofar as said code does not conflict with the
statutes of the state. Copies of the Electrical Code are on file at the
office of the Municipal Clerk and are available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The provisions of the Electrical Code shall be controlling
throughout the municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.



(1976 Code, § 9-504)  (Ord. 1427, passed 5-7-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1001,18-132,19-902



§ 150.034  MOBILE HOME BUILDING CODE.



   The rules, regulations and requirements as set forth in the Standards
for Mobile Homes, National Fire Protection Association, 2011 Edition, and any
supplements and amendments thereto hereafter made or adopted by the National
Fire Protection Association are hereby incorporated and made a part of the
Code as though spread at large herein. Copies of the Mobil Home Building Code
are on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and are available for public
inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of this Code shall be
controlling throughout the municipality and throughout its zoning
jurisdiction.



(1976 Code, § 9-505)  (Ord. 1427, passed 5-7-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1001, 18-132



§ 150.035  RENTAL HOUSING STANDARDS CODE.



   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and
requirements for safe and stable design, construction, uses of materials and
maintenance of rental residential dwellings, the regulations promulgated by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and known as “Section
8 Existing Housing Program”, published by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development, and printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though
printed in full herein insofar as said regulations do not conflict with the
statutes of the state. The City Council shall have the authority to establish
regulations differing from the Section 8 Existing Housing Program, by
resolution, and any such resolution is hereby incorporated by reference, and,
together with the regulations known as Section 8 Existing Housing Program,
shall constitute the Rental Housing Standards Code for the municipality.
Three copies of the Rental Housing Standards Code are on file at the office
of the Municipal Clerk and are available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The provisions of the Rental Housing Standards Code shall be
controlling throughout the municipality.



   (B)   To ensure compliance with the Rental Housing Standards Code,
every residential dwelling unit within the municipality which is not occupied
by a person who is a record title owner of said unit, shall be inspected by
the municipality and brought into compliance with this Code by the owner or
owners of said dwelling at the time of a change of occupancy of said unit.



   (C)   An inspection shall not be required if, within the two-year
period immediately preceding the change of occupancy, a change of occupancy
occurred in the unit which resulted in an inspection and certification of
compliance with the Rental Housing Standards Code. All costs of compliance
with the Rental Housing Standards Code shall be paid by the owner of the
unit. The owner of the dwelling shall pay a fee of $25 for the inspection
required under this section. The Municipal Building Inspector is hereby
authorized to reduce the required inspection fee to no less than $10 for each
rental dwelling unit for owners of multiple rental dwelling units who agree
to have a sufficient number of said owner’s dwelling units inspected at
least once every two years regardless of change in occupancy. The Building
Inspector shall determine eligibility for the reduced inspection fee.



   (D)   The owner of a residential dwelling unit shall have a period
of 60 days from the date of initial inspection to bring the unit into
compliance with the Code. An additional 60-day period shall be allowed, upon
payment of a fee of $25 for said extension to the city; provided that, the
extension fee must be paid prior to the expiration of the initial 60-day
period. Any further extension must be requested by the City Council prior to
the expiration of the original period allowed for compliance, and the City
Council shall have the authority to grant or deny requests for additional
extensions of time.



   (E)   An owner of a residential dwelling unit who has failed to
report a change of occupancy which requires an inspection; failed to allow
the municipality to inspect a residential dwelling covered by this section;
failed to pay fees required under this section; failed to bring a dwelling
into compliance with the Code within the time allowed to said owner, or an
owner in violation of any other aspect of this section, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and a new violation shall be deemed to have been committed for
each 24 hours of continued non-compliance.



   (F)   Notwithstanding the above, the Municipal Building Inspector
shall have the authority to order an inspection of any residential dwelling
covered by this section for the purpose of determining whether or not said
dwelling is in compliance with the Code. No fee shall be required for the
inspection ordered by the Building Inspector under this provision. If it is
determined, after any such inspection, that a dwelling is not in compliance,
all owners of said dwelling shall be in violation of this section until said
dwelling is brought into compliance with this section, and a new violation
shall be deemed to have been committed for each 24 hours of continued
non-compliance.



(1976 Code, § 9-506)  (Ord. 1045, passed 12-9-1991; Ord. 1102, passed
12-6-1993; Ord. 1211, passed 3-18-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1001, 18,132, 19-902



§ 150.036  MECHANICAL CODE.



   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems,
incinerations or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances in the city,
the Uniform Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, published by the international
Conference of Building Officials, and published in book or pamphlet form, is
hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amended additions as
though printed in full herein insofar as said Code does not conflict with the
statutes of the state. Three copies of the Mechanical Code are on file at the
office of the Municipal Clerk and are available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The provisions of the mechanical code shall be controlling
throughout the municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.



(1976 Code, § 9-507)  (Ord. 1085, passed 3-8-1993)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17,1001, 18-132, 19-902




MOVING BUILDINGS




§ 150.050  “BUILDING” DEFINED.



   (A)   The word BUILDING, for purposes of this subchapter, shall mean
a structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed enclosure for
person, animals or property and used for residential, business, mercantile,
storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly, educational or
recreational purposes.



   (B)   A structure which, when loaded, does not violate any width,
height, length or weight restrictions for movement upon the public highways
of the state shall not fall within this definition.



(1976 Code, § 9-301)  (Ord. 1106, passed 6-6-1994)   



§ 150.051  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway,
street or alley within the corporate limits of the city without first
obtaining a permit from the City Clerk.



(1976 Code, § 9-302)  (Ord. 1106, passed 6-6-1994)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.052  PERMIT; APPLICATION.



   A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application for such permit with the city’s Building Inspector.



   (A)   Form. The application shall be made in writing, upon forms
provided by the Building Inspector or otherwise and shall be filed in the
office of the Building Inspector.



   (B)   Contents. The application shall set forth:



      (1)   A description of the building proposed to be moved,
giving street number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and
condition of exterior and interior;



      (2)   A legal description of the lot from which the building
is to be moved, giving the lot, block and tract number, if located in the
city;



      (3)   A legal description of the lot to which it is proposed
such building be moved, giving lot, block and tract number, if located in the
city;



      (4)   The portion of the lot to be occupied by the building
when moved;



      (5)   The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across
which the building is proposed to be moved;



      (6)   Proposed moving date and hours; and



      (7)   Any additional information which the Building Inspector
shall find necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should issue.



   (C)   Accompanying papers.



      (1)   Tax certificate. The owner of the building to be moved
shall file with the application sufficient evidence that the building and lot
from which it is to be removed are free of liens and that all taxes and any
city assessments or utility charges against the same are paid in full.



      (2)   Certificate of ownership or entitlement. The applicant
shall file with the application a written statement or bill signed by the
owner, or other sufficient evidence, that he or she is entitled to move the
building.



   (D)   Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in
the amount of $50.



(1976 Code, § 9-303)  (Ord. 1106, passed 6-6-1994)   



§ 150.053  DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   (A)   Inspection. The Building Inspector shall inspect the building
and the applicant’s equipment to determine whether the standards for
issuance of a permit are met.



   (B)   Standards for issuance. The Building Inspector shall refuse to
issue a permit if he or she finds:



      (1)   Any application requirement or any fee or deposit
requirement has not been complied with;



      (2)   The building is too large to move without endangering
persons or property within the city;



      (3)   The building is in such a state of deterioration or
disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved
without endangering persons or property within the city;



      (4)   The building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the
purpose for which moved, if the removal location is within the city;



      (5)   The applicant’s equipment is unsafe and that the
persons or property would be endangered by its use;



      (6)   Zoning or other ordinances would be violated by the
building in its new location; and



      (7)   For any other reason persons or property in the city
would be endangered by the moving of the building.



   (C)   Estimate to the city. The Building Inspector shall procure
from the city’s Street Department and the city’s Utilities Department an
estimate of the expense that will be incurred in removing and replacing any
electric wires, street lamps or pole lines belonging to the city or any other
property of the city, the removal and replacement of which will be required,
reason of the moving of the building through the city, together with the cost
of materials necessary to be used in making such removals and replacements.
Prior to the issuance of the permit, the Building Inspector shall require of
the applicant a deposit of a sum of money equal to the amount of the
estimated expense or $500, whichever is greater.



   (D)   Notice. When the Building Inspector shall determine that the
moving of a building shall interfere with any gas mains, telephone or
telegraphs poles or wires, cable television wires or equipment, or other
public or private facilities, said Building Inspector shall give notice to
the person, business or franchise owning such facilities of the provisions of
any proposed moving permit.



   (E)   Designate streets for removal. The Building Inspector shall
procure from the Public Streets and Utilities Departments a list of the
designated streets over which the building may be moved. The Building
Inspector shall have the list approved by the Chief of Police and shall
reproduce the list upon the permit in writing. In making their
determinations, the Street Department and Utilities Department and Chief of
Police shall act to assure maximum safety to persons and property in the city
and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public streets.



(1976 Code, § 9-304)  (Ord. 1106, passed 6-6-1994)



§ 150.054  DAMAGE DEPOSITS.



   (A)   General. An application hereunder shall be accompanied by a
cash deposit in the sum of $10,000 as an indemnity for any damage which the
city may sustain by reason of damage or injury to any highway, street or
alley, sidewalk fire hydrant or other property of the city, which may be
caused by or be incidental to the removal of any building over, along and
across any street in the city and to indemnify the city against any claim of
damages to persons or private property, and to satisfy any claims by private
individuals arising out of, caused by or incidental to the moving of any
building over, along or across any street in the city. This damage deposit
shall be in addition to the permit fee and deposit for expense to the city.



   (B)   Bond in lieu of deposit.



      (1)   Any person filing an application hereunder may, in lieu
of the general cash deposit required above, file with the Building Inspector
a bond, approved as to form by the City Attorney, executed by a bonding or
surety company authorized to do business in the state, in the amount of
$100,000, conditioned upon the assurance that this and other applicable
ordinances and laws will be complied with.



      (2)   Such bond shall run to the city for the use and benefit
of any person or persons intended to be protected thereby and shall be
conditioned on the payment of any damage to public or private property and
the payment of any damages or losses resulting from any malfeasance,
misfeasance or non- feasance or negligence in connection with any of the
activities or conditions upon which the permit applied for is granted.



   (C)   Insurance policy in lieu of deposit. Any person filing an
application hereunder may, in lieu of the general cash deposit required
above, file with the Building Inspector a liability insurance policy, issued
by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, and approved
as to form by the City Attorney, in the same amount and providing the same
protection as would be required for bond hereunder.



(1976 Code, § 9-305)  (Ord. 1106, passed 6-6-1994; Ord. 1422, passed
5-9-2011)



§ 150.055  FEES AND DEPOSITS.



   (A)   Deposit. The Building Inspector shall deposit all fees and
deposits and bonds or insurance policies with the City Clerk.



   (B)   Return upon non-issuance. Upon his or her refusal to issue a
permit, the Building Inspector shall return to the applicant all deposits,
bonds and insurance policies. Permit fees filed with the application shall
not be returned.



   (C)   Return upon allowance for expense.



      (1)   After the building has been removed the Building
Inspector shall furnish the City Clerk with a written statement of all
expenses incurred in removing and replacing all property belonging to the
city, and of all material used in making or the removal or replacement
together with a statement of all damage caused to or inflicted upon property
belonging to the city.



      (2)   The City Clerk shall authorize the Building Inspector to
return to the applicant all deposits after the City Clerk deducts the sum
sufficient to pay for all of the costs and expenses and for all damage done
to the property of the city by reason of the removal of the building.



      (3)   Permit fees deposits with the application shall not be
returned.



(1976 Code, § 9-306)  (Ord. 981,passed 9-25-1989; Ord. 1106, passed
6-6-1994)



§ 150.056  DUTIES OF PERMIT HOLDER.



   Every permittee under this subchapter shall:



   (A)   Use designated streets. Move a building only over streets
designated for such use in the written permit;



   (B)   Notify of revised moving time. Notify the Building Inspector
in writing of a desired change in moving date and hours as proposed in the
application;



   (C)   Notify of damage. Notify the Building Inspector in writing of
any and all damage done to property belonging to the city within 24 hours
after the damage or injury has occurred;



   (D)   Display lights. Cause red lights to be displayed during the
nighttime on every side of the building, while standing on a street, in such
manner as to warn the public of the obstruction, and shall at all times erect
and maintain barricades across the streets in such manner as to protect the
public from damage or injury by reason of the removal of the building;



   (E)   Comply with governing law. Comply with the Building Code, the
Fire Code, the zoning ordinances and all other applicable ordinances and laws
upon relocating the building in the city;



   (F)   Pay expense of officer. Pay the expense of a traffic officer
ordered by the city to accompany the movement of the building to protect the
public from injury;



   (G)   Clear old premises. Remove all rubbish and materials and fill
all excavations to existing grade at the original building site so that the
premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition; and



   (H)   Remove service connections. See that the sewer line is
properly plugged, the water shut off, electricity disconnected and all meters
returned to the city office. The permittee shall notify the gas and cable
television companies to remove their services.



(1976 Code, § 9-307)  (Ord. 1106, passed 6-6-1994)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.057  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Enforcing officers. The Building Inspector, Police Department
and City Clerk shall enforce and carry out the requirements of this
subchapter.



   (B)   Permittee liable for expense above deposit. The permittee
shall be liable for any expense, damages or costs in excess of deposited
amounts or securities, and the City Attorney shall prosecute an action
against the permittee in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery
of such excessive amounts.



   (C)   Premises left unsafe. The city shall proceed to do the work
necessary to leaving the original premises in a safe and sanitary condition,
where permittee does not comply with the requirements of this subchapter, and
the cost thereof shall be charged against the general deposit.



(1976 Code, § 9-308)  (Ord. 1106, passed 6-6-1994)



§ 150.058  GENERAL LICENSE NOT TO BE ISSUED.



   There shall be no license or general permit given to anyone to move
buildings at will or generally within the city.



(1976 Code, § 9-309)  (Ord. 1106, passed 6-6-1994)



§ 150.059  CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNERS.



   Buildings, other than modular buildings occupied for less than one year
and other buildings of new construction occupied for less than one year,
which are otherwise permitted to be moved, shall not be moved unless written
consent and approval is signed by all property owners abutting directly
across the street from, and three-fourths of all property owners within 150
feet of the lot to which such building is to be moved.



(1976 Code, § 9-310)  (Ord. 1106, passed 6-6-1994)  Penalty, see § 150.999




UNSAFE BUILDINGS




§ 150.070  DEFINITION.



   The term UNSAFE BUILDING, as used in this subchapter, is hereby defined
to mean and include any building, shed, fence or other human-made structure
which is dangerous to the public health because of its condition, and which
may cause or aid in the spread of disease or injury to the health of the
occupants of it or neighboring structures; which because of faulty
construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause is especially
liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard; which, by reason of
faulty construction or any other cause, is liable to cause injury or damage
by the collapse or fall of all or any part of such structure. Any such unsafe
building in the municipality is hereby declared to be a nuisance.



(1976 Code, § 9-401)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01



§ 150.071  PROHIBITION.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any unsafe
building in the municipality and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant
or person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain
in an unsafe condition or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied
while it is in an unsafe condition.



(1976 Code, § 9-402)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01



§ 150.072  DETERMINATION AND NOTICE.



   (A)   Whenever the Building Inspector, the Fire Official, the Health
Official or the governing body shall be of the opinion that any building or
structure in the municipality is an unsafe building, he or she shall file a
written statement to this effect with the Municipal Clerk. The Clerk shall,
thereupon, cause the property to be posted accordingly and shall file a copy
of such determination in the office of the county’s Register of Deeds, and
shall serve written notice upon the owner thereof, and upon the occupant
thereof, if any, by certified mail or by personal service. Such notice shall
state that the building has been declared to be in an unsafe condition; and
that such dangerous condition must be removed or remedied by repairing or
altering the building or by demolishing it; and that the condition must be
remedied within 60 days from the date of receipt. Such notice may be in the
following terms:



 


To ________________________________________________ (owner-occupant of
premises) of the premise known and described as                    
                                                   
                                                  .

 

You are hereby notified that                                
                                      (describe building)
on the premises above mentioned has been determined to be an unsafe building
and a nuisance after inspection by ___________________________________ . The
causes for this decision are ________________________________ (here insert
the facts as to the dangerous condition).

 

You must remedy this condition or demolish the building within 60 days from
the date of receipt of this notice or the municipality will proceed to do so.
Appeal of this determination may be made to the governing body, acting as the
Board of Appeals, by filing with the Municipal Clerk within ten days from the
date of receipt of this notice a request for a hearing.



 



   (B)   If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith
or taken an appeal from the determination of the officer or employee finding
that a dangerous building exists within ten days from the time when this
notice is served upon such person by personal service or certified mail, the
Building Inspector may, upon orders of the governing body, proceed to remedy
the condition or demolish the unsafe building.



(1976 Code, § 9-403)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01



§ 150.073  HEARING AND APPEAL.



   (A)   Upon receiving the notice to repair or demolish the building,
the owner of the building, within the time stipulated, may in writing to the
Municipal Clerk request a hearing before the governing body, sitting as the
Board of Appeals, to present reasons why the building should not be repaired
or demolished. The governing body shall grant such hearing within ten days
from the date of receiving the request.



   (B)   A written notice of the governing body’s decision following
the hearing shall be sent to the property owner by certified mail. If the
governing body rejects the appeal, the owner shall have five days from the
sending of the decision to begin repair or demolition and removal. If, after
the five-day period, the owner has not begun work, the governing body shall
proceed to cause such work to be done; provided, the property owner may
appeal such decision to the appropriate court for adjudication during which
proceedings the decision of the governing body shall be stayed.



   (C)   Where the municipality has not adopted a building code, the
statutes of the state relating to bonded indebtedness and collection of
delinquent taxes shall apply.



(1976 Code, § 9-404)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01



§ 150.074  EMERGENCY.



   Where any unsafe building or structure poses an immediate danger to the
health, safety or general welfare of any person or persons, and the owner
fails to remedy the situation in a reasonable time after notice by the
Building Inspector to do so, the municipality may summarily repair or
demolish and remove such building or structure.



(1976 Code, § 9-405)



§ 150.075  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   If any owner of any building or structure fails, neglects or
refuses to comply with notice by or on behalf of the municipality to repair,
rehabilitate or demolish and remove a building or structure which is unsafe
and a public nuisance, the municipality may proceed with the work specified
in the notice to the property owner. A statement of the cost of such work
shall be transmitted to the governing body.



   (B)   The governing body may:



      (1)   Levy the cost as a special assessment against the lot or
real estate upon which the building or structure is located and such special
assessment shall be a lien on the real estate and shall be collected in the
manner provided for special assessments; or



      (2)   Collect the cost from the owner of the building or
structure and enforce the collection by civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction.



(1976 Code, § 9-406)  (Ord. 1020, passed 1-21-1991)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01, 77-1725



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500
for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of such failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 9-601)



      (2)   (a)   Whenever a nuisance exists, as defined in this
chapter, the municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate
the same, in the manner provided by law.



         (b)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(1976 Code, § 9-602)



   (B)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of §§ 150.015 and 150.016 of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500
for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of such failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 10-1201)



(Ord. 1449, passed 12-23-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722



CHAPTER 151:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY



Section




General Provisions




   151.001   Cutting curbs



   151.002   Utilities using municipal property; fee



   151.003   Railroad companies




Municipal Property




   151.015   Definition



   151.016   Maintenance and control



   151.017   Sale and conveyance of real property



   151.018   Sale and conveyance of personal property



   151.019   Obstructions



   151.020   Weeds



   151.021   Acquisition of property; construction and the like



   151.022   Public works involving architecture or engineering




Sidewalks




   151.035   Overhanging branches



   151.036   Sidewalks to be kept clean



   151.037   Obstructions



   151.038   Repair



   151.039   Construction by owner



   151.040   Construction by municipality; bids



   151.041   Construction by petition




Streets




   151.055   Names and numbers



   151.056   Opening, improving or vacating



   151.057   Excavations



   151.058   Driving stakes



   151.059   Mixing concrete



   151.060   Harmful liquids



   151.061   Eave and gutter spouts



   151.062   Construction notice



   151.063   Pipe lines and wires



   151.064   Street and utility installation; location



   151.065   Construction; assessment



   151.066   Improvements



   151.067   Deferral from special assessments



   151.068   Driveway approaches



   151.069   Vacating public ways; procedure



   151.070   Operation of vehicles



 



   151.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 151.001  CUTTING CURBS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut into any paving,
curb or sidewalk for the purpose of constructing a driveway or any other
purpose whatsoever without first having obtained a written permit from the
governing body therefor. Before any person shall obtain a permit, he or she
shall inform the Municipal Clerk of the place where such cutting is to be
done, and it shall be Street Commissioner’s duty to inspect the place of
entry into the paving, sidewalk or curb, before the same is cut. When cutting
into any paving, it shall be the duty of the party to cut the paving under
such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the governing body or the
Municipal Engineer. When the applicant is ready to close the opening made, he
or she shall inform the Street Commissioner, who shall supervise and inspect
the materials used and the work done in closing the opening. It shall be
discretionary with the governing body to order the Street Commissioner, under
the supervision and inspection of the Municipal Engineer or the committee of
the governing body on the streets and alleys, to do the work of cutting and
closing the paving and charge the costs thereof to the party who obtained
such permit. The governing body may consent to the work of cutting and
closing the paving to be done by the party holding such permit. Before any
permit is issued by the governing body, the applicant for such permit shall
deposit with the Municipal Treasurer a sum set by resolution of the governing
body for all paving, curb or sidewalk to be cut. Such sum shall be set on a
per square foot cost of construction basis. The deposit shall be retained by
the municipality for the purpose of replacing the paving, curb or sidewalk,
in the event the work is done by the municipality. In the event the
municipality elects to require the applicant to replace the paving, curb or
sidewalk, the deposit shall be retained by the municipality until the work is
completed to the satisfaction of the Street Commissioner or of the committee
of the governing body on streets and alleys.



   (B)   In addition to making the deposit above set forth, the
applicant shall, before any permit is issued, execute a bond to the
municipality with a good and sufficient surety or sureties to be approved by
the governing body in a sum set by resolution of the governing body.



(1976 Code, § 8-401)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.002  UTILITIES USING MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; FEE.



   (A)   Franchise fee imposed. The City Council hereby determines that
the municipality incurs expenses and liabilities because of the use by
utility systems operating within the municipality on public rights-of-way and
easements belonging to the city and that said utilities shall henceforth make
payment for such expenses and liabilities in the form of franchise fee
payable to the city, as hereinafter set forth.



(1976 Code, § 8-501)



   (B)   Amount of franchise fee. There is hereby assessed against each
public utility making use of public rights-of-way and easements located
within the city a franchise fee equal to 8% of such utility’s gross billing
of revenues from sales within the jurisdiction of the city; provided that,
this franchise fee shall not apply to any privately owned utility located in
the municipality presently operating under a franchise granted by the
municipality.



(1976 Code, § 8-502)



   (C)   Franchise fee; monthly payment. Each utility subject to the
provisions of this section shall pay to the City Treasurer on a time schedule
established by the said City Clerk a monthly payment equal to 8% of the
utility’s gross receipts for such month derived from sales of its service
or product located within the jurisdiction of the city. Such utility shall
make available to the City Treasurer a monthly report or statement showing
the amount of total gross receipts which are the basis for which payment of
franchise fees described herein are paid to the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 8-503)



(Ord. 1012, passed 10-22-1990)



§ 151.003  RAILROAD COMPANIES.



   (A)   Safe crossings. It shall be the duty of every railroad company
doing business in, or traveling through, the municipality to keep in a
suitable, and safe condition the crossings and right-of-way in the
municipality. If any such crossing shall at any time fall into disrepair and
become unsafe, or inconvenient for public travel, the governing body may, by
resolution, call upon the said company to make whatever repairs that they may
deem necessary to correct the dangerous condition. Notice of the said
resolution shall be served upon the local agent of the said company. In the
event that the railroad shall fail, or neglect to repair, and correct the
said condition as aforesaid within 48 hours, neglect for each 24 hours
thereafter shall be deemed, and is hereby made a separate, and distinct
offense against the provisions herein.



(1976 Code, § 10-601)



   (B)   Lighting. It shall be the duty of all railroad companies
owning, operating and maintaining a railroad through the municipality to
sufficiently light all crossings and to install as many signal systems as the
governing body shall deem necessary at the expense of the said company.



(1976 Code, § 10-602)  Penalty, see § 151.999



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-143, 17-144, 17-561




MUNICIPAL PROPERTY




§ 151.015  DEFINITION.



   The term SIDEWALK SPACE, as used herein, shall mean that portion of a
street between curb lines and adjacent property lines.



(1976 Code, § 8-101)



§ 151.016  MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL.



   The governing body shall have the care, supervision and control of all
public highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public squares and commons within
the municipality, and shall cause the same to be kept open and in repair and
free from nuisances.



(1976 Code, § 8-102)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-567



§ 151.017  SALE AND CONVEYANCE OF REAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (G) below, the power of the
municipality to convey any real property owned by it, including land used for
park purposes and public squares, except real property used in the operation
of public utilities, shall be exercised by resolution, directing the sale at
public auction or by sealed bid of that property and the manner and terms of
such sales; except that, the property shall not be sold at public auction or
by sealed bid when:



      (1)   The property is being sold in compliance with the
requirements of federal or state grants or programs;



      (2)   The property is being conveyed to another public agency;
or



      (3)   The property consists of streets and alleys.



   (B)   The governing body may establish a minimum price for real
property at which bidding shall begin or shall serve as a minimum for a
sealed bid.



   (C)   After the passage of the resolution directing the sale, notice
of all proposed sales of property described in division (A) above and the
terms of such sales shall be published once each week for three consecutive
weeks in a legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the
municipality.



   (D)   (1)   If, within 30 days after the third publication of the
notice, a remonstrance petition against the sale is signed by registered
voters of the municipality equal in number to 30% of the registered voters of
the municipality voting at the last regular municipality election held
therein and is filed with the governing body, that property shall not then,
nor within one year thereafter, be sold. If the date of filing the petition
falls upon a Saturday Sunday, or legal holiday, the signatures shall be
collected within the 30-day period, but the filing shall be considered timely
if filed or postmarked on or before the next business day.



      (2)   Upon receipt of the remonstrance, the governing body,
with the aid and assistance of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk,
shall determine the validity and sufficiency of signatures on the petition.
The governing body shall deliver the petition to the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk by hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials, or by
certified mail, return receipt requested.



      (3)   Upon receipt of the petition, the Election Commissioner
or County Clerk shall issue to the governing body a written receipt that the
petition is in the custody of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk. The
Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall compare the signature of each
person signing the petition with the voter registration records to determine
if each signer was a registered voter on or before the date on which the
petition was filed with the governing body. The Election Commissioner or
County Clerk shall also compare the signer’s printed name, street and
number or voting precinct, and municipality or post office address with the
voter registration records to determine whether the signer was a registered
voter. The signature and address shall be presumed to be valid only if the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk determines that the printed name,
street and number or voting precinct, and municipality or post office address
match the registration records and that the registration was received on or
before the date on which the petition was filed with the governing body. The
determinations of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk may be rebutted
by any credible evidence which the governing body find sufficient. The
express purpose of the comparison of names and addresses with the voter
registration records, in addition to helping to determine the validity of the
petition, the sufficiency of the petition and the qualifications of the
signer, shall be to prevent fraud and misrepresentation in the petition
process.



      (4)   Upon completion of the comparison of names and addresses
with the voter registration records, the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk shall prepare in writing a certification under seal setting forth the
name and address of each signer found not to be a registered voter and the
signature page number and line number where the name is found and, if the
reason for the invalidity of the signature or address is other than the
non-registration of the signer, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
shall set forth the reason for the invalidity of the signature. If the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk determines that a signer has affixed
his or her signature more than once to the remonstrance and that .only one
person is registered by that name, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
shall prepare in writing a certification under seal setting forth the name of
the duplicate signature and shall count only the earliest dated signature.



      (5)   The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall, certify
to the governing body the number of valid signatures necessary to constitute
a valid remonstrance. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall deliver
the remonstrance and the certifications to the governing body within 40 days
after the receipt of the remonstrance from the governing body. The delivery
shall be by hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials or by certified
mail return receipt requested. Not more than 20 signatures on one signature
page shall be counted.



      (6)   The governing body shall, within 30 days after the
receipt of the remonstrance and certification from the Election Commissioner
or County Clerk, hold a public hearing to review the remonstrance and
certifications and receive testimony regarding them. The governing body
shall, following the hearing, vote on whether or not the remonstrance is
valid and shall uphold the remonstrance if sufficient valid signatures have
been received.



   (E)   Real estate now owned or hereafter owned by the municipality
may be conveyed without consideration to the state for state armory sites or,
if acquired for state armory sites, shall be conveyed strictly in accordance
with the conditions of Neb. RS 18-1001 through 18-1006.



   (F)   Following passage of the resolution directing a sale,
publishing of the notice of the proposed sale and passing of the 30-day
right-of-remonstrance period, the property shall then be sold. The sale shall
be confirmed by passage of an ordinance stating the name of the purchaser and
terms of the sale.



   (G)   Divisions (A) through (F) above shall not apply to the sale of
real property if the authorizing resolution directs the sale of real
property, the total fair market value of which is less than $5,000. Following
passage of the resolution directing the sale of the property, notice of the
sale shall be posted in three prominent places within the municipality for a
period of not less than seven days prior to the sale of the property. The
notice shall give a general description of the property offered for sale and
state the terms and conditions of sale. Confirmation of the sale by passage
of an ordinance may be required.



(1976 Code, § 8-103)



(Ord. 671, passed 9-17-1981; Ord. 702, passed 8-5-1982; Ord. 1147, passed
2-6-1995; Ord. 1205, passed 1-22-1996; Ord. 1350, passed 11-8-2004; Ord.
1479, passed 2-5-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-503, 17-503.01



§ 151.018  SALE AND CONVEYANCE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   The power of the city to convey any personal property owned by
it shall be exercised by resolution directing the sale and the manner and
terms of the sale. Following passage of the resolution directing the sale of
the property, notice of the sale shall be posted in three prominent places
within the city for a period of not less than seven days prior to the sale of
the property. If the fair market value of the property is greater than
$5,000, notice of the sale shall also be published once in a legal newspaper
published in or of general circulation in the city at least seven days prior
to the sale of the property. The notice shall give a general description of
the property offered for sale and state the terms and conditions of sale.



   (B)   Personal property may be conveyed notwithstanding the
procedure in division (A) above when:



      (1)   Such property is being sold in compliance with the
requirements of federal or state grants or programs; or



      (2)   Such property is being conveyed to another public agency.



(1976 Code, § 8-103.1)  (Ord. 1350, passed 11-8-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-503.02



§ 151.019  OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Trees and shrubs, growing upon, or near the lot line,
or upon public ground and interfering with the use, or construction of any
public improvements shall be deemed an obstruction under this subchapter.
Said trees and shrubs, or the roots thereof, may be removed by the
municipality at the expense of the owner of the property upon which the tree
or shrubs are located should the owner fail, or neglect, after notice, to do
so. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to
obstruct or encumber, by fences, gates, buildings, structures or otherwise,
any of the streets, alleys, sidewalk space, sidewalks, public ways or public
grounds. The prohibition against the obstruction of sidewalk space or
sidewalks shall not be construed as being a prohibition of sidewalk sales in
the business district, but retail merchants shall be prohibited hereby from
materially obstructing or encumbering the sidewalk space or sidewalks during
sidewalk sales to an extent that the area for walking thereon is materially
reduced.



      (2)   Whenever the owner of any obstruction, encumbrance or
encroachment upon any street, alley, sidewalk space, sidewalk, public way or
public ground within the municipality refuses, or neglects to remove the same
after receiving notice to do so, or after diligent search, cannot be found
for the purpose of giving such notice to the owner, such obstruction,
encumbrance or encroachment shall be deemed a public nuisance and it shall be
the duty of the Street Commissioner to cause the same to be removed or taken
down and the expenses thereof shall be recoverable from the owner in an
action at law. In addition, the owner of the obstruction, encumbrance or
encroachment shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon receiving
notice, and conviction, to be fined for each and every day that the
obstruction, encumbrance or encroachment remains on public property.



      (3)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to
mailboxes and supports for mailboxes upon streets within the municipality
which have been designated as rural routes for postal delivery service by the
United States Postal Service; provided that, said mailboxes must be approved
by the Postal Service and that no part of any such mailbox or its supporting
structure shall extend more than six inches over the curb from the line
between the curb and sidewalk or more than 12 inches over the sidewalk from
the line between the curb and sidewalk.



(1976 Code, § 8-104)



   (B)   (1)   The municipality shall have the power to remove all
obstructions from the sidewalks, curbstones, gutters and crosswalks at the
expense of the person placing them there or at the expense of the
municipality and to require and regulate the planting and protection of shade
trees in and along the streets and the trimming and removing of such trees.



      (2)   The municipality shall have the power to regulate the
building of bulkheads, cellar and basement ways, stairways, railways,
windows, doorways, awnings, hitching posts and rails, lampposts, awning
posts, all other structures projection upon or over and adjoining, and all
other excavations through and under the sidewalks in the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 8-104.1)



   (C)   (1)   The municipality shall have power to prevent and
remove all encroachments, including snow, ice, mud or other obstructions,
into and upon all sidewalks, streets, avenues, alleys and other municipal
property.



      (2)   (a)   If the abutting property owner refuses or
neglects, after five days’ notice by publication or, in place thereof,
personal service of such notice, to remove all encroachments from sidewalks,
as provided in division (C)(1) above, the municipality through the proper
officers may cause such encroachments to be removed and the cost of removal
shall be paid out of the Street Fund.



         (b)   The governing body shall assess the cost of the
notice and removal of the encroachment against the abutting property as a
special assessment. The special assessment shall be known as a special
sidewalk assessment and, together with the cost of notice, shall be levied
and collected as a special assessment in addition to the general revenue
taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties as other special assessments
and shall draw interest from the date of the assessment.



      (3)   Upon payment of the assessment, the assessment shall be
credited to the Street Fund.



(1976 Code, § 8-104.2)



   (D)   Persons engaged in the erection, construction, reconstruction,
wrecking or repairing of any building, or the construction, or repair, of a
sidewalk along any street, may occupy the public street space with such
building material and equipment as long as is necessary if such persons shall
make application to and receive a permit in writing from the Street
Commissioner to do so; provided, no permit for the occupancy of the sidewalk
space, and more than one-third of the roadway of the public space adjacent to
the real estate on which said building is to be constructed, erected,
reconstructed, wrecked or repaired shall be granted; and, provided further, a
suitable passageway for pedestrians shall be maintained within the public
space included in the permit which shall be protected and lighted in the
manner required by the Street Commissioner.



(1976 Code, § 8-105)



(Ord. 599, passed 1-18-1979; Ord. 1111, passed 7-11-1994; Ord. 1238, passed
9-8-1997; Ord. 1461, passed 2-8-2016)  Penalty, see § 151.999



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-555, 17-557, 17-557.01



§ 151.020  WEEDS.



   It is hereby the duty of the Street Commissioner or his or her duly
authorized agent to view and inspect the sidewalk space within the corporate
limits for growing weeds during the growing season, and if rank and noxious
weeds are found growing thereon, he or she shall notify the owner or occupant
thereof, to cut down such weeds as close to the ground as can be practicably
done and keep the weeds cut thereon in like manner during the growing season
for weeds. In the event that the owner of any lot or parcel of land within
the municipality is a non-resident of the municipality or cannot be found
therein the notice may be given to any person having the care, custody or
control of such lot or parcel of land. In the event that there can be found
no one within the municipality to whom notice can be given, it shall be the
duty of the Street Commissioner or his or her agent to post a copy of the
notice on the premise and then to cut or cause the weeds thereon to be cut as
therein provided and report the cost thereof in writing to the governing
body. The cost shall then be audited and paid by the municipality and the
amount thereof shall be assessed against the lot or parcel of land as a
special tax thereon at the rate of $7.50 per hour, and shall be collected as
are other taxes of the municipality or may be recovered by civil suit brought
by the municipality against the owner of the parcel of land. In the event the
property owner is a non-resident of the county in which the property lies,
the municipality shall, before levying any special assessment against that
property, send a copy of any notice required by law to be published by means
of certified mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the
non-resident property owner. The last known address shall be that address
listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first
published.



(1976 Code, § 8-106)



§ 151.021  ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY; CONSTRUCTION AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   (1)   The municipality is authorized and empowered to
purchase, accept by gift or devise, purchase real estate upon which to erect
and erect a building or buildings for an auditorium, fire station, municipal
building or community house for housing municipal enterprises and social and
recreation purposes, and other public buildings, and maintain, manage and
operate the same for the benefit of the inhabitants of the municipality.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (A)(3) below, before any
such purchase can be made or building erected, the question shall be
submitted to the electors of the municipality at a general municipal election
or at an election duly called for that purpose, or as set forth in Neb. RS
17-954, and be adopted by a majority of the electors voting on such question.



      (3)   If the funds to be used to finance the purchase or
construction of a building pursuant to this section are available other than
through a bond issue then either:



         (a)   Notice of the proposed purchase or construction
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality
and no election shall be required to approve the purchase or construction
unless within 30 days after the publication of the notice, a remonstrance
against the purchase or construction is signed by registered voters of the
municipality equal in number to 15% is filed with the governing body. If the
date for filing the remonstrance falls upon a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday, the signatures shall be considered timely if filed or postmarked on
or before the next question shall be submitted to the voters of the
municipality voting at the last regular municipal election held therein and
is filed with the governing body. If the date for filing the remonstrance
falls upon a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the signatures shall be
considered timely if filed or postmarked on or before the next business day.
If a remonstrance with the necessary number of qualified signatures is timely
filed, the questions shall be submitted to the voters of the municipality at
a general municipal election or a special election duly called for that
purpose. If the purchase or construction is not approved, the property
involved shall not then, nor within one year following the election, be
purchased or constructed; or



         (b)   The governing body may proceed without providing
the notice and right of remonstrance required in division (A)(3)(a) above if
the property can be purchased below the fair market value as determined by an
appraisal, there is a willing seller, and the purchase price is less than
$25,000.



      (4)   The purchase shall be approved by the governing body
after notice and public hearing as provided in Neb. RS 18-1755.



(1976 Code, § 8-107)



   (B)   When acquiring an interest in real property by purchase or
eminent domain, the municipality shall do so only after the governing body
has authorized the acquisition by action taken in a public meeting after
notice and public hearing.



(1976 Code, § 8-108)



   (C)   The municipality shall not purchase, lease-purchase or acquire
for consideration real property having an estimated value of $100,000 or more
unless an appraisal of such property has been performed by a certified real
estate appraiser.



(1976 Code, § 8-109)



(Ord. 672, passed 9-17-1981; Ord. 1157, passed 2-6-1995; Ord. 1158, passed
2-6-1995; Ord. 1206, passed 1-22-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 13-403, 17-953, 17-953.01, 18-1755



§ 151.022  PUBLIC WORKS INVOLVING ARCHITECTURE OR ENGINEERING.



   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section and Neb.
RS 81-349 and 81-3453, the municipality shall not engage in the construction
of any public works involving architecture or engineering unless the plans,
specifications and estimates have been prepared and the construction has been
observed by an architect, a professional engineer or a person under the
direct supervision of an architect, professional engineer or those under the
direct supervision of an architect or professional engineer.



      (2)   This division (A) shall not apply to any public work in
which the contemplated expenditure for the complete project does not exceed
$100,000 or the adjusted dollar amount set by the Board of Engineers and
Architects.



   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above regulating the practice
of architecture do not apply to the following activities or the other
activities specified in Neb. RS 81-3449:



      (1)   Any alteration, renovation or remodeling of a building
if the alteration, renovation or remodeling does not affect architectural or
engineering safety features of the building;



      (2)   A public service provider who employs a design
professional performing professional services for itself;



      (3)   The practice of any other certified trade or legally
recognized profession;



      (4)   Earthmoving and related work associated with soil and
water conservation practices performed any land owned by the municipality
that is not subject to a permit from the Department of Natural Resources; and



      (5)   The work of employees and agents of the municipality
performing, in accordance with other requirements of law, their customary
duties in the administration and enforcement of codes, permit programs and
land use regulations and their customary duties in utility and public works
construction, operation and maintenance.



   (C)   The provisions of division (A) above regulating the practice
of engineering do not apply to the following activities, the activities
specified, in division (B) above, or the other activities specified in Neb.
RS 81-3453:



      (1)   These services ordinarily performed by subordinates
under direct supervision of a professional engineer or those commonly
designated as locomotive, stationary, marine operating engineers, power plant
operating engineers or manufacturers who supervise the operation of or
operate machinery or equipment or who supervise construction within their own
plant; and



      (2)   The construction of water wells as defined in Neb. RS
46-1212, the installation of pumps and pumping equipment into water wells,
and the decommissioning of water wells, unless such construction,
installation or decommissioning is required by the municipality to be
designed or supervised by an engineer or unless legal requirements are
imposed upon the municipality as a part of a public water supply.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the municipality is
considered a public service provider if it employs or appoints an architect
or a professional engineer to be in responsible charge of the
municipality’s architectural or engineering work.



(1976 Code, § 8-110)  (Ord. 1360, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 1426B, passed
12-5-2011; Ord. 1461, passed 2-8-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 81-3423, 81-3449, 81-3453




SIDEWALKS




§ 151.035  OVERHANGING BRANCHES.



   (A)   The owner or occupant of any lot, piece or parcel of ground
abutting or adjacent to any street or sidewalk over which there extends the
branches of trees shall at all times keep the branches or limbs thereof
trimmed to the height of at least eight feet above the surface of said street
or walk.



   (B)   Whenever the limbs or branches of any tree or trees extend
over streets or sidewalks contrary to the provisions herein so as to
interfere with the lighting of the street from street lights, or with the
convenience of the public using said street or sidewalk, the governing body
at any regular or special meeting may pass a resolution ordering the owner or
occupant to cut or remove said obstructions within five days after having
received a copy thereof from the Street Commissioner stating that the
municipality will remove said branches and charge the costs thereof to the
owner or occupant as a special assessment for improvements as herein
provided, if said resolution is not complied with.



   (C)   In the event the property owner is a non-resident of the
county in which the property lies, the municipality shall, before levying any
special assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required
by law to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested
to the last known address of the non-resident property owner.



   (D)   The last known address shall be that address listed on the
current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first published.



(1976 Code, § 8-201)  Penalty, see § 151.999



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-557.01



§ 151.036  SIDEWALKS TO BE KEPT CLEAN.



   It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot or lots or the owner
of any vacant lot or lots within the corporate limits to allow snow, sleet,
mud, ice or other substance to accumulate on the sidewalks or to permit any
snow, sleet, ice, mud or other substance to remain upon said sidewalk. All
sidewalks within the business district shall be cleaned within five hours
after the cessation of a storm, unless the storm or fall of snow shall have
taken place during the night, in which case the sidewalk shall be cleaned
before 9:00 a.m. the following day; provided, sidewalks within the
residential areas of the municipality shall be cleaned within 24 hours after
the cessation of the storm.



(1976 Code, § 8-202)  Penalty, see § 151.999



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-557



§ 151.037  OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   The city may remove all obstructions from the sidewalks,
curbstones, gutters and crosswalks at the expense of the person placing them
there or at the expense of the city and require and regulate the planting and
protection of shade trees in and along the streets and the trimming and
removing of such trees.



   (B)   The city may regulate the building of bulkheads, cellar and
basement ways, stairways, railways, windows, doorways, awnings, hitching
posts and rails, lampposts, awning posts, all other structures projecting
upon or over and adjoining and all other excavations through and under the
sidewalks in the city.



(Ord. 1468, passed 2-6-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-555



§ 151.038  REPAIR.



   (A)   The Mayor and City Council may construct and repair sidewalks,
or cause the construction and repair of sidewalks in such manner as the Mayor
and City Council deems necessary and assess the expense thereof on the
property in front of which such construction or repairs are made, after
having given notice:



      (1)   By publication in one issue of a legal newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality; and



      (2)   By either causing a written notice to be served upon the
occupant in possession of the property involved or to be posted upon such
premises ten days prior to the commencement of such repair or construction.



   (B)   The notice shall:



      (1)   State that the governing body has ordered repair of the
sidewalk;



      (2)   Contain the municipality’s estimate of the cost of the
repair;



      (3)   Notify the property owner that he or she may, within ten
days after the date of publication of the notice, notify the municipality
that he or she will repair the sidewalk within 30 days after such date of
publication; and



      (4)   Notify the property owner that if he or she fails to so
notify the municipality within the ten days or, having so notified the
municipality, fails to repair the sidewalk within the 30 days, the
municipality will cause the sidewalk to be repaired and the expense thereof
to be assessed against the property.



   (C)   (1)   Before the municipality imposes any special
assessments for sidewalk repair, a copy of the notice that is required to be
published shall be mailed to the last-known address of all non-resident
property owners as shown on the current tax rolls at the time such notice is
first published.



      (2)   The Municipal Clerk shall mail the notice by certified
mail with return receipt requested.



      (3)   For purposes of this division (C), NON-RESIDENT PROPERTY
OWNER means any person or corporation whose residence and mailing address as
shown on the current tax rolls is outside the boundaries of the county in
which the property subject to assessment is located and who is a record owner
of the property.



   (D)   All sidewalks shall be repaired in conformity with such plans
and specifications as may be approved by the governing body.



   (E)   Assessments made under this section shall be made and assessed
in the manner provided in Neb. RS 17-524.



(1976 Code, § 8-204)  (Ord. 1361, passed 11-8-2004)  Penalty, see §
151.999



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 13-310, 13-312, 13-314, 17-522



§ 151.039  CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER.



   (A)   (1)   Any person desiring to construct, or cause to be
constructed, any sidewalk shall do so only as herein provided.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any
sidewalk without first having obtained a permit.



   (B)   Said owner shall make application in writing for a permit and
file such application in the office of the City Administrator or Street
Commissioner. The permit shall give a description of the lot, or piece of
land along which the sidewalk is to be constructed. The City Administrator or
Street Commissioner shall issue the desired permit unless good cause shall
appear why said permit should be denied; provided, if it is desired to
construct the sidewalk at any other than the regularly prescribed location,
grade or elevation, the City Administrator or Street Commissioner shall
submit the application to the governing body who shall determine whether the
permit should be granted or denied.



   (C)   All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, glass, iron or
a combination of such materials. In the fire limits, all sidewalks shall be
constructed plumb with the lot lines, unless the governing body by resolution
otherwise order. Within the fire limits, all sidewalks shall extend in width
from lot line to curb, if any, and in no event less than eight feet in width
and elsewhere within the corporate limits, all sidewalks shall be laid four
feet in width, unless the governing body, by resolution, otherwise orders. It
shall be unlawful for any person to construct, or cause to be constructed
said sidewalk at any other location, grade or elevation and, if there is no
established grade, then on the grade or elevation indicated by the City
Administrator or Street Commissioner.



(1976 Code, § 8-205)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.040  CONSTRUCTION BY MUNICIPALITY; BIDS.



   (A)   (1)   The governing body may, by resolution, order the
construction of a sidewalk on any lot or piece of ground within the
municipality. Notice of the governing body’s intention to construct said
sidewalk shall be given by the Municipal Clerk by publication of notice one
time in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.



      (2)   A copy of said notice shall be personally served upon
the occupant in possession of such property or, when personal service is not
possible, said notice shall be posted upon such premises ten days prior to
the commencement of construction. The notice required in this section shall
be prepared by the Municipal Attorney in accordance with the provisions of
this section. Such service shall include a form of return evidencing personal
service or posting as herein required.



      (3)   Said notice shall notify the owner of the premise of the
passage of the resolution ordering him or her to construct or cause to be
constructed a sidewalk within 30 days after the date of publication and,
further that, if he or she fails to construct the sidewalk or cause the same
to be done within the time allowed, the municipality will cause the sidewalk
to be constructed and the cost thereof shall be levied and assessed as a
special tax against the premise; provided, the notice shall contain the
official estimate of the cost of said construction and no special assessment
in excess of this estimate shall be assessed against the property. In the
event the property owner is a non-resident of the county in which the
property lies, the municipality shall, before levying any special assessment
against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law to be
published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested to the last
known address of the non-resident property owner. The last known address
shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such
required notice was first published.



(1976 Code, § 8-206)



   (B)   Whenever the municipality shall construct, widen, replace or
reconstruct any sidewalk, notice prepared by the Municipal Attorney,
specifying the work to be done and calling for bids for doing such work and
supplying the necessary materials and labor shall be published in at least
one issue of a legal newspaper of general circulation in the municipality;
provided, bids so invited shall be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk
within ten days after the date of publication. Bids shall be opened at the
next regular or special meeting of the governing body, and the governing body
shall then award the work to the lowest responsible bidder. Upon approval of
the work, the governing body may require the contractor to accept payment in
certificates issued to him by the Municipal Clerk entitling him or her to all
assessments or special taxes, against such real estate whenever such
assessments or special taxes, shall be collected together with the interest
or penalty collected thereon. Each certificate shall give the legal
description of the lot, lots or parcel of ground against which the
assessments or special taxes are assessed. Such certificate or certificates
may be assigned and transferred, entitling the holder to the same rights as
if held by the original contractor. The County Treasurer shall pay over to
such contractor or other holder of the certificate or certificates all
assessments or special taxes against such real estate, together with the
interest and penalty thereon, at any time upon presentation of such
certificate or certificates after said assessments or special taxes against
such real estate together with interest or penalty thereon shall have been
collected.



(1976 Code, § 8-207)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-522, 17-523



§ 151.041  CONSTRUCTION BY PETITION.



   If the owners of the record title representing more than 60% of the
front footage of the directly abutting property, subject to assessment for
sidewalk improvements, petition the governing body to make the same, the
governing body shall proceed in all things as though such construction had
been ordered by it. Upon the petition of any freeholder who is an abutting
owner in fee simple of property subject to assessment for sidewalk
improvements, the governing body may order permanent sidewalks built in
accordance with this subchapter upon the freeholder making, executing and
delivering to the municipality an agreement to the effect that the
petitioning freeholder will pay the engineering service fee and all other
incidental construction costs until paid shall be a perpetual lien upon the
real estate along which the freeholder desires such sidewalk to be
constructed and that the petitioner gives and grants to the municipality the
right to assess and levy the costs of such construction against the
freeholder’s real estate abutting the sidewalk improvement and promises to
pay such costs with interest. The total cost of such improvement shall be
levied, allocated, financed and specially assessed as provided by law. In the
event the property owner is a non-resident of the county in which the
property lies, the municipality shall, before levying any special assessment
against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law to be
published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested to the last
known address of the non-resident property owner. The last known address
shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such
required notice was first published.



(1976 Code, § 8-208)  (Ord. 621, passed 8-23-1979)




STREETS




§ 151.055  NAMES AND NUMBERS.



   The governing body may at any time, by ordinance, rename any street or
provide a name for any new street. Buildings used for residence or business
purposes and located along such streets shall retain such numbers as the
governing body may require. It shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner,
upon the erection of any new building or buildings to assign the proper
numbers to said building or buildings and give notice to the owner or owners
and occupant or occupants of the same.



(1976 Code, § 8-301)



§ 151.056  OPENING, IMPROVING OR VACATING.



   (A)   The governing body may grade, partially or to an established
grade, change grade, curb, recurb, gutter, regutter, pave, gravel, regravel,
macadamize, remacadamize, widen or narrow streets or roadways, resurface of
re-lay existing pavement or otherwise improve any streets, alleys, public
grounds, public ways, entirely or partially, and streets which divide the
municipal corporate area and the area adjoining the municipality; construct
or reconstruct pedestrian walks, plazas, malls, landscaping, outdoor
sprinkler systems, foundations, decorative water ponds, lighting systems and
permanent facilities; and construct sidewalks and improve the sidewalk space.
These projects may be funded at public cost or by the levy of special
assessments on the property especially benefitted in proportion to such
benefits, except as provided in Neb. RS 19-2428 through 19-2431.



   (B)   The governing body may, by ordinance, create improvement
districts, to be consecutively numbered, which may include two or more
connecting or intersecting streets, alleys or public ways, and may include
two or more types of the improvements authorized under this section in a
single district in one proceeding.



   (C)   All of the improvements which are to be funded by a levy of
special assessment on the property especially benefitted shall be ordered as
provided in Neb. RS 17-510 to 17-512, except as otherwise provided in Neb. RS
17-509.



(1976 Code, § 8-302)  (Ord. 1479, passed 2-5-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-509



§ 151.057  EXCAVATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make an excavation in any street
or streets for any purpose whatsoever unless a written permit is issued by
the Street Commissioner authorizing such excavations.



(1976 Code, § 8-303)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.058  DRIVING STAKES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any peg or stake of any
kind into the pavement in any street or alley without first procuring the
written consent of the Street Commissioner.



(1976 Code, § 8-304)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.059  MIXING CONCRETE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to mix any concrete or plastering
material directly on the street pavement for any reason whatsoever.



(1976 Code, § 8-305)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.060  HARMFUL LIQUIDS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to leak in the
gutter of any street, waste gasoline, kerosene or high lubricating oils,
which damage or act as a solvent upon said streets.



(1976 Code, § 8-306)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.061  EAVE AND GUTTER SPOUTS.



   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any
dwelling house or business building within the limits of the municipality
where the said dwelling or building abuts on any sidewalk or street without
providing proper guttering and eave spouts to receive the waste waters that
collect on the said sidewalks and streets. All eave spouts erected on any
dwelling house or business building shall be constructed to drain into the
alleys, or shall be buried beneath the sidewalks and drain into the streets
where it is found to be impossible to drain said eave spouts into the alley.



(1976 Code, § 8-307)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.062  CONSTRUCTION NOTICE.



   The governing body shall notify the owners in fee simple of real estate
abutting a street, alley or a part thereof which is to be put under contract
for paving or repaving. Notice shall also be given to all gas, electric
service and telephone companies. Notice shall also be given to all consumers
of gas, water and sewer services which will be discontinued during such
construction. Said notice shall be published one time in a legal newspaper at
least 20 days prior to the beginning of such construction by the party
undertaking such construction and said notice shall state at what date
connections must be made and excavation completed. All gas, water, sewer and
underground connections must be made prior to the paving or repaving of the
street under construction. After expiration of such time, permits for
excavation will not be issued, nor will excavation be allowed, until after
the completion of the pavement in said street or alley, and the formal final
acceptance thereof by the proper officials of the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 8-308)



§ 151.063  PIPE LINES AND WIRES.



   Poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines and other appurtenances of public
service companies shall be located, or erected over, upon or under the
streets, alleys and common grounds of the municipality. Application for
location of the above shall be made to the governing body in writing.
Approval by that body shall be issued in writing. Any public service company
granted a right-of-way for the erection and maintenance of poles, conduits,
gas mains, pipe lines and wires shall at all times erect and locate their
poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines and other appurtenances at such places
and in such manner as shall be designated by the governing body. Such poles,
wires, gas mains, pipe lines, and other appurtenances, shall be removed or
relocated by said companies at their own expense when requested to do so by
the governing body. Any such relocation shall be ordered by resolution of the
governing body and the Municipal Clerk shall notify any and all companies
affected. Said companies shall, within 24 hours after receiving notice, at
their own expense, cause the poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines or other
appurtenances to be removed. The governing body shall designate another
location as closely as possible where said poles, wires, gas mains, pipe
lines or other appurtenances, may be reset or placed. All poles, wires, gas
mains, pipe lines or other appurtenances shall be reset, placed or erected in
such a manner that they will not interfere with the water system; sewerage
system; poles, wires and mains of any public utility; adjacent buildings; or
with travel on the public ways and property. Whenever possible, all pole
lines, wires, gas mains, pipe lines or appurtenances shall be confined to the
alleys of the municipality.



(1976 Code, § 8-309)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.064  STREET AND UTILITY INSTALLATION; LOCATION.



   From and after the effective date of this section, any public utilities
installed in alleys or other public rights-of-way within the city shall be
installed in such a manner that electrical and telephone installations shall
be on one side of the alley or other public right-of-way and natural gas
piping shall be on the on the other side of such alley or other public
right-of-way. The first of such utilities to make installation in such alley
or other public right-of-way shall be entitled to choose which side of the
alley or public right-of-way on which the installation shall be made, and the
installations of such utilities made thereafter shall comply with the intent
of this section.



(1976 Code, § 8-310)  (Ord. 575, passed 6-29-1978)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.065  CONSTRUCTION; ASSESSMENT.



   To defray the costs and expenses of street improvements, as may be
authorized by law, the governing body shall have power and authority to levy
and collect special taxes and assessments upon the lots and pieces of ground
adjacent to, abutting upon or especially benefitting from, the street,
avenue, alley or sidewalk in whole or in part opened, widened, curbed, curbed
and guttered, graded, paved, repaired, graveled, macadamized, parked,
extended, constructed or otherwise improved or repaired. The governing body
sitting as the Board of Equalization shall review all such improvements in
accordance with the procedure provided by law. All special assessments shall
be made by the governing body at a regular or special meeting by resolution,
taking into account the benefits derived or injuries sustained in consequence
of such improvements and the amount charged against same. The vote shall be
recorded in the minutes. Notice of the time of holding such meeting and the
purpose for which it is to be held shall be published in some legal newspaper
published, or of general circulation, in the municipality at least four weeks
before the same shall be held. In lieu of such aforementioned notice,
personal service may be had upon the persons owning or occupying the property
to be assessed. Such assessments shall be known as “special assessments for
improvements” and with the cost of notice shall be levied and collected as
a special tax in addition to the taxes for general revenue purposes, subject
to the same penalties and collected in like manner as other municipal taxes
and shall be certified to the County Clerk by the Municipal Clerk forthwith
after the date of levy, for collection by the Treasurer of said county unless
otherwise specified. Said assessments shall become delinquent in equal annual
installments over such period of years, not to exceed 15, as the governing
body may determine, at the time of making the levy, the first such equal
installment to become delinquent on the anniversary date which shall be 50
days after the date of such levy. After it shall become delinquent, said
assessment shall draw interest at the legal interest rate per annum. In the
event the property owner is a non-resident of the county in which the
property lies, the municipality shall, before levying any special assessment
against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law to be
published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested to the last
known address of the non-resident property owner. The last known address
shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such
required notice was first published.



(1976 Code, § 8-311)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-511, 17-524



§ 151.066  IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Of streets on corporate limits. The Mayor and Council shall
have the power to improve any street or part thereof which divides the
municipal corporate area and the area adjoining the municipality. When
creating an improvement district including land adjacent to the municipality,
the Council shall have power to assess, to the extent of special benefits,
the costs of such improvements upon the properties found especially
benefitted thereby.



(1976 Code, § 8-312)



   (B)   Petition for improvements. Whenever a petition signed by the
owners of record title representing more than 60% of the front footage of the
property directly abutting upon the street, streets, alley, alleys, public
ways or the public grounds proposed to be improved, shall be presented and
filed with the Municipal Clerk, petitioning therefor, the governing body
shall by ordinance create a paving, graveling or other improvement district
or districts, and shall cause such work to be done or such improvement to be
made, and shall contract therefor, and shall levy assessments on the lots and
parcels of land abutting on or adjacent to such street, streets, alley or
alleys, especially benefitted thereby in such district in proportion to such
benefits, to pay the cost of such improvement. The governing body shall have
the discretion to deny the formation of the proposed district when the area
has not previously been improved with a water system, sewer system and
grading of streets. If the governing body should deny a requested improvement
district formation, it shall state the grounds for such denial in a written
letter to interested parties.



(1976 Code, § 8-313)



   (C)   Improvement districts; objections. Whenever the governing body
deems it necessary to make any improvements allowed by statute which are to
be funded by a levy of special assessment on the property especially
benefitted, the governing body shall by ordinance create a paving, graveling
or other improvement district and, after the passage, approval and
publication or posting of such ordinance, shall publish notice of the
creation of any such district for six days in a legal newspaper of the
municipality, if a daily newspaper, or for two consecutive weeks if it is a
weekly newspaper. If no legal newspaper is published in the municipality, the
publication shall be in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. If the owners of the record title representing more than 50% of
the front footage of the property directly abutting on the street or alley to
be improved file with the Municipal Clerk within 20 days after the first
publication of such notice written objections to the creation of such
district, such improvement shall not be made as provided in such ordinance,
but such ordinance shall be repealed. If objections are not filed against the
district in the time and manner prescribed in this section, the governing
body shall immediately cause such work to be done or such improvement to be
made, shall contract for the work or improvement and shall levy assessments
on the lots and parcels of land abutting on or adjacent to such street or
alley especially benefitted in such district in proportion to such benefits
to pay the cost of such improvement.



(1976 Code, § 8-314)



(Ord. 622, passed 8-23-1979; Ord. 623, passed 8-23-1979; Ord. 722, passed
9-1-1983; Ord. 1207, passed 1-22-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-509, 17-510, 17-511



§ 151.067  DEFERRAL FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever the governing body of a municipality creates
a paving district which includes land adjacent to the municipality which is
within an agricultural use zone and is used exclusively for agricultural use,
the owners of record title of such adjacent land may apply for a deferral
from special assessments.



      (2)   For purposes of this section, the terms AGRICULTURAL USE
and AGRICULTURAL USE ZONE shall have the meaning specified in Neb. RS 77-1343.



   (B)   Any owner of record title eligible for the deferral granted by
this section shall, to secure such assessment, make application to the
governing body of the municipality within 90 days after creation of the
paving district. Any owner of record title who makes application for the
deferral provided by this section shall notify the county’s Register of
Deeds of such application in writing prior to approval by the governing body.
The governing body shall approve the application of any owner of record title
upon determination that the property:



      (1)   Is within an agricultural use zone and is used
exclusively for agricultural use; and



      (2)   The owner has met the requirements of this section.



   (C)   The deferral provided for in this section shall be terminated
upon any of the following events:



      (1)   Notification by the owner of record title to the
governing body to remove such deferral;



      (2)   Sale or transfer to a new owner who does not make a new
application within 60 days of the sale or transfer, except as provided in
division (C)(3) below;



      (3)   Transfer by reason of death of a former owner to a new
owner who does not make application within 125 days of the transfer;



      (4)   The land is no longer being used as agricultural land; or



      (5)   Change of zoning to other than an agricultural zone.



   (D)   Whenever property which has received a deferral pursuant to
this section becomes disqualified for such deferral, the owner of record
title of such property shall pay to the municipality an amount equal to:



      (1)   The total amount of special assessments which would have
been assessed against such property, to the extent of special benefits, had
such deferral not been granted; and



      (2)   Interest upon the special assessments not paid each year
at the rate of 6% from the dates at which such assessments would have been
payable if no deferral had been granted.



   (E)   In cases where the deferral provided by this section is
terminated as a result of a sale or transfer described in divisions (B) or
(C) above, the lien for assessments and interest shall attach as of the day
preceding such sale or transfer.



(1976 Code, § 8-315)  (Ord. 730, passed 9-1-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2428 through 19-2431



§ 151.068  DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.



   (A)   The Street Commissioner may require the owner of property
served by a driveway approach constructed or maintained upon the street
right-of-way to repair or replace any such driveway approach which is
cracked, broken or otherwise deteriorated to the extent that it is causing or
is likely to cause damage to or interfere with any street structure including
pavement or sidewalks.



   (B)   The Municipal Clerk shall give the property owner notice by
registered letter or certified mail, directed to the last-known address of
such owner or the agent of such owner, directing the repair or replacement of
such driveway approach. If, within 30 days of mailing such notice, the
property owner fails or neglects to cause such repairs or replacements to be
made, the Street Commissioner may cause such work to be done and assess the
cost upon the property served by such approach.



(1976 Code, § 8-316)  (Ord. 761, passed 9-6-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1748



§ 151.069  VACATING PUBLIC WAYS; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   (1)   SPECIAL DAMAGES shall mean only those losses or
damages or injuries which a property owner suffers that are peculiar or
special or unique to his or her property, and which result from the governing
body vacating such street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public ways.
SPECIAL DAMAGES shall not mean those losses or damages or injuries that a
property owner suffers that are in common with the rest of the city or public
at large, even though those losses or damages or injuries suffered by the
property owner are greater in degree that the rest of the city or public at
large.



      (2)   The Chairperson shall appoint three, five or seven
disinterested residents of the municipality to a special commission to
ascertain the amount of special damages that the abutting property owners are
entitled to receive and which resulted from the governing body vacating such
street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public way. The appointees of the
special commission shall be approved by the City Council. Only special
damages, as herein defined, shall be awarded to the abutting property owners.



      (3)   In determining the amount of compensation to award the
abutting property owners as special damages, the aforementioned commission
shall use the following rule: the abutting property owner is entitled to
recover as compensation the difference between the value of such property
immediately before and immediately after the vacating of such street, avenue,
alley, lane or similar public way. However, if no difference in value exists
the abutting property owner is entitled to no compensation.



(1976 Code, § 8-317)



   (B)   Whenever the governing body decides that it would be in the
best interests of the municipality to vacate a street, avenue, alley, lane or
similar public way, the governing body shall comply with the following
procedure.



      (1)   Notice. Notice shall be given to all abutting property
owners either by first class mail to their last known address or if there is
no known address then by publishing the notice in a newspaper that is of
general circulation in the municipality. The content of the notice will
advise the abutting property owners that the governing body will consider
vacating such street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public way at its next
regular meeting or if a special meeting is scheduled for such discussion,
then the date, time and place of such meeting.



      (2)   Consent/waiver.



         (a)   The governing body may have all the abutting
property owners sign a form stating that they consent to the action being
taken by the governing body and waive their right of access. The signing of
such form has no effect on claims for special damages, as defined herein, by
the abutting property owners, but does create the presumption that the
governing body’s action was proper.



         (b)   However, if all the abutting property owners do
not sign the consent/waiver form, the governing body may still proceed with
vacating such street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public way under the
authority granted them by Neb. RS 17-558 and 17-559.



      (3)   Ordinance. The governing body shall pass an ordinance
that shall state essentially the following:



         (a)   A declaration that the action is expedient for the
public good or in the best interests of the municipality;



         (b)   A statement that the municipality shall have an
easement for maintaining all utilities; and



         (c)   A method or procedure for ascertaining special
damages to abutting property owners.



      (4)   Filing. The Clerk shall file a copy of the ordinance
with the county’s Register of Deeds to ensure that abutting property owners
can gain title to their share of the vacated street, avenue, alley, lane or
similar public way and so that such land will be drawn to the attention of
the County Assessor.



(1976 Code, § 8-318)



(Ord. 909, passed 10-20-1986; Ord. 913, passed 10-20-1986)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 17-558, 17-559



§ 151.070  OPERATION OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   The city may, by ordinance or resolution, prohibit the
operation of vehicles upon any highway or impose restrictions as to the
weight of vehicles, for a total period not to exceed 180 days in any one
calendar year, when operated upon any highways under the jurisdiction of and
for the maintenance of which the city is responsible whenever any such
highway by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic condition
will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles thereon is
prohibited or the permissible weight thereof reduced. The city shall erect or
cause to be erected and maintained signs designating the provisions of the
ordinance or resolution at each end of that portion of any highway affected
thereby, and the ordinance or resolution shall not be effective until such
signs are erected and maintained.



   (B)   The city may also, by ordinance or resolution, prohibit the
operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles or impose limitations as to
the weight thereof on designated highways, which prohibitions and limitations
shall be designed by appropriate signs placed on such highways.



(Ord. 1468, passed 2-6-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-681



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500
for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of such failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 8-601)



   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists, as defined in this
chapter, the municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate
the same, in the manner provided by law.



      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(1976 Code, § 8-602)



(Ord. 1449, passed 12-23-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722



CHAPTER 152:  TRAILER AND MOBILE HOME COURTS



Section




General Provisions




   152.01   Definitions



   152.02   Permit required



   152.03   Application; renewals



   152.04   Plans and specifications



   152.05   Annual permit fees; reinspection fees



   152.06   Inspections required



   152.07   Inspection of records



   152.08   Duty of owners and occupants



   152.09   Notices of violations



   152.10   Emergencies



   152.11   Management; registration



   152.12   Conflict




Utilities and Conditions




   152.25   Location, space and general layout; area



   152.26   Access roads



   152.27   Positioning of homes and trailers



   152.28   Unlawful to occupy unless on space



   152.29   Parking of motor vehicles



   152.30   Service buildings



   152.31   Water supply; plumbing



   152.32   Sewer supply



   152.33   Refuse; disposal, storage and removal



   152.34   Insect and rodent control



   152.35   Electrical lighting



   152.36   Fuel containers and supply



   152.37   Fire protection



   152.38   Stands and skirting



   152.39   Alterations and additions



   152.40   Animals and pets




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The legally designated building authority of the
city or his or her authorized representative.



   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A written statement by the Health Officer
certifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



   DEPENDENT TRAILER. A trailer which does not have a built-in flush
toilet and a bath or shower.



   ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR. The legally designated electrical authority of
the city or his or her authorized representative.



   FIRE INSPECTOR. The legally designated Fire Chief of the city or his or
her authorized representative.



   HEALTH OFFICER. Any member of the Board of Health.



   INDEPENDENT TRAILER. A trailer which has a built-in flush toilet and a
bath or shower in serviceable condition.



   MOBILE HOME. A structure or building suitable for permanent (more than
30 days) living quarters built upon or having a frame or chassis to which
wheels may be attached by which it may be moved upon a highway whether or not
such structure actually has, at any given time, such wheels attached, or is
jacked up or skirted up, more than eight feet wide and 32 feet in length, and
designed or used for residential occupancy with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities.



   MOBILE HOME COURT. A contiguous parcel of land under single ownership
containing two acres or more, which has been developed for the placement of
mobile homes and approved by special permit of the City Council and is owned
by an individual, firm, partnership or corporation that has received a permit
from the city.



   PERMIT. A written permit issued by the City Council permitting a
trailer court or mobile home court to operate under this chapter and
regulations promulgated thereunder.



   PERSON. Any natural person or any partnership, association or
corporation existing in and authorized to do business in the state.



   PLUMBING INSPECTOR. The legally designated plumbing authority of the
city or his or her authorized representative.



   SERVICE BUILDING. A building housing toilet facilities for men and
women, and such other faculties as may be required by this chapter.



   TRAILER. Any vehicle, without motive power, designated for living
quarters and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and is suitable for
recreational, vacation or travel purposes and which is not more than eight
feet in width, nor more than 32 feet in length, including hitch; provided,
the length shall not apply if the gross weight does not exceed 4,500 pounds.



   TRAILER COURT. Also referred to as a trailer camp shall mean any plot
of ground approved by the city upon which two or more trailers or mobile
homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located and which has
received a special permit for its location from the City Council.



   TRAILER SPACE. A plot of ground within a trailer court designated for
the accommodation of one trailer or mobile home and reserved for exclusive
use of its occupants.



(1976 Code, § 10-501)



§ 152.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or
operate any trailer court or mobile home court within the limits of the city
unless he or she holds a valid permit issued by the City Clerk in the name of
such person for the specific trailer court or mobile home court. Applications
for permits shall be made to the City Clerk who shall issue a permit upon
compliance by the applicant with provisions of this chapter, as evidenced by
a certificate of compliance, which certificate shall show compliance with
applicable legal requirements. No permit shall be transferable. Every person
holding a trailer court or mobile home court permit shall give notice in
writing to the City Clerk within 72 hours after having sold, transferred,
given away or otherwise disposed of any interest in or control of any trailer
court or mobile home court. Such notice shall include the name and address of
the person succeeding to the ownership or control of the trailer court or
mobile home court.



   (B)   Presently licensed trailer courts and mobile home courts as of
the effective date of this chapter may continue their operation; provided,
they meet the court development standards herein provided and further that
they fully comply with the mobile home or trailer stand requirements of this
chapter.



(1976 Code, § 10-502)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.03  APPLICATION; RENEWALS.



   (A)   Application for original trailer court or mobile home court
permits shall be in writing and verified. The application shall contain the
following:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The interest of the applicant in the trailer court or
mobile home court and the location;



      (3)   The legal description of the trailer court or mobile
home court; and



      (4)   A complete plan and supplemental specifications (in
triplicate) of the trailer court or mobile home court showing compliance with
all applicable provisions of the city ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   An application for renewal of a permit shall be
required and such renewal issued by the City Clerk before any changes are
made in the trailer court or mobile home court which deviate from the plans
and specifications as approved in the original permit or the latest renewal
thereof.



      (2)   Applications for renewals of permits shall be in writing
and verified by the holder of the permit and shall set out any proposed
changes in the trailer court or mobile home court.



(1976 Code, § 10-503)



§ 152.04  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   The plans and specifications of the trailer court or mobile home court
shall show:



   (A)   The area, dimensions and location of the tract of land;



   (B)   The number, location, dimensions and size of all trailer or
mobile home spaces;



   (C)   The location and widths of roadways and walkways;



   (D)   The location of service buildings and any other proposed
structures as required;



   (E)   The location and construction details of water and sewer lines
and service outlets;



   (F)   Source of water service, if a public supply; construction and
location details, if a private supply. An adequate supply of pure drinking
water must be available;



   (G)   Type of sewage disposal, including construction and location
details, if a private system;



   (H)   Plans and specifications of all buildings and other
improvements constructed or to be constructed within the trailer court or
mobile home court; and



   (I)   All plans and detail drawings drawn to scale.



(1976 Code, § 10-504)



§ 152.05  ANNUAL PERMIT FEES; REINSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   The following fees relative to the issuance to permits,
inspections and reinspections for trailer courts and mobile home courts shall
be paid in order for such permits, inspections, plan reviews and
reinspections to be valid:



 


Category

 

Annual Fee

 

Required Inspection




2-15 spaces

 

$150

 

$50/space




16-25 spaces

 

$250

 

$50/space




26 - 50 spaces

 

$350

 

$50/space




Over 50 spaces

 

$450

 

$50/space




 



   (B)   All permits shall expire at midnight December 31 of each
calendar year. The above fees must be paid on or before January 1 of each
year for the applicable category in order for a person to receive an annual
permit to conduct, operate or maintain a mobile home court or trailer court
and receive the required annual inspection of such court. Subsequent
inspections shall be classified as those which are required to determine if
violations which were discovered in previous inspections have been corrected.
Subsequent inspection fees shall be charged for spaces not in compliance 30
days after receipt of annual inspection report. Failure to bring all spaces
into compliance by June 1 may result in revoking the annual permit. A permit
shall be valid continuously so long as the annual permit fees are paid and so
long as the permit is not revoked.



(1976 Code, § 10-505)  (Ord. 1262, passed 1-11-1999; Ord. 1294, passed
8-20-2001)



§ 152.06  INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.



   The Health Officer, upon displaying his or her identification, is
hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition
of trailer courts or mobile home courts in order to perform his or her duty
of safeguarding the health and safety of occupants of trailer courts or
mobile home courts and of the general public. The Health Officer, Plumbing
Inspector, Building Inspector, Fire Inspector, Electrical Inspector or other
authorized inspecting personnel shall have the power to enter at reasonable
times upon any private or public property to inspect and investigate
conditions affected by this chapter.



(1976 Code, § 10-506)



§ 152.07  INSPECTION OF RECORDS.



   The Health Officer shall have the power to inspect the register
containing a record of all trailers and mobile homes and occupants using the
trailer court or mobile home court.



(1976 Code, § 10-507)



§ 152.08  DUTY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of trailer
courts and mobile home courts and trailers or mobile homes contained therein,
or of the person in charge thereof, to give the Health Officer or other
authorized inspecting personnel free access to such premises at reasonable
times for the purpose of inspection. The inspecting personnel, before the
commencement of any inspection, shall offer to the owner or person in charge
of the trailer court or mobile home court the opportunity to accompany such
inspecting personnel on the inspection of the premises. The owner shall have
a person in charge of the trailer court or mobile home court and should the
person in charge be unavailable to accompany the inspecting personnel at the
time of the inspection, this shall in no way delay such inspection.



(1976 Code, § 10-508)



   (B)   Every occupant of a trailer court or mobile home shall give
the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such trailer
court or mobile home court at reasonable times to make repairs or alterations
necessary to effect compliance with this chapter.



(1976 Code, § 10-509)



§ 152.09  NOTICES OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever the Health Officer determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter, he or she shall give notice of such alleged
violation to the person to whom the permit was issued, as hereinafter
provided.



   (B)   Such notice shall:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;



      (3)   Specify a reasonable time (but not less than 30 days)
for the performance of any act it requires;



      (4)   Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken,
will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and



      (5)   Be served upon the owner or his or her agent; provided
that, such notice shall have been properly served when a copy thereof has
been sent by registered mail to the last known address of the owner or agent,
or when the owner or agent has been served with the notice by any other
method authorized by the laws of the state.



   (C)   At the end of such period, the Health Officer shall inspect
such trailer court or mobile home court and, if the alleged violations have
not been corrected, the City Clerk shall revoke the permit and give notice in
writing of such revocation to the person to whom the permit is issued. Upon
receipt of notice of revocation, such person shall cease operations of such
trailer court or mobile home court.



(1976 Code, § 10-510)



§ 152.10  EMERGENCIES.



   Whenever the Health Officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he or she may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and take action as he or she may deem necessary to meet the
emergency including requiring the revocation of the permit by the City Clerk.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be
effective immediately, but upon petition to the Mayor and City Council shall
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.



(1976 Code, § 10-511)



§ 152.11  MANAGEMENT; REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Trailer court or mobile home court owners or operators shall
maintain a register which shall be available to any authorized person
inspecting the court, and shall be preserved for a period of not less than
one year. Such register shall indicate:



      (1)   The name and addresses of all trailer occupants and
mobile home occupants stopping in the court;



      (2)   The make, model and license number of the motor vehicle
and trailer;



      (3)   The state, territory or county issuing the trailer
license;



      (4)   The dates of arrival and departure of each trailer; and



      (5)   Whether or not each trailer is a dependent or
independent trailer.



(1976 Code, § 10-538)



   (B)   The person to whom a permit for a trailer court or mobile home
court is issued shall provide adequate personnel to maintain the court, its
faculties and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition
at all times.



(1976 Code, § 10-539)



   (C)   (1)   Responsibilities of the court management.



         (a)   The person, firm or corporation to whom a license
is issued to operate the mobile home court or trailer court shall operate
said court in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and of
the special permit provisions of the City Council and shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the court, its related facilities, roadways,
walkways, open spaces, utilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean
and sanitary condition.



         (b)   Said licensee shall be responsible to see that all
plumbing, heating and electrical connections, alterations and additions
comply with the requirements of this chapter. No structural additions of any
kind shall be constructed, or become any part of a mobile home, trailer
accessory building or service facility until it meets the approval of the
Building Official and is constructed under proper permit issued by the
Building Official.



         (c)   The court licensee shall supervise the placement
of each mobile home unit or trailer unit upon its stand and shall be
responsible for ensuring its compliance with an approved foundation system
and notification to the Building Official when new units are placed.



      (2)   Responsibilities of court occupants.



         (a)   The occupant of any mobile home or trailer shall
comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter and shall maintain
his or her mobile home space or trailer space, its facilities and equipment
in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.



         (b)   The occupants of any mobile home or trailer shall
be responsible to see that ah plumbing, heating, cooling and electrical
connections, alterations and additions comply with the requirements of this
chapter. No structural additions of any kind shall be constructed, or become
any part of a mobile home, trailer, accessory building or service facility
until it meets the approval of the Building Official and is constructed under
proper permit issued by the Building Official. The mobile home or trailer
occupant may be served with notices of non-compliance together with the court
licensee.



(1976 Code, § 10-540)



   (D)   (1)   Whenever the Building Official determines that there
has been a violation of this chapter, or has reasonable grounds to believe
that there is or has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, he or
she shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person, firm or
corporation to whom the mobile home court or trailer court license was issued
as hereinafter provided.



      (2)   Such notice shall:



         (a)   Be in writing;



         (b)   Specify in detail the alleged violation;



         (c)   Specify a reasonable time (but generally not less
than 30 days) for the performance of any act it requires;



         (d)   Contain an outline of remedial action, which if
taken will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and



         (e)   Be served upon the licensee; provided that, such
notice shall have been properly served when a copy thereof has been sent by
registered mail to the last known address of licensee, or when same has been
served by any other method authorized by the laws of the state.



      (3)   At the end of such period specified for compliance, the
Building Official shall inspect the mobile home court or trailer court and if
the alleged violations have not been corrected, the City Clerk shall remove
the license and shall give notice in writing of such revocation to the
person, firm or corporation to whom the license is issued. Upon receipt of
such notice of revocation, the licensee shall cease operation of such mobile
home court or trailer court.



      (4)   Whenever the Building Official finds an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, he or she may issue an order reciting the existence of such
emergency and take action as he or she may deem necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such order
shall be effective immediately.



(1976 Code, § 10-541)



§ 152.12  CONFLICT.



   (A)   In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be
in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health
ordinance or code of the city, existing on the effective date of this
chapter, the provision which, as applied to trailers, trailer courts, mobile
homes or mobile home courts, establishes the higher standard for the
promotion and protection of the health and safety of the public shall prevail.



   (B)   In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be
in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the city
existing on the effective date of this chapter which established a lower
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
public, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such
other ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extend
that they may be found in conflict with this chapter.



(1976 Code, § 10-542)




UTILITIES AND CONDITIONS




§ 152.25  LOCATION, SPACE AND GENERAL LAYOUT; AREA.



   (A)   Trailer courts or mobile home courts shall be located on a
well-drained site, free from marshes, swamps or other potential breeding
places for insects or rodents, and so that its drainage will not endanger any
water supply.



(1976 Code, § 10-512)



   (B)   In addition to trailer or mobile home spaces, trailer courts
or mobile home courts shall accommodate access roads, parking for motor
vehicles and space for any other facility required by this chapter and any
zoning regulation that may be adopted.



(1976 Code, § 10-513)



   (C)   All trailers and mobile homes shall be located in a trailer
court or mobile home court that has received a permit for operation from the
city and only so long as said permit is current; provided, trailers and
mobile homes may be located in other areas of the municipality where
permitted by Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.



(1976 Code, § 10-544) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.26  ACCESS ROADS.



   Access roads shall be provided to each trailer or mobile home space and
shall connect with a street or highway and shall have a minimum unobstructed
width of 20 feet and shall permit Fire Department apparatus to approach
within 200 feet of any part of any trailer or mobile home. In all trailer
courts or mobile home courts constructed after the effective date of this
chapter access roads shall also provide for continuous forward movement of
using vehicles.



(1976 Code, § 10-514)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.27  POSITIONING OF HOMES AND TRAILERS.



   All mobile home units or trailer units shall be positioned on a mobile
home space or trailer space in compliance with the requirements of the
special permit provisions granted by the City Council or in accordance with
the zoning requirements at the time of the establishment of the mobile home
court or trailer court as follows: in mobile home courts or trailer courts
constructed after the adoption of this code, a distance of at least 25 feet
shall be maintained between mobile homes or trailers and mobile homes or
trailers and buildings in all horizontal directions unless specifically
adjusted by the City Council upon specific request due to special
circumstances as provided in the zoning ordinance.



(1976 Code, § 10-515)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.28  UNLAWFUL TO OCCUPY UNLESS ON SPACE.



   It shall be unlawful to allow any trailer or mobile home to be occupied
in a trailer court or mobile home court unless the trailer or mobile home is
situated on a trailer space or mobile home space. If a mobile home, then the
mobile home must comply with all the construction standards as set forth in
the Standard for Mobile Homes, NFPA No. 501B, as designated in §§ 150.001
and 150.002 of this code of ordinances.



(1976 Code, § 10-516)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.29  PARKING OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   Parking space for motor vehicles shall be provided and the parking area
shall be clearly defined. Motor vehicle parking shall be provided on the
basis of one stall, nine feet wide by 20 feet long for each trailer space or
mobile home space.



(1976 Code, § 10-517)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.30  SERVICE BUILDINGS.



   (A)   (1)   Trailer courts that accommodate dependent trailers
shall provide at least the following facilities within a service building:



         (a)   For one to ten dependent trailer spaces, two
flush-type toilets and lavatories and one shower or bath tub for females; one
flush-type toilet, one urinal, one lavatory and one shower or bath tub for
males; and one slop-water closet consisting of at least one flush-type toilet
bowl receptacle for emptying containers of human excreta, with an adequate
supply of hot and cold running water for cleaning such containers; this
slop-water closet shall be a separate room of a service building with a
single direct opening to the outside; and



         (b)   For more than ten dependent trailers, the
following additional fixtures shall be provided; one lavatory and one shower
or bath tub for each sex for every additional ten dependent trailers or
fraction thereof; one water closet for females for every additional ten
dependent trailers or fraction thereof; one water closet for males for every
additional 15 dependent trailers or fraction thereof; provided that, urinals
may be substituted for not more than one-third of the additional water
closets required under this division (A)(1)(b).



      (2)   Dependent trailer spaces shall be not more than 200 feet
from a service building.



(1976 Code, § 10-518)



   (B)   In addition to other requirements listed previously, the
service building shall comply with the following specifications:



      (1)   Be located 25 feet or more from any trailer; provided,
however, that, this requirement shall not apply to construction lawfully in
existence at the effective date of this chapter;



      (2)   Be of permanent construction, lighted with natural
lighting by windows or skylights at least 12% of the floor area and
artificial lighting;



      (3)   Be of moisture-resistant material;



      (4)   Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a
temperature of 70°F at a distance of three feet above floor level under
ordinary minimum winter conditions and to supply adequate hot water during
time of peak demands. These facilities should be maintained in safe and good
working condition; and



      (5)   Have all rooms well-ventilated and all exterior openings
effectively screened with no larger than 16 mesh screen.



(1976 Code, § 10-519)



   (C)   (1)   Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of
at least one clothes washing machine and one laundry tray to every 30
dependent trailer spaces, and shall be in a separate room of a service
building or in a separate building.



      (2)   Clothes drying facilities shall be available without
charge for all spaces. Facilities may be provided on individual spaces or
centrally located for community use; and they may be outdoor clothes drying
racks or mechanical drying facilities in a service building.



(1976 Code, § 10-520) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.31  WATER SUPPLY; PLUMBING.



   (A)   (1)   An accessible, adequate, safe and potable water
supply shall be provided in each trailer court or mobile home court, capable
of furnishing a minimum of 150 gallons per day per trailer space. An
independent water supply to serve a trailer court shall be developed only
after express approval has been granted by the Health Officer. Where a public
supply of water of such quality is available, connection shall be made
thereto and that supply be used exclusively.



      (2)   The water system of a trailer court or mobile home court
shall be connected and distributed by pipes to all buildings and to all
trailer spaces or mobile home spaces.



      (3)   Water piping shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with city ordinances. The water system shall not be connected with
non-potable water or water supplies which have not been approved by the
Health Officer, and shall be protected against backflow or backsiphonage.



      (4)   Individual water service connections shall be
constructed so that they will not be damaged by parking trailers or mobile
homes. The trailer or mobile home court water system shall be adequate to
provide at least 20 pounds per square inch of pressure at all trailer or
mobile home connections.



(1976 Code, § 10-521)



   (B)   (1)   Where an independent or private water system is used
to serve a trailer or mobile home court with water obtained from wells, the
well shall have been approved by the Health Officer, and shall have been
drilled or driven. Springs or other sources of supply shall not be used
unless approved by the Health Officer.



      (2)   Every well which serves a trailer or mobile home court
shall be located and constructed in such a manner that neither underground
nor surface contamination will reach the water supply from any source. A
minimum distance of 150 feet shall be maintained between the water supply and
any cesspool. A minimum distance of 100 feet shall be maintained between the
water supply and any other possible source of contamination; except that,
sewers or pipes through which sewage may back up shall be located at least 50
feet from any well or water suction pipeline. Where such sewers or pipes are
specifically constructed to provide adequate safeguards and when specifically
authorized by the Health Officer, such sewers or pipes through which sewage
may back up may be closer than 50 feet, but not less than 30 feet from a well.



      (3)   No well-casings, pumps, pumping machinery or suction
pipes which serve a trailer or mobile home court shall be located in any pit,
room or space extending below ground level, nor in any room or space above
ground which is walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms, whether
above or below ground, have free drainage by gravity to the surface of the
ground, and the floor of rooms above ground shall be at least six inches
above grade; such floors shall be water-tight, and sloped from the pump
pedestal to the drain. The pedestal shall be not less than 12 inches above
the floor.



(1976 Code, § 10-522)



   (C)   Water reservoirs which serve a trailer or mobile home court
shall be water-tight, and constructed of impervious material, all overflows
and vents of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Open reservoirs
are prohibited. Manholes of such reservoirs shall be constructed with
over-lapping covers, so as to prevent contamination. Overflow pipes from a
reservoir shall not connect to any pipe in which sewage or polluted water may
back up. Underground stop and waste cocks shall not be installed on any
connection.



(1976 Code, § 10-523)



   (D)   Plumbing in trailer or mobile home courts shall comply with
city plumbing ordinances and regulations.



(1976 Code, § 10-524) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.32  SEWER SUPPLY.



   (A)   Connections. Each independent trailer space or mobile home
space shall be provided with at least a three-inch sewer connection. The
sewer connection shall be provided with suitable fittings as adaptors so that
a water-tight connection can be made between a trailer or mobile home drain
and the sewer connection. Such individual trailer or mobile home connections
shall be constructed so that they can be closed when not linked to a trailer
or mobile home and shall be capped so as to prevent escape odors.



(1976 Code, § 10-525)



   (B)   Sewer lines.



      (1)   Sewer lines shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Health Officer and in accordance with the
recommendations of such Health Officer.



      (2)   All sewer lines shall be adequately vented, and shall be
laid with sufficient earth to prevent breakage from traffic.



(1976 Code, § 10-526)



   (C)   Sewage disposal. It shall be unlawful to permit any waste
water from sinks, baths, showers or other plumbing fixtures in any trailer or
mobile home court to be deposited upon the surface of the ground and all such
fixtures, when in use, must be connected to the city sewer system.



(1976 Code, § 10-527) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.33  REFUSE; DISPOSAL, STORAGE AND REMOVAL.



   (A)   Storage, collection and disposal of refuse in a trailer or
mobile home court shall be managed so as not to create health hazards, rodent
harborage, insect-breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution.



(1976 Code, § 10-528)



   (B)   (1)   Refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, water-tight,
rodent-proof containers, which shall be located not more than 150 feet from
any trailer or mobile home.



      (2)   Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and
capacity to store properly all refuse, and otherwise in conformity with Ch.
51 of this code of ordinances.



(1976 Code, § 10-529)



   (C)   (1)   Refuse shall be removed from the trailer court or
mobile home court at least once weekly. Where suitable refuse removal service
is not available from municipal or private agencies, the trailer court
operator or mobile home operator shall provide this service. Refuse shall be
removed and transported as required by city ordinance.



      (2)   Where municipal or private disposal service is not
available, the trailer court or mobile home operator shall dispose of the
refuse in conformity with the city ordinances.



      (3)   Refuse and garbage incineration on the trailer court
premises is prohibited, unless specifically approved by the Health Officer.
Such approval shall be based on a review of the plans and specifications for
such incinerators and approval of the site as well as the type of material
placed in the incinerator.



(1976 Code, § 10-530) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.34  INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL.



   (A)   Insect and rodent control measures to safeguard public health
as required by the Health Officer shall be applied in the trailer court or
mobile home court.



   (B)   Use of effective larvicidal solutions may be required by the
Health Officer for fly or mosquito breeding areas which cannot be controlled
by other, more permanent measures.



   (C)   The Health Officer may require a trailer court operator or
mobile home operator to take measures to control insects and obnoxious weeds.



   (D)   Debris which may harbor rodents shall not accumulate in a
trailer court or mobile home court. When rats or other objectional rodents
are detected in a trailer court or mobile home court, the court operator
shall take definite action, as described by the Health Officer, to
exterminate them.



(1976 Code, § 10-531)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.35  ELECTRICAL LIGHTING.



   (A)   Standard 115-volt electrical service shall be provided each
trailer or mobile home, additional service may be furnished.



   (B)   High voltage distribution power lines in a trailer court or
mobile home court shall be supported on poles or buried.



   (C)   Low voltage service lines (115-230 volts) may be supported on
poles or buried, or may be laid on surface in sheathed cable, approved by the
city’s Electrical Inspector.



   (D)   Illumination of roadways and walkways shall be equivalent to
that required for residential areas.



Electrical wiring referred to in this section shall comply with the
Electrical Code of the city.



(1976 Code, § 10-532)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.36  FUEL CONTAINERS AND SUPPLY.



   (A)   Piping from fuel storage tanks or cylinders to trailers or
mobile homes shall be copper or other acceptable metallic tubing and shall be
permanently installed and securely fastened in place. Fuel storage tanks or
cylinders shall be set upon a firm foundation or otherwise firmly secured in
place, readily available for inspection and located so as to require filling
and draining on the outside and shall be not less than five feet from any
trailer exit. The possible effect on the outlet piping of settling of
containers shall be guarded against by a flexible connection or special
fitting.



   (B)   No empty fuel containers shall be placed under trailers or
mobile homes, but shall be left in place if the trailer is so designed for
more than one container. If not so designed, the empty containers shall be
stored in an area which the trailer court operator or mobile home operator
shall designate for the storage of such containers.



   (C)   The National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet No. 501A for
Trailer Courts, as it presently exists or may hereafter be amended, is hereby
incorporated by reference and shall apply to all trailer courts and mobile
home courts except that no filling plant for liquefied petroleum gases shall
be constructed, maintained or operated within a trailer court or mobile home
court.



(1976 Code, § 10-533)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.37  FIRE PROTECTION.



   (A)   Trailer courts or mobile home courts shall be subject to the
Fire Prevention Code of the city.



   (B)   Trailer courts or mobile home courts shall be kept free from
litter, rubbish, dry brush and other flammable materials.



   (C)   Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the Chief of
the Fire Department shall be kept in service buildings and at other locations
designated by the Chief, and shall be maintained in good operating condition.
Appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent freezing of fire equipment.



   (D)   Where a public water system with a water main of six inches or
larger is available to the trailer court or mobile home court, standard fire
hydrants shall be located within 1,000 feet of each trailer or mobile home or
service building.



   (E)   Where the water supply system does not provide at least a
six-inch water main, a two-inch frost-protected water riser within 300 feet
of each trailer or mobile home or service building shall be provided in
trailer courts or mobile home courts.



   (F)   The person to whom the trailer court permit or mobile home
permit is issued shall be responsible for informing all tenants about means
for summoning fire apparatus, the Police Department and trailer court
employees, and he or she shall conspicuously post a list of safety rules and
regulations, the form of which is found in Appendix A of the National Fire
Protection Association Pamphlet No. 501A, as it presently exists or may
hereafter be amended.



(1976 Code, § 10-534)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.38  STANDS AND SKIRTING.



   (A)   The area of the mobile home or trailer stand shall be improved
to provide an adequate and approved foundation for the placement of the
mobile home or trailer, thereby positioning the super structure against
uplift, sliding, rotation or overbearing. The mobile home or trailer stand
shall be on basically non-combustible materials and shall not shift, or
settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile home or trailer due to frost
action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting upon the super
structure. A mobile home or trailer stand may be provided by means of a solid
concrete foot or block sixteen inches by 16 inches by four inches minimum
placed on solid uniform soil upon which are placed and centered standard
concrete blocks on top of another with cells placed vertically. A solid
four-inch concrete cap covering the concrete blocks shall be provided as the
bearing area to be positioned directly beneath the steel frame of the mobile
home or trailer. If blocking shall be provided upon which shall be placed a
wooden spacer and wooden shims upon the full length of the mobile home or
trailer unit, they shall be placed not more than ten feet apart and not more
than five feet from the ends of the unit.



   (B)   The skirting of all mobile homes and trailers is required.
Such skirting shall not attach a mobile home or trailer permanently to the
ground, but shall be sufficient to withstand wind blow requirements and shall
not provide a harborage for junk or rodents nor create a fire hazard. Such
skirting shall be provided with removable or hinged access panels sufficient
to provide easy access to all utility connection points of the mobile home or
trailer and its subsequent connection with the utility risers if they are
located within the skirted area.



   (C)   Skirting for trailers, travel trailers or recreational
trailers on authorized overnight trailer spaces shall not be required;
provided that, the trailer, travel trailer or recreational trailer is not
parked on said overnight space for more than 30 days. All mobile homes and
trailers shall be secured to the ground by being affixed to a minimum of four
anchors as to prevent the trailer or mobile home from overturning or the
separation of the chassis from the frame due to high winds within 30 days of
location in the mobile home or trailer space.



(1976 Code, § 10-535)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.39  ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS.



   No additions or appurtenances shall be built onto or become a part of
any trailer or mobile home unless they are approved by the Health Officer.
All plumbing and electrical alterations shall be in accordance with city
ordinance.



(1976 Code, § 10-536)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.40  ANIMALS AND PETS.



   No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other pet animal shall
permit it to run at large, or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any
trailer court or mobile home court.



(1976 Code, § 10-537)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 153:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



Section




General Provisions




   153.01   Statutory authorization



   153.02   Findings of fact



   153.03   Statement of purpose



   153.04   Land to which chapter applies



   153.05   Enforcement officer



   153.06   Interpretation of district boundaries



   153.07   Compliance



   153.08   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   153.09   Interpretation



   153.10   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   153.11   Severability



   153.12   Appeal



   153.13   Definitions




Administration and Enforcement




   153.25   Development permit



   153.26   Zoning districts established



   153.27   Variances



   153.28   Non-conforming uses



   153.29   Amendments




Flood Hazard Reduction




   153.40   Floodplain development



   153.41   Flood Fringe District (including AO and AH Zones)



   153.42   Floodway Overlay District



 



   153.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 153.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   The legislature of the state has delegated the responsibility
to local governmental units to adopt zoning regulations designed to protect
the public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   The legislature, in Neb. RS 31-1001 to 31-1022, has further
assigned the responsibility to adopt, administer and enforce floodplain
management regulations to the county, city or village with zoning
jurisdiction over the flood-prone area.



   (C)   Therefore, the Mayor and City Council ordains as follows.



(1976 Code, § 14-101)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation. The flood
hazard areas of the city are subject to inundation which results in loss of
life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   General causes of the flood losses. These flood losses are
caused by:



      (1)   The cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and



      (2)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable
to floods or hazardous to others, which are inadequately elevated or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



   (C)   Methods used to analyze flood hazards. This chapter uses a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series of
interrelated steps:



      (1)   Selection of a regulatory flood which is based upon
engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors
as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated and the depth of
inundation. The base flood is selected for this chapter. It is representative
of large floods which are reasonably characteristic of what can be expected
to occur on the particular streams subject to this chapter. It is in the
general order of a flood which could be expected to have a 1% chance of
occurrence in any one year, as delineated on the Federal Insurance
Administration’s Flood Insurance Study, and illustrative materials dated
5-3-2011, as amended;



      (2)   Calculation of water surface profiles based on a
hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and
overbank areas to convey the base flood;



      (3)   Computation of the floodway required to convey this
flood without increasing flood heights more than one foot at any point;



      (4)   Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which
no obstruction is permitted which would cause any water surface increase
along the floodway profile; and



      (5)   Delineation of floodway fringe (i.e., that area outside
the floodway encroachment lines, but which still is subject to inundation by
the base flood).



(1976 Code, § 14-101)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in § 153.02(B) of
this chapter by applying the provisions of this chapter to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood
heights or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public
facilities which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the
time of initial construction;



   (C)   Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard; and



   (D)   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in
the community to purchase flood insurance in the National Flood Insurance
Program.



(1976 Code, § 14-101)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.04  LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.



   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction
of the city identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) dated 5-3-2011
as numbered and unnumbered A Zones (including AE, AO and AH Zones) and within
the Zoning Districts FW and FF established in § 153.26 of this chapter.



   (B)   In all areas covered by this chapter, no development shall be
permitted, except upon the issuance of a floodplain permit to develop,
granted by the city or its duly designated representative under such
safeguards and restrictions as the city or the designated representative may
reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare,
health of the inhabitants of the community and where specifically noted in
§§ 153.40, 153.41 and 153.42 of this chapter.



(1976 Code, § 14-102)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.05  ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   The Zoning Administrator of the community is hereby designated as the
community’s duly designated Enforcement Officer under this chapter.



(1976 Code, § 14-102)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.06  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   The boundaries of the Floodway and Flood Fringe Overlay
Districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the official Zoning Map
or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map or Floodway Map.



   (B)   Where interpretation is needed to the exact location of the
boundaries of the districts as shown on the official Zoning Map, as for
example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions, the Enforcement Officer shall make the necessary
interpretation. In such cases where the interpretation is contested, the
Board of Adjustment will resolve the dispute. The regulatory flood elevation
for the point in questions shall be the governing factor in locating the
district boundary on the land. The person contesting the location of the
district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his or
her case to the Board of Adjustment and to submit his or her own technical
evidence, if he or she so desires.



(1976 Code, § 14-102)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.07  COMPLIANCE.



   Within identified special flood hazard areas of this community, no
development shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations.



(1976 Code, § 14-102)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.08  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or
impair any existent easements, covenants or deed restrictions.



   (B)   However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provision of this chapter shall prevail.



   (C)   All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.



(1976 Code, § 14-102)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.09  INTERPRETATION.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by state statutes.



(1976 Code, § 14-102)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.10  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood
height may be increased by human-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and
bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas
outside Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries or land uses permitted
within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damage. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.



(1976 Code, § 14-102)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.11  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.



(1976 Code, § 14-102)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.12  APPEAL.



   Where a request for a permit to develop or a variance is denied by the
Zoning Administrator, the applicant may apply for such permit or variance
directly to the Board of Adjustment.



(1976 Code, § 14-102)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.13  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Zoning Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure on the same parcel of property as
the principal structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   BASE FLOOD. The flood having 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.



   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. (For the purposes of determining rates)
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before 1-1-1975, for FIRMs effective before
that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING
STRUCTURES.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before
the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISIONS. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and



      (2)   The usual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD FRINGE. The area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway, that
on the average is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a
1% chance of flood occurrence in any one year).



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the flood hazard boundaries
and the zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source. (See definition of FLOODING.)



   FLOODWAY or REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other water
course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
more than one foot.



   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate
for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater
than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions,
such as wave action, clogged bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   VARIANCES. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   VIOLATION. A failure of a structure or other development to be fully
complaint with the community’s floodplain management regulations.



(1976 Code, § 14-112)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)




ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 153.25  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   Permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall initiate
any floodplain development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be
done without first obtaining a separate permit for development, as defined in
§ 153.13 of this chapter.



   (B)   Administration.



      (1)   The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Duties of the Zoning Administrator shall include, but
not be limited to:



         (a)   Review of all developmental permit applications to
assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



         (b)   Review applications for proposed development to
assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal,
state or local government agencies from which prior approval is required;



         (c)   Review subdivision proposals and other proposed
new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to
determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding;



         (d)   Notify adjacent communities and the state’s
Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocations of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency;



         (e)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying
capacity is not diminished;



         (f)   Verify, record and maintain record of the actual
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved structures in special flood
hazard areas;



         (g)   Verify, record and maintain record of the actual
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which new or substantially
improved structures have been flood-proofed; and



         (h)   When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular
structure the Zoning Administrator shall be presented certification from a
registered professional engineer or architect.



   (C)   Application for permit. To obtain a floodplain development
permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form
furnished for that purposes. Every such application shall:



      (1)   Identify and described the development to be covered by
the floodplain development permit;



      (2)   Described the land on which the proposed development is
to be done by lot, block, tract and house and street address or similar
description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed
building or development;



      (3)   Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed
development is intended;



      (4)   Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed
construction;



      (5)   Be signed by the permittee or his or her authorized
agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority; and



      (6)   Give such other information as reasonably may be
required by the Zoning Administrator.



(1976 Code, § 14-103)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.26  ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.



   Along watercourses where a floodway has been established, the mapped
floodplain areas are hereby divided into the two following districts: a
Floodway Overlay District (FW) and a Flood Fringe Overlay District (FF) as
identified in the Flood insurance Study, and accompanying map(s). Within
these districts, all uses not meeting the standards of this chapter and those
standards of the underlying zoning district shall be prohibited.



(1976 Code, § 14-104)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.27  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Procedures.



      (1)   The Board of Adjustment as established by the city shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter.



      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.



      (3)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as
provided in Neb. RS 19-912.



      (4)   In passing upon such applications, the Board of
Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:



         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands to the injury of others;



         (b)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community;



         (e)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront
location, where applicable;



         (f)   The availability of alternative locations, not
subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing and anticipated development;



         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



         (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



            1.   The expected heights, velocity, duration rate
of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and



            2.   The costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
and streets and bridges.



   (B)   Conditions for variances.



      (1)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction
and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level; providing, divisions (B)(2) through
(B)(6) below have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the
one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.



      (2)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation
of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.



      (3)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels along the floodway profile during
the base flood discharge would result.



      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



      (6)   This application shall be given a written notice over
the signature of a community official that:



         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and



         (b)   Such construction below the base flood level
increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained
with the record of all variance actions as required by this chapter.



(1976 Code, § 14-108)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.28  NON-CONFORMING USES.



   (A)   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was
lawful before the passage or amendment of the chapter, but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to
the following conditions.



      (1)   If such use is discontinued for 24 consecutive months,
any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. The
Utility Department shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of
instances of non-conforming uses where utility services have been
discontinued for a period of 24 months.



      (2)   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances
shall not be entitled to continue as non-conforming uses.



   (B)   If any non-conforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more
than 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred;
except that, if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building or safety
codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places; provided that, the alteration shall not preclude its continued
designation.



(1976 Code, § 14-109)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.29  AMENDMENTS.



   The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this chapter
may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or appealed to
reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of
1973; provided, however, that, no such action may be taken until after a
public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
At least ten days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the
public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The regulations of this chapter are in
compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations as published
in C.F.R. Title 44 and the 1983 State Floodplain Management Act.



(1976 Code, § 14-110)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)




FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION




§ 153.40  FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   No permit for development shall be granted for new
construction, substantial improvements and other development(s) including the
placement of manufactured homes within all numbered and unnumbered A Zones
(including AE, AO and AH Zones) unless the conditions of this section are
satisfied.



   (B)   All areas identified as unnumbered A Zones on the FIRM are
subject to inundation of the base flood; however, the water surface elevation
was not provided. The unnumbered A Zones shall be subject to all development
provisions of § 153.41 of this chapter. If Flood Insurance Study data is not
available, the community shall utilize any base flood elevation or floodway
data currently available from federal, state or other sources.



   (C)   Until a floodway has been designated, no development or
substantial improvement may be permitted within special flood hazard areas
unless the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed development or
substantial improvement, when combined with all other existing and reasonably
anticipated developments or substantial improvements, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any location
as shown on the Flood Insurance Study.



   (D)   New construction, subdivision proposal’s substantial
improvements, prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes and
other developments shall require:



      (1)   Design or anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy;



      (2)   New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary
sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floods
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters and
on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or
contamination;



      (3)   Construction with materials resistant to flood damage,
utilizing methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions
of flooding; and



      (4)   All utility and sanitary facilities be elevated or flood
proofed up to the regulatory flood protection elevation.



   (E)   (1)   The storage or process of materials that are in time
of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive or could be injurious to human,
animal or plant life is prohibited.



      (2)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if
not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent
flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available
after flood warning.



   (F)   Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, be required to assure that:



      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;



      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage;



      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure
to flood hazards; and



      (4)   Proposals for development (including proposals for
manufactured homes parks and subdivisions) of five acres or 50 lots,
whichever is lesser, include within such proposals the base flood elevation.



(1976 Code, § 14-105)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.41  FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (INCLUDING AO AND AH ZONES).



   (A)   Permitted uses. Any use permitted in § 153.42 of this chapter
shall be permitted in the Flood Fringe Overlay District. No use shall be
permitted in the district unless the standards of § 153.40 of this chapter
are met.



   (B)   Standards for the Flood Fringe Overlay District.



      (1)   Require new construction or substantial improvements of
residential structures to have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above one foot above the base flood elevation.



      (2)   Require new construction or substantial improvements of
non-residential structures to have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above one foot above the base flood elevation or, together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to be flood-proofed so that
below that level the structure is water-tight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this division (B)(2) are satisfied. Such certification shall
be provided to the Zoning Administrator as set forth in § 153.25(B)(2)(f) of
this chapter.



      (3)   Require for all new construction and substantial
improvements that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: a minimum of two openings
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding to flooding shall be provided. The
bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or
devices; provided that, they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood
waters.



      (4)   Appurtenant structures used exclusively for storage of
motor vehicles, and storage of other items readily removable in the event of
a flood warning may have their lowest floor below one foot above the base
flood elevation; provided, the structure meets the requirements as set forth
in division (B)(3) above; and, provided that, no utilities are installed in
the structure, except elevated or flood- proofed electrical fixtures. If the
structure is converted to another use, it must be brought into full
compliance with the minimum standards governing such use.



      (5)   Within AH Zones, adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide flood waters around
and away from proposed structures.



      (6)   (a)   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to
resist floatation, collapse or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be
anchored in accordance with local building codes or FEMA guidelines. In the
event that over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following
specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:



            1.   Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the
four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at
intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long
requiring one additional tie per side;



            2.   Frame ties be provided at each corner of the
home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and
manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per
side;



            3.   All components of the anchoring system be
capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and



            4.   Any additions to the manufactured home be
similarly anchored.



         (b)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed
or substantially improved within special flood hazard areas on the
community’s FIRM on sites:



            1.   Outside of a manufactured home park or
subdivision;



            2.   In a new manufactured home park or
subdivision;



            3.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision; or



            4.   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial
damage” as the result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundations
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above one foot
above the base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of division
(B)(6)(a) above.



         (c)   Require that manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision within special flood hazard areas on the community’s FIRM that
are not subject to the provisions of division (B)(6)(b) above be elevated so
that either:



            1.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at or above one foot above the base flood elevation; or



            2.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade; and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the
provisions of division (B)(6)(a) above.



      (7)   (a)   Recreational vehicles placed on sites within
the special flood hazard areas on the community’s official map shall either:



            1.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive
days;



            2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use;
or



            3.   Meet the permit requirements and the
elevation and anchoring requirements for “manufactured homes” of this
chapter.



         (b)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if
it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.



      (8)   Located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in § 153.06 of this chapter are areas designated as AO Zones.
These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the
following provisions apply with AO Zones.



         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements
of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one foot above
the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified).



         (b)   All new construction and substantial improvements
of non-residential structures shall:



            1.   Have the lowest floor elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as one foot above the depth number
specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified); or



            2.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities be completely flood-proofed to or above that level so that any
space below that level is water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
153.25(B)(2)(g) of this chapter.



         (c)   Adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes shall be required in order to guide flood waters around and away from
proposed structures.



(1976 Code, § 14-106)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.42  FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses. Only uses having a low flood-damage potential
and not obstructing flood flows shall be permitted within the Floodway
District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance.
The following are recommended uses for the Floodway District:



      (1)   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture,
nurseries, forestry;



      (2)   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and
play areas;



      (3)   Non-residential areas such as loading areas, parking and
airport landing strips; and



      (4)   Public and private recreational uses such as golf
courses, archery ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves.



   (B)   Standards for the Floodway Overlay District. New structures
for human habitation are prohibited. All encroachment, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other development must be
prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer or
architect is provided demonstrating that the development shall not result in
any increase in water surface elevations along the floodway profile during
occurrence of the base flood discharge. These uses are subject to the
standards of §§ 153.40 and 153.41 of this chapter. In Zone A unnumbered,
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any flood elevation and floodway data
available through federal, state or other sources or § 153.40(F)(4) of this
chapter, in meeting the standards of this section.



(1976 Code, § 14-107)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special
exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not more that $200 and, in addition, shall pay
all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city or other
appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action is as necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.



(1976 Code, § 14-110)  (Ord. 1421, passed 4-18-2011)



CHAPTER 154:  PLANNING AND ZONING



Section



   154.01   Comprehensive Development Plan



   154.02   Subdivision and zoning regulations



   154.03   Sign regulations



   154.04   Conflicts



 



   154.99   Penalty



§ 154.01  COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   The city’s Comprehensive Development Plan provisions, and any and all
amendments, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set
out in full.



(1976 Code, § 11-101)  (Ord. 1466, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 154.02  SUBDIVISION AND ZONING REGULATIONS.



   The city’s subdivision and zoning regulations, and any and all
amendments, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set
out in full.



(1976 Code, § 11-201 and Ch. 12)  (Ord. 1467, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 154.03  SIGN REGULATIONS.



   The city’s sign regulations, and any and all amendments, are hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(1976 Code, Ch. 13)  (Ord. 1477, passed 1-22-2018)



§ 154.04  CONFLICTS.



   Where the provisions adopted by this chapter conflict with one another
or with the provisions of Ch. 150 of this code of ordinances, the most
restrictive or stringent provisions shall govern.



(1976 Code, § 11-301)



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such
failure to comply.



(1976 Code, § 11-401)  (Ord. 1427, passed 5-7-2012; Ord. 1449, passed
12-23-2013)



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Nebraska Revised Statutes





References to 1976 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO NEBRASKA REVISED STATUTES



 

Neb. RS Section
 
Code Section




3-501 through 3-514
 
31.08


5-108
 
33.13


9-501 through 9-513
 
110.17


9-601 to 9-653
 
35.15


10-201 through 10-411
 
35.34


10-601 through 10-614
 
35.34


Ch. 11, Art. 1
 
34.26


11-101
 
30.001


11-104
 
30.001


11-105
 
30.001


11-109 through 11-118
 
30.001


12-301 through 12-403
 
95.01


12-403
 
95.02


12-519
 
130.24


12-1001
 
35.34


13-310
 
151.038


13-312
 
151.038


13-314
 
151.038


13-403
 
151.021


13-501 through 13-513
 
32.32; 35.20; 35.22


13-503
 
35.15


13-504
 
35.16


13-505
 
35.16


13-506
 
35.17


13-507
 
35.17


13-508
 
35.19


13-509
 
35.19


13-509.02
 
35.19


13-511
 
35.20


13-518 to 13-522
 
35.17; 35.19; 35.20


13-801 through 13-827
 
34.27; 35.18


13-1802
 
34.27


13-2001 through 13-2043
 
32.32


13-2016.01
 
51.15


13-2501 through 13-2550
 
34.27; 35.18


14-114
 
30.055


16-230
 
51.01; 51.03; 51.04


16-231
 
51.01; 51.03; 51.04


16-246
 
51.01; 51.03; 51.04


16-318(3)
 
30.074


16-901
 
51.01; 51.03; 51.04


17-102
 
33.08; 33.15


17-103
 
30.041; 33.08


17-104
 
30.041; 30.042; 33.08


17-105
 
30.023


17-107
 
30.055; 30.070; 30.077; 30.084; 30.085; 30.086; 30.087; 30.088


17-107.02(2)
 
33.03


17-107.02(4)
 
33.04


17-107.02(6)
 
33.06


17-107.02(6), (7)
 
33.07


17-107.02(9)
 
30.025


17-108.02
 
30.003; 30.055; 30.071; 33.19


17-110
 
30.055


17-111
 
30.055


17-112
 
30.055


17-113
 
30.055


17-114
 
51.17


17-115
 
30.055


17-118
 
30.078; 34.27


17-119
 
30.088


17-120
 
111.02


17-121
 
30.076; 30.077; 31.05; 91.01


17-123
 
51.17


17-124
 
30.078


17-129
 
130.23


17-130 through 17-132
 
150.002


17-134
 
93.03; 113.01; 113.02; 113.03; 113.04; 113.05; 113.06; 113.07; 113.08; 113.09


17-137
 
93.04


17-143
 
151.003


17-144
 
151.003


17-147
 
30.079; 34.01


17-148
 
30.040


17-149
 
55.01


17-150
 
30.081


17-207
 
51.17


17-213
 
30.078


17-405
 
30.081; 30.082


17-502
 
30.002


17-503
 
151.017


17-503.01
 
151.017


17-503.02
 
151.018


17-505
 
10.99; 30.079; 32.01


17-509
 
151.056; 151.066


17-510
 
151.066


17-510 to 17-512
 
151.056


17-511
 
151.065; 151.066


17-522
 
151.038; 151.040


17-523
 
151.040


17-524
 
151.038; 151.065


17-525
 
110.01; 110.02; 110.03; 110.04; 113.04


17-526
 
90.07


17-531
 
54.01


17-534
 
54.01


17-536
 
54.15


17-537
 
54.03; 54.05; 54.12; 54.13; 54.16; 54.18; 54.21


17-539
 
54.16


17-540
 
54.08


17-541
 
30.084


17-542
 
54.05; 54.07; 54.09; 54.10


17-543
 
30.084


17-547
 
90.11


17-548
 
90.05


17-549
 
92.25; 92.28


17-550
 
92.23; 150.002


17-555
 
91.21; 151.019; 151.037


17-556
 
92.28; 93.02; 130.23; 130.26


17-557
 
72.31; 151.019; 151.036


17-557.01
 
151.019; 151.035


17-558
 
151.069


17-559
 
151.069


17-561
 
151.003


17-563
 
130.32


17-567
 
151.016


17-568
 
30.082


17-568.01
 
30.081; 30.082; 35.25


17-568.02
 
35.25


17-602
 
33.14


17-604
 
30.001; 30.070


17-605
 
30.073


17-606
 
30.074


17-606(2)
 
30.074


17-607
 
35.33


17-608
 
35.33


17-609
 
35.33


17-610
 
30.075


17-611
 
30.003


17-612
 
30.003


17-613
 
32.04; 32.07; 32.08; 35.25


17-614
 
10.15; 32.05; 32.06; 32.09


17-616
 
30.020; 32.06


17-701
 
35.15


17-702
 
35.23


17-706
 
35.22


17-708
 
35.24


17-710
 
35.30


17-711
 
35.28


17-714
 
35.27


17-715
 
35.27


17-718
 
34.01


17-801 through 17-808
 
31.06


17-810
 
31.06


17-902
 
52.03; 52.04; 52.05; 52.06


17-902 through 17-904
 
52.01


17-906
 
52.01


17-909
 
52.01


17-919
 
30.081; 30.082


17-925.01
 
55.01


17-925.02
 
55.08


17-938
 
95.04


17-941
 
95.03


17-948
 
94.01


17-948 through 17-952
 
94.03


17-949
 
94.01


17-951
 
94.01


17-952
 
94.01


17-953
 
34.01; 151.021


17-953.01
 
151.021


17-954
 
151.021


17-1001
 
150.002; 150.032; 150.033; 150.034; 150.035; 150.036


18-132
 
10.16; 91.03; 92.20; 150.032; 150.033; 150.034; 150.035; 150.036


18-301 through 18-312
 
30.003


18-412
 
32.34


18-412.01
 
35.25


18-412.02
 
32.34


18-415
 
53.04


18-416
 
54.10


18-1001 through 18-1006
 
151.017


18-1208
 
110.01


18-1214
 
35.35


18-1303
 
51.01; 51.03; 51.04


18-1701
 
30.073


18-1720
 
10.99; 51.99; 90.99; 91.15; 91.16; 91.18; 91.20; 130.30; 130.99; 150.070;
150.071; 150.072; 150.073; 150.075; 150.999; 151.999


18-1722
 
10.99; 51.99; 90.99; 130.99; 150.070; 150.071; 150.072; 150.073; 150.075;
150.999; 151.999


18-1722.01
 
150.070; 150.071; 150.072; 150.073; 150.075


18-1729
 
72.01


18-1736
 
72.45


18-1736 to 18-1741.07
 
72.49


18-1737
 
72.45; 72.46; 72.52


18-1738
 
72.47; 72.48


18-1738.01
 
72.48


18-1739
 
72.48; 72.49


18-1740
 
72.49


18-1741
 
72.51


18-1741.01
 
72.47; 72.53


18-1741.04
 
72.53


18-1741.06
 
72.53


18-1743
 
150.002


18-1748
 
55.07; 151.068


18-1755
 
151.021


18-1756
 
35.25


18-2101 to 18-2144
 
31.11


18-2101 to 18-2154
 
31.11


18-2102.01
 
31.02; 31.11


18-2147 to 18-2153
 
31.11


18-2501 through 18-2511
 
32.20


18-2501 through 18-2531
 
32.99


18-2512
 
32.21


18-2513
 
32.21


18-2514
 
32.22


18-2515
 
32.22


18-2516
 
32.24


18-2517
 
32.25


18-2519
 
32.27


18-2520
 
32.28


18-2521
 
32.29


18-2522
 
32.30


18-2523 through 18-2526
 
32.31


18-2527
 
32.32


18-2528
 
32.32


18-2529 through 18-2531
 
32.33


18-2532 through 18-2535
 
32.99


18-2536
 
32.34


18-2537
 
32.34


18-2715
 
31.02


18-2801 through 18-2808
 
35.15; 35.16


19-613
 
33.08


19-901 et seq.
 
31.02


19-901 to 19-914
 
31.04


19-902
 
91.03; 92.20; 150.032; 150.033; 150.035; 150.036


19-903
 
31.02


19-908
 
31.04


19-909
 
31.04


19-910
 
31.04


19-912
 
31.04; 153.27


19-916
 
31.02


19-924 through 19-929
 
31.02


19-930 to 19-933
 
31.02


19-1101
 
30.074


19-1102
 
30.073


19-1103
 
30.073; 30.074


19-1301 through 19-1304
 
35.31


19-1305
 
54.01


19-1405
 
30.084


19-2101 through 19-2106
 
51.30


19-2106
 
51.16


19-2428 through 19-2431
 
151.056; 151.067


19-2901 through 19-2909
 
35.26


20-203
 
90.30


21-1316.01
 
35.33


23-122
 
30.073


23-186
 
35.35


23-928
 
35.29


23-929
 
35.29


25-505.01
 
33.18


25-1801
 
50.01


25-21,149 through 25-21,164
 
32.23


28-109
 
90.33


Ch. 28, Art. 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11 or 12
 
112.06


28-318
 
130.19


28-411
 
130.21


28-431
 
130.33


28-4,109
 
130.18


28-4,110
 
130.18


28-503
 
130.61


28-512
 
130.60


28-513
 
130.61


28-514
 
130.37; 130.60


28-519
 
92.03; 95.06; 130.16


28-520
 
90.30


28-521
 
71.36; 90.30


28-523
 
130.28; 130.66


28-552
 
90.12


28-553
 
90.12


28-565 through 28-567
 
130.63


28-588
 
130.15


28-588.01
 
130.15


28-610
 
130.01


28-728
 
130.02


28-729
 
130.03; 130.04


28-801
 
130.19


28-804
 
130.25; 130.26


28-818
 
130.22


28-830
 
130.19


28-831
 
130.19


28-907
 
92.09; 130.36


28-908
 
92.02; 92.04; 92.06


28-1004
 
90.09


28-1005
 
90.09


28-1008
 
90.14; 90.30


28-1009
 
90.14


28-1009.02
 
90.15


28-1009.03
 
90.15


28-1012
 
90.14; 91.21


28-1013.01
 
90.15


28-1013.02
 
90.15


28-1016
 
91.19; 91.21


28-1213
 
92.28


28-1219
 
34.07


28-1229
 
92.28


28-1233
 
92.28


28-1233(3)
 
92.28


28-1241
 
93.01; 93.02


28-1241(6)
 
93.01


28-1241(7)
 
93.01; 93.04


28-1244
 
93.02


28-1245
 
93.02


28-1249
 
93.04


28-1321
 
91.20


28-1418
 
130.38


28-1419
 
130.38


28-1420
 
110.15


28-1420 to 28-1429
 
110.15


28-1421
 
110.15


28-1422
 
110.15


28-1423
 
110.15


28-1425
 
110.15


28-1426
 
110.15


28-1427
 
130.38


28-1428
 
110.15


28-1429
 
110.15


28-1429.02
 
130.38


28-1465
 
34.27


28-1466
 
34.27


28-1472
 
34.27


29-422 to 29-429
 
90.14


29-423
 
72.02


29-426
 
72.04


29-4001.01
 
130.39


29-4003
 
130.39


31-506
 
35.16


31-1001 to 31-1022
 
153.01


Ch. 32
 
30.055; 33.01; 33.08; 33.11; 35.18


32-102
 
33.14


32-109
 
30.055


32-402.01
 
33.10


32-404
 
33.01; 33.02


32-405
 
33.11


32-417
 
33.16


32-418
 
33.16


32-533
 
33.08


32-537(7), (8)
 
33.17


32-554
 
33.08


32-556
 
33.01


32-557
 
33.08


32-559
 
33.11


32-560
 
30.056


32-561
 
30.056


32-562
 
33.18


32-567 to 32-570
 
33.18


32-569
 
30.056


32-574
 
33.18


32-603
 
30.055


32-604
 
30.055


32-606
 
33.05; 33.12


32-607
 
33.05


32-608
 
33.09; 33.12


32-615
 
33.12


32-616
 
33.12


32-617
 
33.12


32-618
 
33.12


32-621
 
33.12


32-622
 
33.05


32-625
 
33.05


32-625(2)
 
33.12


32-627
 
33.05; 33.12


32-628
 
33.12


32-628 through 32-631
 
35.18


32-629
 
33.12; 33.18


32-630
 
33.12; 33.18


32-710
 
33.12


32-802
 
35.18


32-952 through 32-959
 
33.11


32-1301
 
33.18


32-1302
 
33.18


32-1303
 
33.18


32-1304
 
33.18


32-1307
 
33.18


32-1309
 
33.18


33-139.01
 
34.04


35-102
 
30.079


35-106
 
110.01; 110.16


35-108
 
30.079; 34.04


35-109
 
34.04


35-504
 
92.26


35-506
 
92.26


35-508
 
92.26


35-509
 
92.26


35-511
 
92.26


35-520
 
92.09


35-530 through 35-536
 
92.26


37-1254.01
 
34.27


37-1254.05
 
34.27


39-609 through 39-611
 
71.01


39-614
 
71.01


39-618
 
70.03


39-619
 
70.03; 71.01


39-619.01
 
71.01


39-620
 
71.08


39-622
 
71.07; 71.08; 71.30


39-625
 
71.08; 71.30


39-628
 
71.31


39-629
 
71.32


39-631
 
71.38


39-638
 
71.09


39-640
 
71.07


39-650
 
71.06


39-651
 
71.06


39-652 through 39-654
 
71.06


39-662
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I


39-663
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I


39-664
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I


39-668
 
73.18


39-669
 
71.25


39-669.01
 
71.25


39-669.02
 
71.25


39-669.21
 
70.18


39-669.26
 
71.25; 71.27


39-671
 
72.04


39-672
 
72.26; 72.27


39-673
 
72.22; 72.28


39-674
 
72.20


39-676
 
71.34


39-677
 
71.33


39-681
 
71.32; 92.08


39-682
 
92.07


39-683
 
70.02


39-690
 
73.18


39-691
 
73.18


39-694
 
71.31


39-697
 
70.17; 70.18; 71.01; 71.05; 71.06; 71.07; 71.08; 71.10; 72.03; 72.04; 72.22;
72.23; 72.24; 72.28; 72.29; 72.30


39-6,104.01
 
70.15


39-6,104.02
 
70.15; 70.99


39-6,104.03
 
70.99


39-6,124
 
70.34


39-6,129
 
70.35


39-6,130
 
70.35


39-6,136
 
70.34


39-6,137
 
70.34; 71.34


39-6,170
 
70.34


39-6,189
 
71.03


39-6,192
 
70.16; 70.18


39-6,196
 
73.17


39-6,203
 
73.17


39-6,205 through 39-6,207
 
71.37


43-248
 
130.19


46-1212
 
151.022


48-1503
 
35.25


49-801(16)
 
10.05


51-201
 
35.18; 94.02


51-202
 
31.02; 94.02


51-205
 
94.02


51-207
 
94.02


51-209
 
94.02


51-211
 
94.02


51-212
 
94.02


51-501
 
35.18


53-101 through 53-1,122
 
110.01; 112.02; 112.05—112.07; 112.13; 112.14; 112.16


53-101.01
 
112.16


53-102
 
112.02; 112.16


53-103.01 through 53-103.42
 
112.01


53-123.04(3)
 
112.13


53-123.11(1)(c)
 
112.13


53-124
 
112.02; 112.07; 112.18


53-124.01
 
112.02; 112.07


53-124.12
 
112.18


53-124.15
 
112.03


53-125
 
112.06


53-131
 
112.02; 112.07


53-132
 
110.01; 112.02; 112.07


53-133
 
112.02; 112.03; 112.07


53-134
 
112.02; 112.07; 112.16; 112.17


53-134.03
 
112.02; 112.07


53-135
 
112.07


53-135.01
 
112.02; 112.07


53-148
 
112.05


53-160
 
110.01


53-167
 
112.09


53-167.03
 
112.19


53-168.06
 
112.14


53-175
 
112.14


53-177
 
112.03


53-177.01
 
112.03


53-178
 
112.04


53-180
 
112.09


53-183
 
112.09


53-184
 
112.09


53-186
 
112.13; 130.17


53-186.01
 
112.13


53-186(2)
 
112.13


53-194.03
 
112.14


53-1,101
 
112.08


53-1,102
 
112.08


53-1,121
 
112.15


54-601
 
90.10


54-602
 
90.10


54-603
 
90.03


54-605
 
90.05


54-617
 
90.30


54-618
 
90.31


54-619
 
90.32


54-620
 
90.33


54-621
 
90.33


54-622.01
 
90.33


54-623
 
90.33


54-624
 
90.33


54-603(3)
 
90.03


Ch. 60, Art. 1, 3, 5 and 17
 
73.17


60-169
 
130.33


Ch. 60, Art. 3
 
70.30; 70.31


60-2,209
 
71.35


60-301 through 60-3,235
 
35.35


60-302
 
70.30; 70.31


60-311
 
70.31


60-320
 
70.30; 70.31


60-320.01
 
70.30


60-321
 
70.30; 70.31


60-323
 
70.30


60-324
 
70.32


60-325
 
70.32


60-376
 
130.33


Ch. 60, Art. 4
 
70.30; 73.17


Ch. 60, Art. 6
 
70.01


60-606 through 60-676
 
70.01


60-680
 
72.20; 72.25


60-681
 
151.070


60-1902
 
130.33


60-1903
 
130.33


60-1903.01
 
130.33


60-1905
 
130.33


60-1906
 
130.33


60-1907
 
130.33


60-2106
 
94.03


60-2401
 
72.04


60-2402
 
72.04


60-3,113
 
72.45; 72.46


60-4,163
 
34.27


60-4,164
 
34.27


60-4,186
 
70.30


60-6,118
 
72.46


60-6,142
 
73.15


60-6,146 through 60-6,154
 
71.07


60-6,166
 
92.05


60-6,167
 
72.20


60-6,168
 
72.20


60-6,196
 
34.27


60-6,197
 
34.27


60-6,211.01
 
34.27


60-6,211.02
 
34.27


60-6,211.08
 
112.13


60-6,219
 
70.33; 73.02


60-6,220
 
70.33


60-6,224
 
70.33


60-6,235
 
70.33


60-6,244
 
70.33


60-6,265
 
71.11


60-6,267
 
71.11


60-6,268
 
71.11


60-6,278 through 60-6,282
 
73.01


60-6,285
 
70.33


60-6,310
 
73.17


60-6,311
 
73.17


60-6,312
 
73.17


60-6,313
 
73.17


60-6,315
 
73.15


60-6,316
 
73.16


60-6,318
 
73.15


60-6,354
 
73.16


60-6,355
 
73.18


66-489
 
110.01


66-489.02
 
110.01


66-4,140
 
110.01


66-4,145
 
110.01


66-4,146
 
110.01


70-504
 
32.34


70-650.01
 
32.34


70-650.02
 
32.34


70-1601 through 70-1615
 
50.04


70-1605
 
50.02


70-1607
 
50.02


70-1608 through 70-1614
 
50.02


70-1615
 
50.02


71-1572 to 71-15,168
 
31.10


71-1637
 
35.18


71-4402
 
90.02


71-4404
 
90.02


71-4405
 
90.02


71-4406
 
90.02


71-4408
 
90.05


71-4603
 
130.33


71-5301
 
54.23


75-323
 
113.01


75-323 through 75-335
 
113.02


75-325
 
113.06


75-329
 
113.05


75-334
 
113.09


77-1343
 
151.067


77-1606
 
35.18


77-1725
 
150.075


77-2201
 
30.074


77-2201 through 77-2215
 
30.074


77-2202
 
30.074


77-2209
 
30.074


77-2337
 
35.31


77-2339
 
35.31


77-2341
 
35.33


77-2362
 
35.33


77-2365.01
 
35.33


77-2366
 
35.33


77-2602
 
110.01


77-2704-24
 
110.01


77-2705
 
113.22


77-3442
 
35.18


77-3443
 
35.18


77-3444
 
33.11; 35.18


77-4008
 
110.01


80-203 to 80-205
 
32.34


81-145 through 81-162
 
35.25


81-201
 
90.14


81-349
 
151.022


81-502
 
92.20


81-506
 
30.079; 34.10


81-512
 
30.079


81-520.01
 
92.27


81-566
 
150.016


81-579
 
150.016


81-586
 
150.016


81-592
 
150.016


81-5,100
 
150.016


81-829.51
 
35.20


81-829.65
 
34.27


81-839
 
30.081


81-1179 through 81-1177
 
31.10


81-1444
 
34.26


81-1517
 
51.31


81-1519
 
51.31


81-3423
 
151.022


81-3449
 
151.022


81-3453
 
151.022


84-712 through 84-712.09
 
30.073; 30.074


84-712(2)
 
30.073


84-1201
 
30.073


84-1201 through 84-1220
 
30.073


84-1407 to 84-1414
 
30.017


84-1408
 
30.016


84-1409
 
30.016


84-1409(1)
 
30.015


84-1409(2)
 
30.015


84-1410
 
30.017


84-1411
 
30.016; 30.018; 30.021


84-1412
 
30.019; 30.022


84-1413
 
30.016; 30.019; 30.020


86-329 through 86-331
 
50.04


86-331.01 through 86-331.04
 
50.01


86-704
 
110.01


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1976 CODE



 

1976 Code
 
2018 Code




1-101
 
30.055


1-102
 
30.040


1-103
 
30.041


1-104
 
30.042


1-105
 
30.056


1-106
 
30.055


1-107
 
30.057


1-108
 
30.055


1-201
 
30.070


1-202
 
30.071


1-203
 
30.072


1-204
 
30.073


1-205
 
30.074


1-208
 
30.075


1-209
 
30.076


1-210
 
30.077


1-211
 
30.078


1-212
 
30.079


1-212.01
 
30.080


1-213
 
30.081


1-214
 
30.082


1-215
 
30.083


1-216
 
30.084


1-217
 
30.085


1-218
 
30.086


1-219
 
30.087


1-220
 
30.088


1-221
 
30.089


1-223
 
30.090


1-224
 
30.091


1-225
 
30.092


1-301
 
30.001


1-302
 
30.001


1-401
 
30.002


1-501
 
30.015


1-502
 
30.015


1-503
 
30.016


1-504
 
30.017


1-505
 
30.018


1-506
 
30.019


1-507
 
30.020


1-508
 
30.021


1-509
 
30.022


1-510
 
30.023


1-511
 
30.024


1-512
 
30.025


1-513
 
30.026


1-601
 
32.01


1-602
 
32.02


1-603
 
32.03


1-604
 
32.04


1-605
 
32.05


1-606
 
32.06


1-607
 
32.07


1-608
 
32.07


1-609
 
32.08


1-610
 
32.09


1-701
 
33.01


1-701.01
 
33.02


1-702
 
33.03


1-703
 
33.04


1-704
 
33.05


1-705
 
33.06


1-706
 
33.07


1-708
 
33.09


1-709
 
33.10


1-710
 
33.11


1-712
 
33.12


1-713
 
33.13


1-714
 
33.14


1-716
 
33.15


1-717
 
33.16


1-718
 
33.17


1-719
 
33.18


1-720
 
33.19


1-801
 
35.15


1-802
 
35.16


1-803
 
35.17


1-804
 
35.19


1-804.01
 
35.19


1-804.02
 
35.20


1-805
 
35.21


1-806
 
35.22


1-807
 
35.23


1-808
 
35.24


1-809
 
35.25


1-810
 
35.26


1-811
 
35.27


1-812
 
35.28


1-813
 
35.29


1-814
 
35.30


1-815
 
35.31


1-816
 
35.32


1-817
 
35.33


1-818
 
35.33


1-819
 
35.34


1-820
 
35.35


1-821
 
35.36


1-901
 
30.003


1-902
 
30.003


1-903
 
30.003


1-1001
 
32.20


1-1002
 
32.21


1-1003
 
32.22


1-1003.01
 
32.23


1-1004
 
32.24


1-1005
 
32.25


1-1006
 
32.26


1-1007
 
32.27


1-1008
 
32.28


1-1009
 
32.29


1-1010
 
32.30


1-1011
 
32.31


1-1012
 
32.32


1-1013
 
32.33


1-1014
 
32.99


1-1015
 
32.34


1-1101
 
32.99


2-101
 
31.01


2-104
 
31.05


2-106
 
31.06


2-108
 
31.07


2-109
 
31.08


2-110
 
31.09


2-111
 
31.09


2-201
 
31.02


2-202
 
31.03


2-203
 
31.04


2-307
 
31.10


2-308
 
31.10


2-309
 
31.10


2-310
 
31.10


2-311
 
31.10


2-312
 
31.10


2-313
 
31.10


2-314
 
31.10


2-315
 
31.10


2-316
 
31.10


2-401
 
31.99


3-101
 
54.01


3-102
 
54.02


3-103
 
54.03


3-104
 
54.04


3-105
 
54.05


3-105.01
 
54.05


3-106
 
54.06


3-107
 
54.07


3-108
 
54.08


3-109
 
54.09


3-110
 
54.10


3-111
 
54.11


3-112
 
54.12


3-113
 
54.13


3-114
 
54.14


3-115
 
54.15


3-116
 
54.16


3-117
 
54.17


3-118
 
54.18


3-119
 
54.19


3-120
 
54.20


3-121
 
54.21


3-122
 
54.22


3-125
 
54.23


3-126
 
54.24


3-201
 
55.01


3-202
 
55.02


3-203
 
55.03


3-203.01
 
55.03


3-203.02
 
55.03


3-204
 
55.04


3-205
 
55.30


3-205.01
 
55.31


3-205.02
 
55.32


3-205.03
 
55.33


3-205.04
 
55.34


3-205.05
 
55.35


3-205.06
 
55.36


3-206
 
55.05


3-207
 
55.06


3-208
 
55.50


3-208.01
 
55.51


3-208.02
 
55.52


3-208.03
 
55.53


3-208.04
 
55.54


3-208.05
 
55.55


3-208.06
 
55.56


3-208.07
 
55.57


3-209
 
55.58


3-210
 
55.07


3-211
 
55.08


3-212
 
55.09


3-212.01
 
55.09


3-212.03
 
55.09


3-213
 
55.10


3-214
 
55.11


3-215
 
55.12


3-216
 
55.13


3-217
 
55.14


3-218
 
55.14


3-219
 
55.14


3-220
 
55.14


3-221
 
55.14


3-222
 
55.14


3-223
 
55.14


3-224
 
55.14


3-225
 
55.15; 55.99


3-226
 
55.16


3-227
 
55.16


3-228
 
55.16


3-229
 
55.99


3-230
 
55.99


3-301
 
34.01


3-302
 
34.02


3-302.01
 
34.03


3-303
 
34.04


3-304
 
34.05


3-305
 
34.05


3-306
 
34.05


3-307
 
34.06


3-308
 
34.07


3-309
 
34.08


3-310
 
34.09


3-311
 
34.10


3-401
 
34.25


3-402
 
34.26


3-403
 
34.27


3-404
 
34.28


3-501
 
94.03


3-502
 
94.03


3-503
 
94.03


3-601
 
94.01


3-602
 
94.01


3-603
 
94.01


3-604
 
94.01


3-701
 
94.02


3-702
 
94.02


3-703
 
94.02


3-704
 
94.02


3-705
 
94.02


3-706
 
94.02


3-707
 
94.02


3-708
 
94.02


3-801
 
95.01


3-802
 
95.02


3-803
 
95.03


3-804
 
95.04


3-805
 
95.05


3-806
 
95.06


3-807
 
95.07


3-901
 
51.30


3-902
 
51.31


3-1001
 
52.01


3-1002
 
52.02


3-1005
 
52.03


3-1008
 
52.04


3-1009
 
52.05


3-1011
 
52.06


3-1013
 
52.07


3-1025
 
52.08


3-1101
 
50.01


3-1102
 
50.02


3-1103
 
50.03


3-1104
 
50.04


3-1201
 
34.99


4-101
 
91.01


4-102
 
91.02


4-103
 
91.03


4-104
 
91.02


4-201
 
51.15


4-202
 
51.15


4-203
 
51.16


4-204
 
51.16


4-204.01
 
51.16


4-205
 
51.17


4-206
 
51.15


4-301
 
91.15


4-302
 
91.16


4-303
 
91.17


4-304
 
91.18


4-305
 
91.19


4-306
 
91.20


4-307
 
91.21


4-308
 
91.22


4-401
 
51.01


4-402
 
51.02


4-403
 
51.03


4-404
 
51.04


4-501
 
51.99


4-502
 
51.99


5-101
 
70.01


5-201
 
71.01


5-202
 
71.01


5-203
 
71.02


5-204
 
71.03


5-205
 
71.04


5-206
 
71.05


5-207
 
71.05


5-208
 
71.06


5-209
 
71.06


5-210
 
71.06


5-211
 
71.07


5-212
 
71.07


5-213
 
71.07


5-214
 
71.07


5-215
 
71.08


5-216
 
71.08


5-217
 
71.08


5-218
 
71.09


5-219
 
71.10


5-220
 
71.01


5-221
 
71.01


5-222
 
71.01


5-301
 
70.02


5-302
 
70.03


5-303
 
70.03


5-304
 
73.19


5-305
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I


5-306
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I


5-308
 
71.25


5-309
 
71.26


5-310
 
71.27


5-311
 
71.28


5-312
 
71.29


5-313
 
71.30


5-314
 
71.30


5-315
 
71.31


5-316
 
71.32


5-317
 
71.32


5-318
 
71.33


5-319
 
71.34


5-320
 
71.35


5-321
 
71.35


5-322
 
71.36


5-323
 
70.15


5-324
 
70.99


5-325
 
70.16


5-326
 
70.16


5-327
 
70.17


5-328
 
70.18


5-329
 
71.37


5-330
 
73.01


5-331
 
71.38


5-332
 
71.11


5-333
 
73.02


5-334
 
71.39


5-401
 
70.30


5-402
 
70.31


5-403
 
70.32


5-404
 
70.33


5-405
 
70.34


5-406
 
70.35


5-407
 
70.35


5-501
 
73.15


5-502
 
73.16


5-503
 
73.17


5-504
 
73.17


5-505
 
73.17


5-506
 
73.17


5-507
 
73.17


5-508
 
73.17


5-509
 
73.18


5-510
 
73.19


5-601
 
72.20


5-602
 
72.21


5-603
 
72.22


5-604
 
72.22


5-605
 
72.23


5-606
 
72.23


5-607
 
72.24


5-608
 
72.25


5-609
 
72.26


5-610
 
72.27


5-611
 
72.24


5-612
 
72.28


5-613
 
72.28


5-614
 
72.29


5-615
 
72.30


5-616
 
72.30


5-617
 
72.31


5-618
 
72.01


5-619
 
72.02


5-620
 
72.03


5-621
 
72.45


5-621.01
 
72.46


5-621.02
 
72.47


5-621.03
 
72.48


5-621.04
 
72.48


5-621.05
 
72.49


5-621.06
 
72.50


5-621.07
 
72.51


5-621.08
 
72.52


5-621.09
 
72.53


5-622
 
72.04


5-623
 
72.04


5-624
 
72.04


5-625
 
Ch. 75, Schd. I


5-626
 
Ch. 74, Schd. II


5-627
 
Ch. 74, Schd. II


5-627
 
Ch. 75, Schd. II


5-628
 
Ch. 75, Schd. II


5-629
 
71.40


5-630
 
71.40


5-631
 
71.40


5-632
 
71.40; 72.04


5-633
 
72.04


5-634
 
72.05


5-701
 
70.99


6-101
 
90.01


6-103
 
90.02


6-104
 
90.02


6-105
 
90.03


6-106
 
90.03


6-107
 
90.04


6-108
 
90.05


6-109
 
90.05


6-110
 
90.05


6-111
 
90.06


6-112
 
90.07


6-113
 
90.02


6-114
 
90.05


6-115
 
90.08


6-116
 
90.09


6-117
 
90.10


6-118
 
90.11


6-119
 
90.12


6-120
 
90.12


6-121
 
90.13


6-122
 
90.05


6-123
 
90.09


6-124
 
90.09


6-126
 
90.30


6-127
 
90.31


6-128
 
90.32


6-129
 
90.33


6-130
 
90.34


6-131
 
90.14


6-132
 
90.14


6-133
 
90.14


6-134
 
90.15


6-135
 
90.16


6-201
 
130.01


6-202
 
130.02


6-203
 
130.03


6-203.1
 
130.03


6-204
 
130.04


6-205
 
130.15


6-206
 
130.16


6-207
 
130.60


6-208
 
130.61


6-209
 
130.62


6-210
 
130.63


6-211
 
130.64


6-212
 
130.65


6-213
 
130.66


6-215
 
130.17


6-216
 
130.18


6-223
 
130.19


6-224
 
130.20


6-225
 
130.20


6-232
 
130.21


6-233
 
130.22


6-234
 
130.23


6-235
 
130.24; 130.99


6-236
 
130.25


6-237
 
130.25


6-238
 
130.26


6-240
 
130.27


6-241
 
130.28


6-242
 
130.29


6-243
 
130.30


6-244
 
130.31


6-245
 
130.31


6-246
 
130.31


6-247
 
130.32


6-248
 
130.33


6-249
 
130.34


6-253
 
130.36


6-254
 
130.35; 130.37; 130.99


6-255
 
130.35


6-256
 
130.38


6-258
 
130.38; 130.99


6-259
 
130.39


6-260
 
130.38


6-301
 
130.40


6-302
 
130.40


6-303
 
130.40


6-304
 
130.40


6-305
 
130.40


6-401
 
90.99; 130.99


6-402
 
90.99; 130.99


6-403
 
90.99


7-101
 
92.01


7-102
 
92.02


7-103
 
92.03


7-104
 
92.04


7-105
 
92.05


7-106
 
92.06


7-107
 
92.07


7-108
 
92.08


7-109
 
92.09


7-201
 
92.20; 92.24


7-202
 
92.20


7-203
 
92.21


7-204
 
92.22


7-205
 
92.23


7-207
 
92.25


7-208
 
92.26


7-209
 
92.27


7-301
 
92.28


7.401
 
92.99


8-101
 
151.015


8-102
 
151.016


8-103
 
151.017


8-103.1
 
151.018


8-104
 
151.019


8-104.1
 
151.019


8-104.2
 
151.019


8-105
 
151.019


8-106
 
151.020


8-107
 
151.021


8-108
 
151.021


8-109
 
151.021


8-110
 
151.022


8-201
 
151.035


8-202
 
151.036


8-204
 
151.038


8-205
 
151.039


8-206
 
151.040


8-207
 
151.040


8-208
 
151.041


8-301
 
151.055


8-302
 
151.056


8-303
 
151.057


8-304
 
151.058


8-305
 
151.059


8-306
 
151.060


8-307
 
151.061


8-308
 
151.062


8-309
 
151.063


8-310
 
151.064


8-311
 
151.065


8-312
 
151.066


8-313
 
151.066


8-314
 
151.066


8-315
 
151.067


8-316
 
151.068


8-317
 
151.069


8-318
 
151.069


8-401
 
151.001


8-501
 
151.002


8-502
 
151.002


8-503
 
151.002


8-601
 
151.999


8-602
 
151.999


9-101
 
150.001


9-102
 
150.001


9-103
 
150.001


9-104
 
150.001


9-201
 
150.002


9-202
 
150.002


9-203
 
150.002


9-204
 
150.002


9-301
 
150.050


9-302
 
150.051


9-303
 
150.052


9-304
 
150.053


9-305
 
150.054


9-306
 
150.055


9-307
 
150.056


9-308
 
150.057


9-309
 
150.058


9-310
 
150.059


9-401
 
150.070


9-402
 
150.071


9-403
 
150.072


9-404
 
150.073


9-405
 
150.074


9-406
 
150.075


9-501
 
150.030


9-502
 
150.031


9-503
 
150.032


9-504
 
150.033


9-505
 
150.034


9-506
 
150.035


9-507
 
150.036


9-601
 
150.999


9-602
 
150.999


10-101
 
112.01


10-102
 
112.02


10-103
 
112.03


10-104
 
112.04


10-105
 
112.05


10-106
 
112.06


10-107
 
112.07


10-108
 
112.07


10-109
 
112.07


10-110
 
112.08


10-111
 
112.08


10-112
 
112.09


10-113
 
112.10


10-114
 
112.10


10-116
 
112.10


10-117
 
112.10


10-118
 
112.11


10-119
 
112.12


10-120
 
112.13


10-121
 
112.14


10-122
 
112.15


10-123
 
112.16


10-124
 
112.17


10-125
 
112.18


10-126
 
112.19


10-128
 
112.13


10-201
 
113.01


10-202
 
113.02


10-203
 
113.03


10-204
 
113.04


10-205
 
113.05


10-206
 
113.06


10-207
 
113.07


10-208
 
113.08


10-209
 
113.09


10-210
 
113.20


10-211
 
113.21


10-212
 
113.22


10-213
 
113.23


10-214
 
113.24


10-215
 
113.25


10-216
 
113.26


10-217
 
113.27


10-218
 
113.28


10-219
 
113.29


10-220
 
113.30


10-301
 
111.01


10-306
 
111.02


10-307
 
111.02


10-401
 
150.015


10-402
 
150.015


10-403
 
150.016


10-404
 
150.016


10-405
 
150.016


10-406
 
150.016


10-407
 
150.016


10-501
 
152.01


10-502
 
152.02


10-503
 
152.03


10-504
 
152.04


10-505
 
152.05


10-506
 
152.06


10-507
 
152.07


10-508
 
152.08


10-509
 
152.08


10-510
 
152.09


10-511
 
152.10


10-512
 
152.25


10-513
 
152.25


10-514
 
152.26


10-515
 
152.27


10-516
 
152.28


10-517
 
152.29


10-518
 
152.30


10-519
 
152.30


10-520
 
152.30


10-521
 
152.31


10-522
 
152.31


10-523
 
152.31


10-524
 
152.31


10-525
 
152.32


10-526
 
152.32


10-527
 
152.32


10-528
 
152.33


10-529
 
152.33


10-530
 
152.33


10-531
 
152.34


10-532
 
152.35


10-533
 
152.36


10-534
 
152.37


10-535
 
152.38


10-536
 
152.39


10-537
 
152.40


10-538
 
152.11


10-539
 
152.11


10-540
 
152.11


10-541
 
152.11


10-542
 
152.12


10-544
 
152.25


10-601
 
151.003


10-602
 
151.003


10-701
 
93.01


10-702
 
93.02


10-703
 
93.03


10-704
 
93.04


10-705
 
93.04


10-801
 
110.01


10-801.01
 
110.15


10-802
 
110.16


10-803
 
110.02


10-804
 
110.03


10-805
 
110.04


10-806
 
110.17


10-807
 
110.17


10-1001
 
53.01


10-1002
 
53.02


10-1003
 
53.03


10-1004
 
53.04


10-1005
 
53.05


10-1006
 
53.06


10-1007
 
53.07


10-1008
 
53.08


Ch. 10, Art. 11
 
110.18


10-1201
 
93.99; 110.99; 150.999


11-101
 
154.01


11-201
 
154.02


11-301
 
154.04


11-401
 
154.99


Ch. 12
 
154.02


Ch. 13
 
154.03


14-101
 
153.01—153.03


14-102
 
153.04—153.12


14-103
 
153.25


14-104
 
153.26


14-105
 
153.40


14-106
 
153.41


14-107
 
153.42


14-108
 
153.27


14-109
 
153.28


14-110
 
153.29; 153.99


14-112
 
153.13


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




6/605
 
- -
 
50.02


1380
 
- -
 
50.02


528
 
3-17-1977
 
130.40


531
 
4-21-1977
 
130.34


532
 
4-21-1977
 
130.33


533
 
4-21-1977
 
130.63


536
 
4-21-1977
 
33.10


538
 
4-21-1977
 
30.070


557
 
9-22-1977
 
51.16


558
 
9-22-1977
 
33.01


560
 
9-22-1977
 
35.26


562
 
9-22-1977
 
110.02


563
 
9-22-1977
 
31.05


565
 
10-20-1977
 
130.35


573
 
4-20-1978
 
92.20


575
 
6-29-1978
 
151.064


577
 
9-21-1978
 
31.03


578
 
9-21-1978
 
31.04


580
 
9-21-1978
 
92.26


581
 
9-21-1978
 
112.10


582
 
9-21-1978
 
112.10


595
 
1-11-1979
 
52.05


596
 
1-11-1979
 
54.09


599
 
1-18-1979
 
151.019


619
 
8-23-1979
 
71.26


620
 
8-23-1979
 
73.17


621
 
8-23-1979
 
151.041


622
 
8-23-1979
 
151.066


623
 
8-23-1979
 
151.066


624
 
8-23-1979
 
150.002


625
 
8-23-1979
 
112.15


626
 
8-23-1979
 
112.10


627
 
9-6-1979
 
30.003


630
 
9-27-1979
 
55.09


635
 
12-6-1979
 
112.07


629
 
5-8-1980
 
55.03—55.05; 55.13—55.16; 55.30—55.36; 55.50—55.58; 55.99


641
 
5-10-1980
 
90.05


644
 
7-31-1980
 
51.16


650
 
12-4-1980
 
72.04


655
 
2-19-1981
 
55.09—55.11


659
 
3-26-1981
 
54.09


662
 
6-4-1981
 
31.07


665
 
9-17-1981
 
30.023


666
 
9-17-1981
 
33.03


667
 
9-17-1981
 
33.07


668
 
9-17-1981
 
31.02


669
 
9-17-1981
 
72.04


670
 
9-17-1981
 
90.05


671
 
9-17-1981
 
151.017


672
 
9-17-1981
 
151.021


673
 
9-17-1981
 
112.10


674
 
9-17-1981
 
112.15


675
 
9-21-1981
 
92.24


679
 
1-21-1982
 
72.01


681
 
2-18-1982
 
112.10


683
 
6-24-1982
 
92.24


685
 
7-8-1982
 
130.40


686
 
7-29-1982
 
51.16


689
 
7-29-1982
 
130.40


690
 
8-5-1982
 
32.20—32.34; 32.99


691
 
8-5-1982
 
30.003


697
 
8-5-1982
 
71.37


698
 
8-5-1982
 
130.36


699
 
8-5-1982
 
130.37


701
 
8-5-1982
 
92.24


702
 
8-5-1982
 
151.017


703
 
8-5-1982
 
150.016


704
 
8-5-1982
 
150.016


705
 
8-5-1982
 
150.016


687
 
8-19-1982
 
130.32


708
 
11-18-1982
 
72.31


1427
 
5-2-1983
 
150.032


713
 
6-9-1983
 
50.03


720
 
9-1-1983
 
30.081


721
 
9-1-1983
 
30.082


722
 
9-1-1983
 
151.066


723
 
9-1-1983
 
112.10


724
 
9-1-1983
 
112.06; 112.07


727
 
9-1-1983
 
30.015—30.018; 30.022


729
 
9-1-1983
 
50.01


730
 
9-1-1983
 
151.067


732
 
9-15-1983
 
30.092


733
 
9-15-1983
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I


757
 
11-3-1983
 
32.20—32.34; 32.99


249
 
11-8-1983
 
32.99


751
 
1-6-1984
 
30.056


745
 
6-7-1984
 
94.03


747
 
8-9-1984
 
51.16


752
 
9-6-1984
 
30.071


753
 
9-6-1984
 
33.11; 33.12; 33.19


754
 
9-6-1984
 
35.16


758
 
9-6-1984
 
55.07


759
 
9-6-1984
 
50.02


761
 
9-6-1984
 
151.068


762
 
9-6-1984
 
112.07


765
 
9-6-1984
 
30.055


887
 
11-25-1985
 
72.25


892
 
3-10-1986
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I


894
 
4-8-1986
 
30.023


896
 
5-5-1986
 
90.06


897
 
5-12-1986
 
55.09


898
 
5-12-1986
 
54.09


900
 
5-12-1986
 
112.16


904
 
6-9-1986
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I


906
 
8-4-1986
 
110.01


909
 
10-20-1986
 
151.069


911
 
10-20-1986
 
32.07


912
 
10-20-1986
 
34.26


913
 
10-20-1986
 
151.069


914
 
10-20-1986
 
95.07


915
 
10-20-1986
 
112.07


916
 
10-20-1986
 
112.17


910
 
11-17-1986
 
52.05


946
 
5-2-1988
 
54.23


947
 
5-2-1988
 
150.032


948
 
7-18-1988
 
54.09


945
 
9-12-1988
 
52.01—52.06


949
 
9-12-1988
 
54.05


951
 
9-26-1988
 
35.35


952
 
9-26-1988
 
31.08


953
 
9-26-1988
 
51.01—51.04


955
 
9-26-1988
 
71.38


956
 
9-26-1988
 
72.04


957
 
9-26-1988
 
90.09


959
 
9-26-1988
 
93.01


960
 
9-26-1988
 
112.07


961
 
9-26-1988
 
112.18


985
 
9-26-1988
 
93.02


963
 
11-7-1988
 
110.18


966
 
12-5-1988
 
30.003


973
 
5-15-1989
 
130.31


974
 
7-10-1989
 
130.66


981
 
9-25-1989
 
150.055


982
 
9-25-1989
 
130.33


983
 
10-10-1989
 
72.30


985
 
11-6-1989
 
54.09


988
 
12-18-1989
 
35.33


989
 
12-18-1989
 
35.35


990
 
12-18-1989
 
71.01


992
 
12-18-1989
 
90.30—90.34


993
 
12-18-1989
 
92.28


994
 
12-18-1989
 
112.07


995
 
12-18-1989
 
112.16


996
 
12-18-1989
 
112.17


998
 
1-22-1990
 
130.31


1001
 
6-4-1990
 
Ch. 75, Schd. I


1003
 
6-25-1990
 
113.01; 113.02


1009
 
9-10-1990
 
73.18


1010
 
10-8-1990
 
130.35


1011
 
10-22-1990
 
110.17


1012
 
10-22-1990
 
151.002


1023
 
1-7-1991
 
31.06


1014
 
1-21-1991
 
30.057


1015
 
1-21-1991
 
30.056


1016
 
1-21-1991
 
30.071


1017
 
1-21-1991
 
71.11


1018
 
1-21-1991
 
90.14


1019
 
1-21-1991
 
90.09


1020
 
1-21-1991
 
150.075


1024
 
1-21-1991
 
91.02


1025
 
1-21-1991
 
30.003


1026
 
1-21-1991
 
90.08


1027
 
2-18-1991
 
150.032


1028
 
3-18-1991
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I


1030
 
4-15-1991
 
54.05


1031
 
4-15-1991
 
54.09


1033
 
5-7-1991
 
72.01; 72.02


1034
 
5-21-1991
 
54.09


1035
 
6-17-1991
 
31.07


1036
 
6-17-1991
 
55.02; 55.09


1040
 
8-5-1991
 
30.003


1042
 
8-19-1991
 
130.32


1046
 
11-20-1991
 
54.02; 54.24


1047
 
11-20-1991
 
30.003


1045
 
12-9-1991
 
150.035


1047
 
1-20-1992
 
54.24


1050
 
3-16-1992
 
112.10


1051
 
3-23-1992
 
70.30


1053
 
3-23-1992
 
112.10


1054
 
3-23-1992
 
112.18


1055
 
3-23-1992
 
112.07


1056
 
3-23-1992
 
30.003


1062
 
7-20-1992
 
30.003


1063
 
7-20-1992
 
51.16


1065
 
8-24-1992
 
112.13


1069
 
12-21-1992
 
112.10


1073
 
1-11-1993
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I; Ch. 75, Schd. I; Ch. 75, Schd. II


1075
 
3-8-1993
 
30.073


1076
 
3-8-1993
 
30.015


1077
 
3-8-1993
 
30.017


1078
 
3-8-1993
 
32.32


1079
 
3-8-1993
 
72.49


1080
 
3-8-1993
 
72.52


1081
 
3-8-1993
 
130.38


1085
 
3-8-1993
 
150.036


1086
 
3-8-1993
 
72.05


1089
 
4-12-1993
 
72.05


1090
 
7-12-1993
 
31.07


1092
 
7-12-1993
 
30.003


1094
 
8-9-1993
 
54.24


1095
 
8-9-1993
 
30.003


1096
 
9-13-1993
 
31.09


1101
 
11-8-1993
 
90.08


1102
 
12-6-1993
 
150.035


1107
 
3-21-1994
 
31.06


1106
 
6-6-1994
 
150.050—150.059


1111
 
7-11-1994
 
151.019


1113
 
8-8-1994
 
30.080; 34.03


1114
 
8-8-1994
 
90.01; 90.03


1117
 
11-21-1994
 
55.09


1116
 
12-5-1994
 
90.03


1121
 
1-24-1995
 
54.05


1122
 
2-6-1995
 
35.16


1124
 
2-6-1995
 
35.22


1125
 
2-6-1995
 
70.01


1126
 
2-6-1995
 
71.07


1127
 
2-6-1995
 
73.16


1128
 
2-6-1995
 
70.30


1129
 
2-6-1995
 
70.31


1130
 
2-6-1995
 
70.33


1131
 
2-6-1995
 
73.15


1132
 
2-6-1995
 
73.02


1133
 
2-6-1995
 
73.01


1135
 
2-6-1995
 
73.17


1136
 
2-6-1995
 
73.17


1137
 
2-6-1995
 
73.17


1138
 
2-6-1995
 
72.21


1139
 
2-6-1995
 
72.45


1140
 
2-6-1995
 
72.46


1141
 
2-6-1995
 
72.47


1142
 
2-6-1995
 
72.50


1143
 
2-6-1995
 
72.52


1144
 
2-6-1995
 
72.53


1146
 
2-6-1995
 
92.28


1147
 
2-6-1995
 
151.017


1148
 
2-6-1995
 
30.017


1149
 
2-6-1995
 
32.06


1150
 
2-6-1995
 
35.19


1151
 
2-6-1995
 
31.03


1153
 
2-6-1995
 
91.22


1154
 
2-6-1995
 
51.15


1155
 
2-6-1995
 
130.28


1156
 
2-6-1995
 
92.27


1157
 
2-6-1995
 
151.021


1158
 
2-6-1995
 
151.021


1159
 
2-6-1995
 
112.18


1164
 
7-10-1995
 
130.32


1167
 
8-21-1995
 
52.05


1169
 
8-21-1995
 
113.04; 113.07


1177
 
10-9-1995
 
92.05


1178
 
10-24-1995
 
110.17


1181
 
11-20-1995
 
72.04


1186
 
12-18-1995
 
54.02; 54.05


1184
 
1-8-1996
 
34.28


1187
 
1-22-1996
 
35.15


1189
 
1-22-1996
 
35.22


1190
 
1-22-1996
 
31.03


1191
 
1-22-1996
 
31.04


1192
 
1-22-1996
 
50.04


1193
 
1-22-1996
 
30.023


1194
 
1-22-1996
 
70.30


1195
 
1-22-1996
 
70.31


1196
 
1-22-1996
 
70.33


1197
 
1-22-1996
 
72.45


1198
 
1-22-1996
 
72.47


1199
 
1-22-1996
 
72.48


1200
 
1-22-1996
 
72.48


1201
 
1-22-1996
 
72.49


1202
 
1-22-1996
 
72.50


1203
 
1-22-1996
 
72.51


1204
 
1-22-1996
 
72.52


1205
 
1-22-1996
 
151.017


1206
 
1-22-1996
 
151.021


1207
 
1-22-1996
 
151.066


1208
 
1-22-1996
 
112.14


1212
 
1-22-1996
 
54.05


1211
 
3-18-1996
 
150.035


1220
 
7-8-1996
 
130.35


1221
 
9-9-1996
 
51.16


1227
 
11-4-1996
 
35.36


1228
 
3-24-1997
 
72.25


1230
 
3-24-1997
 
90.01; 90.02


1237
 
7-21-1997
 
130.38


1238
 
9-8-1997
 
151.019


1240
 
10-6-1997
 
90.01


1241
 
10-6-1997
 
35.36


1242
 
10-20-1997
 
55.09


1262
 
1-11-1999
 
152.05


1273
 
11-22-1999
 
93.03; 93.04


1274
 
1-10-2000
 
150.015


1280
 
9-11-2000
 
130.34


1281
 
9-25-2000
 
31.10


1283
 
9-25-2000
 
51.16


1284
 
12-20-2000
 
52.05


1289
 
4-9-2001
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I


1293
 
6-25-2001
 
55.31; 55.51


1292
 
7-9-2001
 
150.002


1294
 
8-20-2001
 
93.04; 110.01; 113.04; 152.05


1296
 
10-8-2001
 
51.16


1298
 
1-7-2002
 
72.30


1299
 
1-21-2002
 
130.40


1301
 
5-20-2002
 
54.09


1307
 
9-16-2002
 
71.39


1314
 
3-10-2003
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I


1320
 
9-8-2003
 
30.091


1322
 
11-10-2003
 
31.05


1353
 
8-11-2004
 
150.002


1344
 
11-8-2004
 
34.04


1345
 
11-8-2004
 
34.27


1346
 
11-8-2004
 
33.11


1348
 
11-8-2004
 
32.22; 32.23


1349
 
11-8-2004
 
35.33


1350
 
11-8-2004
 
151.017; 151.018


1352
 
11-8-2004
 
150.030; 150.031


1354
 
11-8-2004
 
31.04


1355
 
11-8-2004
 
30.017


1356
 
11-8-2004
 
33.01


1356
 
11-8-2004
 
33.02; 71.11


1358
 
11-8-2004
 
94.02


1360
 
11-8-2004
 
151.022


1361
 
11-8-2004
 
151.038


1362
 
11-8-2004
 
112.07


1364
 
11-8-2004
 
112.07


1365
 
11-8-2004
 
112.18


1367
 
11-8-2004
 
130.32


1372
 
1-24-2005
 
90.99; 130.99


1373
 
1-24-2005
 
90.05


1377
 
6-6-2005
 
52.05


1378
 
6-6-2005
 
54.09


1379
 
6-6-2005
 
55.02; 55.09


1381
 
7-25-2005
 
52.05


1383
 
10-24-2005
 
55.09


1385
 
4-24-2006
 
110.01


1386
 
5-22-2006
 
130.39


1389
 
6-19-2006
 
90.12


1390
 
7-10-2006
 
Ch. 74, Schd. I


1392
 
11-20-2006
 
112.10


1395
 
2-4-2007
 
90.05


1393
 
2-5-2007
 
71.40; 72.04; Ch. 74, Schd. II; Ch. 75, Schd. II


1395
 
6-4-2007
 
90.02; 90.06; 90.07


1397
 
9-24-2007
 
113.20—113.30


1399
 
12-4-2007
 
130.34


1400
 
12-17-2007
 
90.06


1401
 
1-7-2008
 
30.001; 90.01; 90.02


1402
 
3-10-2008
 
52.05


1406
 
10-6-2008
 
51.16


1411
 
11-23-2009
 
90.12


1412
 
2-22-2010
 
130.32


1413
 
4-19-2010
 
90.11; 90.13


1414
 
8-9-2010
 
52.05


1415
 
9-13-2010
 
51.16


1416
 
11-8-2010
 
52.08


1417
 
11-22-2010
 
93.01—93.03


1418
 
12-20-2010
 
33.09; 90.03; 90.09; 90.14; 112.01; 112.03; 112.06; 112.07; 112.10; 112.18;
112.19


1419
 
2-7-2011
 
130.39


1421
 
4-18-2011
 
153.01—153.13; 153.25—153.29; 153.40—153.42; 153.99


1422
 
5-9-2011
 
150.054


1423
 
8-8-2011
 
54.09


1424
 
8-8-2011
 
55.09


1426A
 
10-24-2011
 
150.030; 150.031


1426B
 
12-5-2011
 
30.055; 30.070; 33.05; 33.12; 33.18; 34.27; ; 112.03; 112.07; 112.10; 112.13;
151.022


1427
 
5-7-2012
 
150.033; 150.034; 154.99


1431
 
5-21-2012
 
150.031


1444
 
12-23-2012
 
30.073


1433A
 
1-7-2013
 
90.14; 110.01; 112.10; 130.03


1433B
 
2-18-2013
 
90.16


1436
 
11-4-2013
 
150.030; 150.031


1437
 
12-23-2013
 
30.001


1438
 
12-23-2013
 
35.15


1439
 
12-23-2013
 
35.16


1440
 
12-23-2013
 
35.17


1442
 
12-23-2013
 
35.19


1443
 
12-23–2013
 
30.055


1445
 
12-23-2013
 
30.074


1446
 
12-23-2013
 
130.32


1447
 
12-23-2013
 
32.06


1448
 
12-23-2013
 
130.19


1449
 
12-23-2013
 
31.99; 32.99; 34.99; 51.99; 70.99; 90.99; 92.99; 93.99; 110.99; 130.99;
150.999; 151.999; 154.99


1450
 
2-17-2014
 
52.05


1451
 
3- -2014
 
31.07


1452
 
5-5-2014
 
52.05


1454
 
10-20-2014
 
130.33


1455A
 
11-24-2014
 
30.057; 34.04


1455B
 
2-9-2015
 
30.055; 33.09; 33.12; 110.01; 110.15; 112.10; 130.19; 130.38


1456
 
3-9-2015
 
73.19


1457
 
4-20-2015
 
112.10


1458
 
5-18-2015
 
52.05


1460
 
1-18-2016
 
54.09; 55.09


1461
 
2-8-2016
 
30.056; 33.18; 35.20; 50.02; 70.01; 90.03; 90.14; 91.17; 91.22; 112.03;
112.19; 130.16; 130.32; 151.019; 151.022


1462
 
5-23-2016
 
71.03


1465
 
10-17-2016
 
52.05


1466
 
12-5-2016
 
154.01


1467
 
12-5-2016
 
154.02


1468
 
2-6-2017
 
33.08; 33.12; 35.01; 90.14; 91.22; 112.02; 112.04; 112.06; 112.14; 151.037;
151.070


1471
 
6-19-2017
 
35.01


1470
 
7-10-2017
 
31.11


1472
 
8-7-2017
 
30.091


1474
 
9-5-2017
 
51.16


1475
 
12-4-2017
 
110.18


1476
 
1-8-2018
 
35.01


1477
 
1-22-2018
 
154.03


1479
 
2-5-2018
 
30.016; 31.03; 34.27; 35.17; 35.18; 35.25; 51.03; 72.20; 130.32; 151.017;
151.056


1478
 
2-19-2018
 
71.40

CITY OF COZAD
DAWSON COUNTY, NEBRASKA
ZONING ORDINANCE
ADOPTED BY THE CITY OF COZAD, NEBRASKA
__________________
Prepared By

TABLE OF CONTENTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 I
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1: TITLE AND PURPOSE.................................................................................................................. 1
SECTION 1.01 TITLE ....................................................................................................................................................... 1
SECTION 1.02 PURPOSE ................................................................................................................................................ 1
SECTION 1.03 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN RELATIONSHIP ..................................................................................................... 1
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................................. 2
SECTION 2.01 RULES ..................................................................................................................................................... 2
SECTION 2.02 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ............................................................................................................ 2
SECTION 2.03 DEFINITIONS............................................................................................................................................ 3
ARTICLE 3: DISTRICTS AND OFFICIAL MAP ............................................................................................. 41
SECTION 3.01 DISTRICTS .............................................................................................................................................41
SECTION 3.02 PROVISION FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP ................................................................................................41
SECTION 4.01 PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS ......................................................................................42
SECTION 4.02 DISTRICT REGULATIONS, RESTRICTIONS, BOUNDARY CREATION ................................................................42
SECTION 4.03 JURISDICTION .......................................................................................................................................42
SECTION 4.04 PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS ................................................42
SECTION 4.05 ZONING AFFECTS EVERY BUILDING AND USE ..........................................................................................42
SECTION 4.06 LOT ......................................................................................................................................................42
SECTION 4.07 REDUCTIONS IN LOT AREA PROHIBITED ...................................................................................................42
SECTION 4.08 OBSTRUCTIONS TO VISION AT STREET INTERSECTIONS ...............................................................................43
SECTION 4.09 YARD REQUIREMENTS ............................................................................................................................43
SECTION 4.10 DRAINAGE ...........................................................................................................................................43
SECTION 4.11 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS ......................................................................................44
SECTION 4.12 ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USES ..........................................................................................................44
SECTION 4.13 PERMITTED MODIFICATIONS OF HEIGHT REGULATIONS .............................................................................45
SECTION 4.14 OCCUPANCY OF BASEMENTS AND CELLARS ..........................................................................................45
SECTION 4.15 NONCONFORMING, GENERAL INTENT....................................................................................................46
SECTION 4.16 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD ...................................................................................................46
SECTION 4.17 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES............................................................................................................46
SECTION 4.18 NONCONFORMING USES ......................................................................................................................46
SECTION 4.19 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE .................................................................................................................47
SECTION 4.20 USES UNDER CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT NOT NONCONFORMING USES ....................................................47
SECTION 4.21 REAR YARD SETBACKS REDUCTION ........................................................................................................47
SECTION 4.22 TEMPORARY USES AND PERMITS .............................................................................................................48
SECTION 4.23: PROHIBITED USES ..................................................................................................................................48
SECTION 4.24: FEES .....................................................................................................................................................48
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS ................................................................................................................. 49
SECTION 5.01 DISTRICTS; USE ......................................................................................................................................49
SECTION 5.02 DISTRICTS; BOUNDARIES AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAP .............................................................................49
SECTION 5.03 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES ON THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP .............................49
SECTION 5.04 LAND USE CATEGORIES MATRIX EXPLANATION .......................................................................................50
SECTION 5.05 ANNEXATION AND CONFORMANCE WITH THE LAND USE PLAN................................................................50
SECTION 5.06 LAND USE CATEGORIES/MATRIX ...........................................................................................................51
SECTION 5.07 TA-1: TRANSITIONAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT ........................................................................................60
SECTION 5.08 R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ..............................................................................................................61
SECTION 5.09 R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ...........................................................................................62
SECTION 5.10 R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ................................................................................................63
SECTION 5.11 RM MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ...............................................................................................65
SECTION 5.12 C-1 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT .............................................................................................67
SECTION 5.13 C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT ..................................................................................................69
SECTION 5.14 C-3 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT .................................................................................................70
SECTION 5.15 F-1 COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL FLEX DISTRICT .........................................................................................71
SECTION 5.16 I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT .........................................................................................................................72
SECTION 5.17 HPO HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT .................................................................................73
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ii COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
SECTION 5.18 AH AIRPORT HAZARD OVERLAY DISTRICT ..............................................................................................74
SECTION 5.19 PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ......................................................................................................80
ARTICLE 6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS .................................................................................................. 86
SECTION 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS ..........................................................................................................................86
SECTION 6.02 APPLICATION FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT .........................................................................................86
SECTION 6.03 PUBLIC HEARING ..................................................................................................................................86
SECTION 6.04 DECISIONS ...........................................................................................................................................86
SECTION 6.05 TRANSFERABILITY ...................................................................................................................................86
SECTION 6.06 REVOCATION .......................................................................................................................................87
SECTION 6.07 STANDARDS ..........................................................................................................................................87
ARTICLE 7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS ...................................................................................................... 88
SECTION 7.01 PURPOSE ..............................................................................................................................................88
SECTION 7.02 OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE STORAGE .......................................................................................................88
SECTION 7.03 SCHEDULE OF MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS .........................................89
SECTION 7.04 OFF-STREET PARKING: SHARED PARKING REQUIREMENTS ........................................................................90
SECTION 7.05 OFF-STREET PARKING: PARKING FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES .........................................................90
SECTION 7.06 OFF-STREET PARKING DESIGN CRITERIA .................................................................................................91
ARTICLE 8: SIGN REGULATIONS ............................................................................................................... 93
SECTION 8.01 COMPLIANCE WITH SIGN REGULATIONS .................................................................................................93
SECTION 8.02 SIGN DEFINITIONS .................................................................................................................................93
SECTION 8.03 SIGN AREA COMPUTATION ...................................................................................................................96
SECTION 8.04 SIGN SCHEDULES ..................................................................................................................................97
SECTION 8.05 SIGNS, SPECIAL CONDITIONS ................................................................................................................99
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS ............................................................................................ 101
SECTION 9.01 HOME OCCUPATIONS AND HOME BASED BUSINESSES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS .................................... 101
SECTION 9.02 HOME OCCUPATIONS AND HOME BASED BUSINESSES WITHIN THE TA-1 DISTRICTS ................................. 104
SECTION 9.03 RADIO, TELEVISION AND WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS ............................................................ 107
SECTION 9.04 FENCES ............................................................................................................................................. 112
SECTION 9.05 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR INDUSTRIAL USES ............................................................................... 113
SECTION 9.06 SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS ........................................................................................................... 114
SECTION 9.07 COMMERCIAL/UTILITY GRADE WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS........................................................................ 116
SECTION 9.08 JUNK YARDS OR SALVAGE YARDS ...................................................................................................... 119
SECTION 9.09 BIOFUELS AND DISTILLATION FACILITIES ................................................................................................ 120
SECTION 9.10 SOLAR PANELS .................................................................................................................................. 120
SECTION 9.11 SELF-STORAGE UNITS (MINI-WAREHOUSES) ......................................................................................... 121
SECTION 9.12 AUTO REPAIR, EQUIPMENT REPAIR, AND BODY REPAIR ........................................................................ 121
SECTION 9.13 AUTOMOBILE AND EQUIPMENT RENTAL AND SALES .............................................................................. 121
SECTION 9.14 BED AND BREAKFASTS ........................................................................................................................ 122
SECTION 9.15 SALVAGE SERVICES ............................................................................................................................ 122
SECTION 9.16 OUTDOOR STORAGE CONTAINERS ..................................................................................................... 122
SECTION 9.17 SAND AND GRAVEL, MINERAL, STONE, ROCK, AND SOIL EXTRACTION AND QUARRIES .......................... 123
SECTION 9.18 MOBILE FOOD UNITS .......................................................................................................................... 123
SECTION 9.19 AMATEUR RADIO TOWERS AND FCC PRONOUNCEMENTS ................................................................... 124
SECTION 9.20 ROADSIDE STANDS ............................................................................................................................. 124
SECTION 9.21 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS .............................................................................................. 124
ARTICLE 10: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ................................................................................................... 125
SECTION 10.01 MEMBERS, TERMS AND MEETINGS ....................................................................................................... 125
SECTION 10.02 APPEALS TO BOARD, RECORD OF APPEAL, HEARINGS AND STAYS ........................................................ 125
SECTION 10.03 POWERS AND JURISDICTION ON APPEAL ............................................................................................. 125
SECTION 10.04 APPEALS TO DISTRICT COURT ............................................................................................................. 126
TABLE OF CONTENTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 III
ARTICLE 11: AMENDMENTS AND APPLICATION PROCESS .................................................................. 127
SECTION 11.01 PURPOSE ........................................................................................................................................... 127
SECTION 11.02 INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS ............................................................................................................... 127
SECTION 11.03 AMENDMENT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS ......................................................................................... 127
SECTION 11.04 AMENDMENT PROCEDURES ................................................................................................................ 127
SECTION 11.05 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR ................................................................................................................... 128
SECTION 11.06 ZONING PERMITS ............................................................................................................................... 128
SECTION 11.07 CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE .............................................................................................. 129
SECTION 11.08 PENALTIES.......................................................................................................................................... 129
SECTION 11.09 REMEDIES .......................................................................................................................................... 129
ARTICLE 12: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS .............................................................................................. 130
SECTION 12.01 SEVERABILITY ..................................................................................................................................... 130
SECTION 12.02 PURPOSE OF CATCH HEADS ............................................................................................................... 130
SECTION 12.03 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES .............................................................................................. 130
SECTION 12.04 EFFECTIVE DATE ................................................................................................................................. 130
ARTICLE 1: TITLE AND PURPOSE
iv COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
This Page Intentionally left Blank
ARTICLE 1: TITLE AND PURPOSE
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 1
Article 1: Title and Purpose
Section 1.01 Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cozad, Nebraska.
Section 1.02 Purpose
This ordinance has been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community; to lessen congestion in streets; to secure safety from fire and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to promote the distribution of population, land classifications and land development to support provisions for adequate transportation, water flows, water supply, drainage, sanitation, recreation, and other public requirements; to protect property against blight and depreciation; and to secure economy in governmental expenditures.
Section 1.03 Comprehensive Plan Relationship
These zoning ordinances are designed to implement various elements of the comprehensive plan as required by state statutes. Any amendment to the district ordinances or map shall conform to the comprehensive plan adopted by the governing body.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
2 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Article 2: Definitions
Section 2.01 Rules
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following rules shall apply:
2.01.01 Words and numbers used singularly shall include the plural. Words and numbers used in the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
2.01.02 The word "persons" includes a corporation, members of a partnership or other business organization, a committee, board, council, commission, trustee, receiver, agent or other representative.
2.01.03 The word "shall" is mandatory. The word “may” is permissive.
2.01.04 The words "use", "used", "occupy" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended", "arranged" or "designed" to be used or occupied.
2.01.05 The word "commission" shall refer to the Planning Commission of Cozad, Nebraska.
2.01.06 Undefined words or terms not herein defined shall have their ordinary meaning in relation to the context.
2.01.07 In the case of any real or apparent conflict between the text of the Ordinance and any illustration explaining the text, the text shall apply.
Section 2.02 Abbreviations and Acronyms
For purposes of these Regulations this section contains a listing of abbreviations and acronyms used throughout this document.
ADA = Americans with Disabilities Act
A.U. = Animal Unit
CFR = Code of Federal Regulations
DU = Dwelling Unit
DNR= Department of Natural Resources
FAA = Federal Aviation Administration
FCC = Federal Communication Commission
FEMA = Federal Emergency Management Agency
GFA = Gross Floor Area
HUD = US Department of Housing and Urban Development
KV = Kilovolt
KW = Kilowatt
NDEQ= Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality
NDOR= Nebraska Department of Roads
NEMA= Nebraska Emergency Management Agency
NHHS= Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services
NPDES = National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service
USC = United States Code
USACE = United States Army Corps of Engineers
USDA = United States Department of Agriculture
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 3
Section 2.03 Definitions
A
ABANDONMENT shall mean to cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent to resume as distinguished from short term interruptions such as during periods of remodeling, maintenance, or normal periods of vacation or seasonal closure.
ABUT shall mean to border on, be contiguous with or have common property or district lines, including property separated by a public street or alley
ACCESS or ACCESS WAY shall mean the place, means, or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this Regulation.
ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS shall mean living quarters within an accessory building located on the same premises with the main building, for use by temporary guests of the occupant of the premises, such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.
ACCESSORY BUILDING or STRUCTURE shall mean a detached subordinate building or structure located on the same lot with the principal building or structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure. Customary accessory buildings and structures include farm buildings, garages, carports, and storage sheds but not portable storage containers.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT shall mean a separate, complete housekeeping unit with a separate entrance, kitchen, sleeping area, and full bathroom facilities, which is an attached or detached extension to an existing single-family structure, also referred to as “Granny Flats”.
ACCESSORY USE shall mean a use incidental, related, appropriate and clearly subordinate to the main use of the lot or building.
ACREAGE shall mean any tract or parcel of land, used for single-family residential purposes, that does not qualify as a farm or farmstead.
ADJACENT see “Abut”.
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE shall mean any structure used as an outdoor display, regardless of size and shape, for the purposes of making anything known, the origin or place of sale of which is not on the property with such Advertising Structure.
AGENT shall mean any person showing written verification that he/she is acting for, and with the knowledge and consent of, a property owner.
AGRICULTURAL OR FARM BUILDINGS shall mean any building or structure which is necessary or incidental to the normal conduct of a farming operation, including but not limited to, residence of hired persons, barns, buildings and sheds for housing livestock, poultry and farm machinery, buildings for the storage or shelter of grain, hay and other crops, silos, windmills and water storage tanks.
AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRIES shall mean establishments or uses engaged in the large-scale storage or initial processing of agricultural products and supplies that cannot be otherwise categorized as light, general, or heavy industries, some of which may involve storage of potentially hazardous materials. Typical uses include grain elevators and anhydrous ammonia storage facilities.
Accessory Building
Accessory Use
Example of an Accessory Use
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
4 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
AGRICULTURAL SALES AND SERVICE shall mean an establishments or places of business engaged in sale from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers, farm equipment, pesticides and similar goods or in the provision of agriculturally related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. Typical uses include nurseries, hay, farm implement dealerships, feed and grain stores, and tree service firms.
AGRICULTURE shall mean the use of land for agricultural purposes, for obtaining a profit by raising, harvesting, and selling crops or by the feeding, breeding, management, and sale of, or the produce of, livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals, or honeybees, or for dairying and the sale of dairy products, or any other agricultural or horticultural use.
ALLEY shall mean a public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon.
ALTERATION shall mean any change, addition or modification to the construction or occupancy of an existing structure.
AMENDMENT shall mean a change in the wording, context, or substance of this Ordinance, or an addition, deletion or change in the district boundaries or classifications upon the Official Zoning Map.
ANIMAL, DOMESTIC see Household Pet.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL shall mean a place where animals are given medical care and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use.
ANIMAL UNIT shall mean any farming operation or the feeding, farrowing, or raising cattle, swine, sheep, poultry, or other livestock, in a confined area where grazing is not possible, and where the confined area is for more than 6 months in any one calendar year, and where the number of animals so maintained exceeds 300 Animal Units as defined below. The confined area of the Livestock Feeding Operation (LFO) shall include the pens, corrals, sheds, buildings, feed storage areas, waste disposal ponds, and related facilities. Such facilities shall be constructed and operated in conformance with applicable county, state, and federal regulations. Two or more LFO's under common ownership are deemed to be a single LFO if they are adjacent to each other or if they utilize a common area of system for the disposal of livestock wastes. Animal Units (A.U.) are defined as follows:
One (1) A.U. = One Cow/Calf combination;
One (1) A.U. = One Slaughter, Feeder Cattle;
One (1) A.U. = One-half Horse;
One (1) A.U. = Seven Tenths Mature Dairy Cattle;
One (1) A.U. = Two and One Half Swine (55 lbs. or more);
One (1) A.U. = Twenty-Five Weaned Pigs (less than 55 lbs.);
One (1) A.U. = Two Sows with Litters;
One (1) A.U. = Ten Sheep;
One (1) A.U. = One Hundred Chickens;
One (1) A.U. = Fifty Turkeys;
One (1) A.U. = Five Ducks.
ANTENNA shall mean any attached or external system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting disks or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves. Also, see Satellite Dish Antenna and Tower.
ANTIQUE SHOPS shall mean a place offering primarily antiques for sale. An antique for the purpose of this ordinance shall be a work of art, piece of furniture, decorative object, or the like, that is at least 30 years old.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 5
APARTMENT shall mean a room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house or multiple family dwelling arranged, intended or designed as a place of residence for a single family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, including culinary accommodations. Also, see Dwelling Unit.
APARTMENT COMPLEX shall mean a building or buildings containing apartments used as a place of residence for more than two households.
APARTMENT HOUSE see Dwelling, Multiple.
APPLICANT shall mean the owner or duly designated representative of land proposed to be subdivided, or for which a special use permit, conditional use permit, temporary use permit, zoning amendment, variance, appeal, building permit, or certificate of occupancy and other similar administrative permits has been requested. Consent shall be required from the legal owner or his legal representative in writing except for building permits.
APPROPRIATE shall mean fitting the context of the site and the whole community.
APPURTENANCES shall mean the visible, functional objects accessory to and part of buildings.
ARTISAN PRODUCTION SHOP shall mean a building or portion thereof used for the creation of original handmade works of art or craft items by more than three but less than six artists or artisans, as either a principal or accessory use.
ARTIST STUDIO shall mean a place designed to be used, or used as, both a dwelling place and a place of work by an artist, artisan, or craftsperson, including persons engaged in the application, teaching, or performance of fine arts such as, but not limited to, drawing, vocal or instrumental music, painting, sculpture, and writing.
ATTACHED shall mean a foundation, wall or roof of a building or structure which is connected to and supported by the foundation, wall, or roof of another building or structure.
AUTO BODY REPAIR shall mean the Repair, painting, or refinishing of the body, fender, or frame of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, boats, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar vehicles or equipment. Typical uses include body and fender shops, painting shops, and other similar repair or refinishing garages.
AUTO SERVICES shall mean the provision of fuel, lubricants, parts and accessories, and incidental services to motor vehicles; and washing and cleaning and/or repair of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing of equipment and parts. Typical uses include service stations, car washes, muffler shops, auto repair garages, tire sales and installation, wheel and brake shops, and similar repair and service activities but exclude dismantling, salvage, or body and fender repair services.
AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE (ATM) shall mean an automated device that performs banking or financial functions at a location remote from the controlling financial institution.
AUTOMOBILE RENTAL AND SALES shall mean sale or rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include new and used car dealerships; motorcycle dealerships; and boat, trailer, and recreational vehicle dealerships.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD shall mean any lot, or the use of any portion of a lot, for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles, tractors, farm machinery, or other motor vehicles, or for the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking.
Apartment Complex
Example of a stand-alone ATM
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
6 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
AUTOMOTIVE AND MACHINERY REPAIR SHOP shall mean a building used for the repair of motor vehicles or machinery; when such repair shall be wholly within a completely enclosed building. This definition also includes body repair and painting.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES AREA shall mean an open area, other than a street, used for display or sale of new or used motor vehicles and trailers by one required to be licensed as a motor vehicle dealer by the State of Nebraska, and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of motor vehicles or trailers to be displayed and sold on the premises.
B
BAR shall mean any establishment whose principal business is serving alcoholic beverages at retail for consumption on the premises. Also, see Nightclub and Tavern.
BASE FLOOD shall mean the flood, from whatever source, having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, otherwise referred to as the 100-year flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION shall mean that elevation, expressed in feet above mean sea level, to which flooding can be expected to occur on a frequency of once in every 100 years, or which is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
BASE ZONING DISTRICT shall mean a district established by this Ordinance that prescribes basic regulations governing land use and site development standards.
BASEMENT shall mean the substructure or foundation of a building; the lowest habitable story of a building, usually below ground level. A basement used for independent dwelling or business purposes shall be considered a story for the purposes of height measurement.
BEACON shall mean any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN shall mean a dwelling that is used for the purpose of offering overnight lodging and meals to travelers for a fee which dwelling has unique structural and/or site characteristics which create the appearance of an Inn type setting. Such dwelling shall have a maximum of six guest rooms available for travelers lodging and no more than 12 guests may stay at any time. Guests who stay at the bed and breakfast shall not remain for a period of more than 30 consecutive days.
BEDROOM shall mean a room within a dwelling unit planned and intended for sleeping, separable from other rooms by a door.
BEER GARDEN shall mean a permanent establishment which includes any area out-of-doors and not completely contained within a building in which alcoholic beverages or food is served.
BEGINNING OF CONSTRUCTION shall mean that site grading is the beginning of construction.
BERM shall mean a raised form of earth to provide screening or to improve the aesthetic character.
BEST INTERESTS OF COMMUNITY shall mean interests of the community at large and not the interest of the immediate neighborhood.
BILLBOARD see Sign, Billboard.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 7
BLOCK shall mean a parcel of land platted into lots and bounded by public streets or by waterways, right-of-ways, non-platted land, City or County boundaries, or adjoining property lines.
BLOCK FRONTAGE shall mean that section of a block fronting on a street between two intersecting streets or other block boundary.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT shall mean that Board that has been created by the City and which has the statutory authority to hear and determine appeals from, interpretations of, and variances to the zoning regulations.
BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE shall mean a building other than a hotel or motel, but containing a single dwelling unit and provisions for three but not more than 20 guests, where lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation.
BREW-ON PREMISES STORE shall mean a facility that provides the ingredients and equipment for a customer to use to brew malt liquor at the store. Brew-on-premises stores do not include the sale of intoxicating liquor, unless the owner of the brew-on-premises store holds the appropriate liquor license.
BREW PUB shall mean a restaurant or hotel which includes the brewing of beer as an accessory use. The brewing operation processes water, malt, hops, and yeast into beer or ale by mashing, cooking, and fermenting. By definition, these establishments produce no more than 10,000 barrels of beer or ale annually. The area, by definition, used for brewing, including bottling and kegging shall not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area of the commercial space. Also see Brewery, Craft.
BREWERY shall mean a facility for brewing ales, beers, meads and/or similar beverages on site. Breweries are classified as a use that manufactures more than 10,000 barrels of beverage (all beverages combined) annually.
BREWERY, CRAFT shall mean a brew pub or a microbrewery.
BREWERY, MICRO shall mean a facility for the production and packaging of malt beverages of low alcoholic content for distribution, retail or wholesale, on or off premises, with a capacity of not more than 10,000 barrels per year. The development may include other uses such as standard restaurant, bar, or live entertainment as otherwise permitted in the zoning district.
BUFFER shall mean a strip of land established to protect one type of land use from another incompatible land use or between a land use and a private or public road. Also, see Screening.
BUFFER AREA shall mean an open and unobstructed ground area of a plot in addition to any no building zones or street widening around the perimeter of any plot where required.
BUFFERYARD shall mean a landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another.
BUILDABLE AREA shall mean that part of a zoning lot not included within the required yards or subject to other restrictions herein required.
BUILDING shall mean any structure built and maintained for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, but shall not include temporary buildings as defined in "Structure, Temporary". Trailers, with or without wheels, shall not be considered buildings.
Buildable Area
Buildable Area
Example of Buildable Area
Example of Buildable Area
Example of a Block
Example of a Block
Example of Block Frontage
Example of Block Frontage
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
8 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
BUILDING AREA shall mean the sum in square feet of the ground areas occupied by all buildings and structures on a lot.
BUILDING CODE shall mean the various codes of the City of Cozad that regulate construction and require building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and other permits to as well as other codes adopted by the City that pertain to building construction.
BUILDING COVERAGE shall mean the area of a site covered by buildings or roofed areas, excluding allowed projecting eaves, balconies, and similar features.
BUILDING ENVELOPE shall mean the three-dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot after all zoning and other applicable municipal requirements have been met.
BUILDING HEIGHT shall mean the vertical distance above grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest point of a gable, hip, or shed roof, measured from the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five feet horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building.
BUILDING LINE shall mean the outer boundary of a building established by the location of its exterior walls.
BUILDING OFFICIAL shall mean the designee of the City Council, responsible for the enforcement of the building and land use regulations of the City of Cozad.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE shall mean the required zoning distance between a building and the lot line.
BULK REGULATIONS shall mean regulations controlling the size and relationship of structures and uses to each other and to open areas and lot lines. Bulk regulations include regulations controlling: (1) maximum height (2) maximum lot coverage and (3) minimum size of yard and setbacks.
BUSINESS shall mean activities that include the exchange or manufacture of goods or services on a site.
BUSINESS CENTER shall mean a building containing more than one commercial business, or any group of nonresidential buildings within a common development, characterized by shared parking and access.
BUSINESS SERVICES shall mean uses providing services to people, groups, businesses, dwellings and other buildings. Business services shall include janitorial services, carpet and upholstery cleaning, painting and decorating, building maintenance, swimming pool maintenance, security service, graphics/advertising agency, photocopying/duplication, quick print shops, printing, blueprinting, sign painting, non-vehicle equipment rental, photographic studios.
BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES shall mean establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale, rental or repair of equipment, supplies and materials or the provision of services used by office, professional and service establishments to the firms themselves but excluding automotive, construction and farm equipment; or engaged in the provision of maintenance or custodial services to businesses. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops or hotel equipment and supply firms, janitorial services, photography studios, and convenience printing and copying.
Example of Building Setback Line
Example of Building Setback Line
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 9
C
CAMPGROUND shall mean a parcel of land intended for the temporary occupancy of tents, campers, and major recreational vehicles for which the primary purpose is recreational, and having open areas that are natural in character.
CAR WASH shall mean a building or structure or an area of land with machine or hand operated facilities for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles.
CARPORT shall mean a permanent roofed structure with not more than two enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage.
CELLAR shall mean a building space having less than one-half of its height below the average adjoining grade lines.
CEMETERY shall mean land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for such purposes, including columbarium, crematoriums, and mausoleums.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY shall mean an official certificate issued by the Building Official or his/her designee, upon finding of conformance with the zoning regulations and other applicable ordinances of the City and authorizing legal use of the premises for which it is issued.
CHANNEL shall mean the geographical area located within either the natural or the artificial banks of a watercourse or drainageway.
CHARITABLE shall mean a public or semi-public institutional use of a philanthropic, charitable, benevolent, religious, or eleemosynary character, but not including sheltering or caring of animals.
CHILD CARE CENTER shall mean an establishment other than a public or parochial school, which provides day care, play groups, nursery schools or education for nine or more children under age 13, at any one time, from families other than that of the provider. In addition to these regulations, Child Care Centers shall meet all requirements of the State of Nebraska.
CHILD CARE HOME shall mean an operation in the provider's place of residence, which serves at least four, but not more than eight children at any one time from families other than that of the provider. A Family Child Care Home provider may be approved to serve no more than two additional school-age children during non-school hours. In addition to these regulations, Child Care Homes shall meet all requirements of the State of Nebraska.
CHURCH, STOREFRONT shall mean a religious facility contained within a store or similar structure not typically used for religious activities that are now used as a meeting place for a congregation, including but not limited to, barns, stores, warehouses, old public buildings, and single-family dwellings.
CITY shall mean the City of Cozad, Nebraska. Also, “City Council” or “Governing Body.”
CITY ATTORNEY shall mean the City Attorney of the City of Cozad or his/her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
CITY COUNCIL shall mean the City Council of Cozad, Nebraska.
CITY ENGINEER shall mean the City Engineer as hired or appointed by the Mayor, City Council and City Council or his/her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
CITY LIMITS shall mean the established corporate boundary of the City of Cozad.
CLEAR VIEW ZONE See Sight Triangle.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
10 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
CLUB shall mean an association of persons (whether or not incorporated), religious or otherwise, for a common purpose, but not including groups which are organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business for profit.
CLUSTERED DEVELOPMENT shall mean a development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, or the preservation of historically or environmentally sensitive features.
CODE shall mean the Municipal Code of the City of Cozad, Nebraska.
COFFEE KIOSK shall mean a retail food business in a freestanding building that sells coffee, or other nonalcoholic beverages, and pre-made bakery goods from a drive-through window to customers seated in their automobiles for consumption off the premises and that provides no indoor or outdoor seating.
COMMISSION shall mean the Planning Commission of Cozad, Nebraska.
COMMON AREA OR PROPERTY shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which are shared by the Owners of the individual building sites in a Planned Development or condominium development.
COMMON DEVELOPMENT shall mean a development proposed and planned as one unified project not separated by a public street or alley.
COMMON OPEN SPACE shall mean land within or related to a development that is not individually owned or dedicated for public use, designed and generally intended for the common use of the residents of the development.
COMMUNICATION SERVICES shall mean establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but excludes those classified as Utilities. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunication service centers, telegraph service offices, or film and sound recording facilities.
COMMUNITY CENTER shall mean a place, structure, or other facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve various segments of the community.
COMPATIBILITY shall mean harmony in the appearance of two or more external design features in the same vicinity.
COMPATIBLE USE shall mean the degree to which two or more different land use types are able to exist together in close proximity, with no one use having significant negative effects on any other use.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN shall mean the Comprehensive Development Plan of Cozad, Nebraska as adopted by the City Council, setting forth policies for the present and foreseeable future community welfare as a whole and meeting the purposes and requirements set forth in the Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-903.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT shall mean a permit issued by the Planning Commission and City Council that authorizes the recipient to make a conditional use of property in accordance with the provisions of Article 6 and any additional conditions placed upon, or required by said permit.
CONDOMINIUM shall mean real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions, pursuant to the Nebraska Condominium Act, as set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 76-825 to 76-894 (R.R.S.1997).
CONFLICTING LAND USE shall mean the use of property which transfers over neighboring property lines negative economic or environmental effects, including, but not limited to, noise, vibration, odor, dust,
Example of
Example of Clustered Clustered DevelopmentDevelopment
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 11
glare, smoke, pollution, and water vapor, or consists of mismatched land uses, density, height, mass, or layout of adjacent uses, or results in a loss of privacy.
CONGREGATE HOUSING shall mean a residential facility for four or more persons aged 55 years or over and their spouses, providing living and sleeping facilities including meal preparation, dining areas, laundry services, room cleaning and common recreational, social, and service facilities for the exclusive use of all residents including resident staff personnel who occupy a room or unit in the residential facility. Also, see Life Care Facility.
CONSERVATION shall mean the management of natural resources to prevent waste, destruction, or degradation.
CONSERVATION AREA shall mean an area of environmentally sensitive and valuable lands protected from any activity that would significantly alter their ecological integrity, balance or character, except in the case of an overriding public interest, including but not limited to: wetlands, floodways, flood plains, drainage ways, river or stream banks, and areas of significant biological productivity or uniqueness.
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT shall mean a development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, or the preservation of historically or environmentally sensitive features.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT shall mean an easement granting a right or interest in real property that is appropriate to retaining land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic, open, or wooded condition and retaining such areas as suitable habitat for fish, plants, or wildlife, or maintaining existing land uses.
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION shall mean wholly or in majority, a residential subdivision that permits a reduction in lot area, setback, or other site development regulations, provided 1) there is no increase in the overall density permitted for a conventional subdivision in a given zoning district, and 2) the remaining land area is used for common space.
CONSTRUCTION BATCH PLANT shall mean a temporary demountable facility used for the manufacturing of cement, concrete, asphalt, or other paving materials intended for specific construction projects.
CONSTRUCTION YARDS shall mean establishments housing facilities of businesses primarily engaged in construction activities, including incidental storage of materials and equipment on lots other than construction sites. Typical uses are building contractor's yards.
CONVALESCENT SERVICES shall mean a use providing bed care and inpatient services for persons requiring regular medical attention but excluding a facility providing surgical or emergency medical services and excluding a facility providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or communicable disease. Typical uses include nursing homes.
CONVENIENCE STORE shall mean a one-story, retail store containing less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies, and may also sell gasoline, to customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a "supermarket.") It is dependent on, and is designed to attract and accommodate large volumes of stop-and-go traffic.
CONTIGUOUS see Abut.
CORPORATE LIMITS shall mean all land, structures and open space that has been annexed into the Village’s jurisdiction. This does not include the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City.
COURT shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or buildings and bounded on two or more sides by such building or buildings.
Convenience Store
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
12 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
COURT, INNER shall mean a court enclosed on all sides by the exterior walls of a building or buildings.
COURT, OUTER shall mean a court enclosed on all but one side by exterior walls of building or buildings or lot lines on which fences, hedges, or walls are permitted.
COURTYARD shall mean an open, unoccupied space, bounded on two or more sides by the walls of the building.
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION shall mean a subdivision which literally meets all nominal standards of the Land Development Ordinance for lot dimensions, setbacks, street frontage, and other site development regulations.
CREATIVE SUBDIVISION shall mean a subdivision that, while complying with the Subdivision Ordinance, diverges from nominal compliance with site development regulations in the Land Development Ordinance. Creative subdivisions imply a higher level of pre-planning than conventional subdivisions. They may be employed for the purpose of environmental protection or the creation of superior community design. Types of Creative Subdivisions include Cluster Subdivisions and New Urban Residential Districts.
CROP PRODUCTION shall mean the raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops for field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis. This definition may include accessory retail sales under certain conditions.
CUL-DE-SAC shall mean a short public way, which has only one outlet for vehicular traffic and terminates in a vehicular turn-around.
CULTURAL SERVICES shall mean a library, museum, or similar registered nonprofit organizational use displaying, preserving and exhibiting objects of community and cultural interest in one or more of the arts and sciences.
CURVE LOT see Lot, Curve.
D
DATE OF SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION shall mean the date certified by the local building inspector or zoning administrator when the work, or a designated portion thereof is sufficiently complete, so the owner may occupy the work or designated portion thereof for the use for which it is intended.
DECIDUOUS SCREEN shall mean landscape material consisting of plants which lose their leaves in winter and eventually will grow and be maintained at six feet in height, at least.
DECK shall mean a flat, floored, roofless structure. Roofless does not include a roll-out awning or a canopy provided that all the vertical sides, other than the residential structure are open.
DENSITY shall mean the number of dwelling units per gross acre of land.
DENTENTION BASIN shall mean a facility for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
DENTENTION FACILITY shall mean a publicly or privately operated or contracted use providing housing and care for individuals legally confined, designed to isolate those individuals from the community.
DEVELOPER shall mean any person, corporation, partnership, or entity that is responsible for any undertaking that requires a building or zoning permit, conditional use permit or sign permit.
Cul-de-sac
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 13
DEVELOPMENT shall mean any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations for which necessary permits may be required.
DEVELOPMENT CONCEPT PLAN see Site Plan.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW shall mean the review, by the City, of subdivision plats, site plans, rezoning requests, or permit review.
DISTRICT OR ZONE shall mean a section or sections of the Zoning Area for which uniform regulations governing the use of land, the height, use, area, size, and intensity of use of buildings, land, and open spaces are established.
DOG KENNEL see Kennel, Boarding or Training, and Kennel, Commercial.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS see Household Pet.
DOWNZONING shall mean a change in zoning classification of land to a less intensive or more restrictive district, such as from commercial district to residential district or from a multiple family residential district to single family residential district.
DRAINAGEWAY shall mean any depression two feet or more below the surrounding land serving to give direction to a current of water less than nine months of the year, having a bed and well-defined banks; provided, that when there is doubt as to whether a depression is a watercourse or drainageway, it shall be presumed to be a watercourse.
DRIVE-IN FACILITY shall mean an establishment where customers can be served without leaving the confinement of their vehicle.
DRIVEWAY shall mean any vehicular access to an off-street parking or loading facility.
DUMP shall mean a place used for the disposal, abandonment, discarding by burial, incineration, or by any other means for any garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, rubble, waste material, offal or dead animals. Such use shall not involve any industrial or commercial process.
DUPLEX see Dwelling, Two Family.
DWELLING shall mean any building or portion thereof, which is designed and used exclusively for single family residential purposes, excluding mobile homes.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME shall mean a factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation, which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a permanent site, which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles, and which bears a label certifying that it was built in compliance with standards promulgated by the HUD.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME shall mean any prefabricated structure, composed of one or more parts, used for living and sleeping purposes, shipped or moved in essentially a complete condition and mounted on wheels, skids or rollers, jacks blocks, horses, skirting or a permanent or temporary foundation or any prefabricated structure which has been or reasonably can be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place, whether by motor power or other means. The term mobile home shall include trailer home and camp car, but the definition shall not apply to any vehicle lawfully operated upon fixed rails.
a) Permanently Attached: Attached to real estate in such a way as to require dismantling, cutting away, unbolting from permanent continuous foundation or structural change in such mobile home in order to relocate it on another site in accordance to manufacturers recommendations.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
14 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
b) Permanent Foundation: Base on which building rests, to be constructed from either poured concrete or laid masonry block or brick on a footing to be placed a minimum of 42 inches below the final ground level.
DWELLING, MODULAR shall mean any dwelling whose construction consists entirely of or the major portions of its construction consist of a unit or units not fabricated on the final site for the dwelling unit, which units are movable or portable until placed on a permanent foundation and connected to utilities, pursuant to the Nebraska Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units Act, as set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 71-1557 to 71-1568.01 (Cum.Supp.2000). Further, such dwelling must also meet or be equivalent to the construction criteria set forth in the Nebraska Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units Act. Such dwelling is considered to be a conventional type single-family dwelling, and those that do not meet the above criteria shall be considered a mobile home.
DWELLING, MODULAR (HOME SEAL) shall mean a device or insignia issued by the Nebraska Department of Health to be displayed on the exterior of the modular housing unit to evidence compliance with departmental standards.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE shall mean a building or buildings designed and used for occupancy by three or more families, all living independently of each other, and having separate kitchen and toilet facilities for each family.
DWELLING, SEASONAL shall mean a dwelling designed and used as a temporary residence and occupied less than six months in each year.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY shall mean a building having accommodations for or occupied exclusively by one family, which meets all the following standards. This definition applies to all “double-wide” mobile or manufactured homes that meet the following standards.
a) The home shall have no less than 800 square feet of floor area, above grade, for single story construction;
b) The home shall have no less than a 18 feet exterior width;
c) The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two and one-half inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run;
d) The exterior material shall be of a color, material and scale comparable with existing site-built, single family residences;
e) The home shall have a non-reflective roof material that is or simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile, or rock. However, standing seam roofs are allowable provided it’s non-reflective;
f) The home shall be placed on a continuous permanent foundation and have wheels, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus removed, and
g) The home shall meet and maintain the same standards that are uniformly applied to all single-family dwellings in the zoning district.
h) The home shall have a permanent foundation, to be constructed from either poured concrete or laid masonry block or brick on a footing to be placed a minimum of 42 inches below the final ground level.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED shall mean a portion of a residential building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by one family, and which is located on a separate lot of record apart from the remaining portions of the building. Each such dwelling may be sold independently of other portions.
DWELLING UNIT, SPECIAL TYPES shall mean any dwelling type consisting of single-family detached; single-family attached, multi-family, mobile home that is not meet the typical construction style of traditional stick framed structures.
1. Cargo Container Dwelling: a dwelling unit constructed of one or
more new or used cargo containers used for multi-modal shipping and meeting the definition of dwelling unit above.
Example of Single-Family Attached
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 15
2. Grain Bin Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit constructed of one or more grain bins, new or used meeting the definition of Dwelling Unit above.
3. Shouse: A combination of a dwelling unit and machine shed under a common or connect roofing system. For purposes of a Shouse, these structures when on a farm, agricultural operation, or acreage shall not be classified as a farm building. In addition, the residence portion of the facility shall meet the definition of Dwelling Unit above.
4. Quonset home: A home constructed beneath and in a structure referred to as a Quonset.
5. Tiny House: A structure containing living spaces including sleeping and kitchen areas which measure 500 square feet or less in area. Tiny houses can be either portable, on wheels similar to a recreational vehicle, or on a permanent foundation.
6. Tree House: A dwelling unit where the primary structure of the unit is based on one or more tree clusters.
Cargo Container Apartment
Cargo Container Home
Cargo Container Home
Grain Bin Home
Grain Bin Home
Shouse
Shouse
Grain Elevator Apartment
Tiny House
Tiny House
Tree House
Tree House
Quonset home
Quonset home
Quonset home
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE shall mean a one-family dwelling in a row of at least two such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical wall(s).
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY shall mean a building designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of two families living independently of each other and having separate kitchen and toilet facilities for each family.
DWELLING UNIT shall mean one or more rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separate from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent cooking, toilet and sleeping facilities.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
16 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
E
EASEMENT shall mean a grant, made by a property owner, to the use of his or her land by the public, a corporation, or persons, for specific purposes, such as access to another property or the construction of utilities, drainage ways or roadways.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION shall mean a public or nonprofit institution or facility which conducts regular academic instruction at preschool, kindergarten, elementary, secondary, and collegiate levels, including graduate schools, universities, junior colleges, trade schools, nonprofit research institutions and religious institutions. Such institutions must either: (1) Offer general academic instruction equivalent to the standards established by the State Board of Education; or (2) Confer degrees as a college or university or undergraduate or graduate standing; or (3) Conduct research; or (4) Give religious instruction. Private schools, academies, or institutes incorporated or otherwise, which operate for a profit, and commercial or private trade schools are not included in this definition.
EFFECTIVE DATE shall mean the date that this chapter shall have been adopted, amended, or the date land areas became subject to the regulations contained in this chapter as a result of such adoption or amendment.
EMERGENCY RESIDENTIAL SERVICES shall mean a facility or use of a building to provide a protective sanctuary for victims of crime or abuse, including emergency housing during crisis intervention for victims of rape, abuse, or physical beatings.
ENCROACHMENT shall mean an obstruction or illegal or unauthorized intrusion into a delineated floodway, right-of-way, or adjacent property.
ENLARGEMENT shall mean the expansion of a building, structure, or use in volume, size, area, height, length, width, depth, capacity, ground coverage, or in number.
EQUIPMENT RENTAL AND SALES shall mean the sale or rental of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, mobile homes, and similar heavy equipment, including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include truck dealerships, construction equipment dealerships, and mobile home sales establishments.
EQUIPMENT REPAIR SERVICES shall mean the Repair of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses include truck repair garages, tractor and farm implement repair services, and machine shops, but exclude dismantling, salvage, or body and fender repair services.
ERECTED shall mean constructed upon or moved onto a site.
ETHANOL PLANT shall mean a facility where the conversion of biomass into an alcohol fuel product is undertaken. The facility also includes the processing of certain by-products resulting from the fermentation and distillation process.
EVERGREEN OR CONIFEROUS SCREEN shall mean landscape material consisting of plants which retain leaves or needles throughout the year which eventually will grow and be maintained at six feet in height, at least.
EXPRESSWAY shall mean a street or road that provides fast and efficient movement of large volumes of vehicular traffic between areas and does not provide direct access to property.
Easement
Easement
Example of an Easement
Example of an Easement
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 17
EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION shall mean the area beyond the corporate limits of the City, in which the State has granted the City the power to exercise zoning jurisdiction and building regulations.
F
FAÇADE shall mean the exterior wall of a building exposed to public view from the building’s exterior.
FACTORY shall mean a structure or plant within which something is made or manufactured from raw or partly wrought materials into forms suitable for use.
FAMILY shall mean one or more persons living together and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, and eating facilities within an individual housing unit, no more than 4 of whom may be unrelated. The following persons shall be considered related for the purpose of this title:
1. Persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption;
2. Persons residing with a family for the purpose of adoption;
3. Not more than eight persons under 19 years of age, residing in a foster house licensed or approved by the State of Nebraska.
4. Not more than eight persons 19 years of age or older residing with a family for the purpose of receiving foster care licensed or approved by the State of Nebraska.
5. Person(s) living with a family at the direction of a court.
FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME I shall mean a child care operation in the provider’s place of residence which serves between four and eight children at any one time. A Family Child Care Home I provider may be approved to serve no more than two additional school-age children during non-school hours. In addition to these regulations, a Child Care Home shall meet requirement of the State of Nebraska.
FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME II shall mean a child care operation either in the provider’s place of residence or a site other than the residence, serving twelve or fewer children at any one time. In addition to these regulations, a Child Care Home shall meet requirement of the State of Nebraska.
FARM an area containing at least 20 acres or more which is used for growing or storage of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruit, and grain, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals, and which produces 1,000 dollars or more per year of farms products raised on the premises. The term farming includes the operating of such area for one or more of the above uses with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce and the feeding of livestock as hereinafter prescribed provided such accessory uses do not include the feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.
FARMER’S MARKET shall mean an occasional or periodic market held in an open area or in a structure where groups of sellers offer for sale to the public such items as fresh produce, seasonal fruits, fresh flowers, arts and crafts items, and food and beverages (but not to include second hand goods) dispensed from booths located on-site.
FEDERAL shall mean the federal government of the United States of America.
FEEDLOT, COMMERCIAL shall mean a lot or building or combination of lots and buildings intended to be used for the confined feeding, breeding, raising or holding of animals and specifically designed as a confinement area in which manure may accumulate, or where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetation cover cannot be maintained in the enclosure. This definition does not include the pasturing of livestock.
FENCE shall mean a structure serving as an enclosure, barrier or boundary above ground.
FENCE, INVISIBLE shall mean an electronic pet containment system that includes the burying of wire and the use of transmitters for complete enclosure of a yard or creating sectional areas within a yard.
FENCE, OPEN shall mean a fence, including gates, which has 50 percent or more of the surface area in open spaces, which affords direct views through the fence.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
18 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
FENCE, SOLID shall mean any fence, which does not qualify as an open fence.
FINANCIAL SERVICES shall mean the provision of financial and banking services to consumers or clients. Walk-in and drive-in services to consumers are provided on site. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan associations, savings banks, and loan companies.
FIREWORKS STAND shall mean any tent used for the retail sale of fireworks, on a temporary basis.
FIREWORKS STORAGE shall mean any permanent building and/or structure where fireworks are stored for any portion of a year provided there is no retail sales made from the storage location. Said storage facility may also be used for the delivery and distribution of fireworks on a wholesale basis.
FLOOD shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters, or (2) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN shall mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
FLOOD PROOFING shall mean any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY shall mean the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
FLOOR AREA shall mean the square feet of floor space within the outside line of the walls, including the total of all space on all floors of the building. Floor area shall not include porches, garages, or spaces in a basement, cellar, or attic.
FOOD SALES shall mean establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food or household products for home consumption. Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy shops.
FOUNDATION shall mean that part of a building or wall, wholly or partly below grade, that constitutes a structural base for such building or wall.
FREESTANDING CANOPY shall mean a permanent, freestanding, unenclosed roof structure, typical of gas stations and financial institutions, designed to provide patrons shelter from the elements.
FRONTAGE shall mean that portion of a parcel of property that abuts a dedicated public street or highway.
G
GARAGE, PRIVATE shall mean a detached accessory building up to and including 1,000 s.f., including carports, on the same lot as a dwelling, used to house vehicles of the occupants of the dwelling. Private garages shall not have any sort of repair service facilities or function as a location where motor vehicles are kept for rental or sale.
GARAGE, PUBLIC shall mean any garage other than a private garage designed or used for equipment, repairing, hiring, servicing, selling, or storing motor driven vehicles.
Freestanding Canopy
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 19
GARAGE, REPAIR shall mean a building designed and used for the storage, care, repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles including both minor and major mechanical overhauling, paint, and body work. Also, see Service Station.
GARAGE, STORAGE shall mean a detached accessory building over 1,000 s.f., on the same lot as a dwelling, used to house vehicles, recreational vehicles, and other consumables owned by the occupants of the dwelling.
GARBAGE shall mean any waste food material of an animal or vegetable nature, including that which may be used for the fattening of livestock.
GENERAL OFFICES shall mean the Use of a site for business, professional, or administrative offices. Typical uses include real estate, insurance, management, travel, or other business offices; organization and association offices; banks or financial offices; or professional offices.
GRADE shall mean the horizontal elevation of the finished surface of ground, paving, or sidewalk adjacent to any building line.
1. For buildings having walls facing one street only, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall facing the street.
2. For buildings having walls facing more than one street, the grade shall be the average elevation of the grades of all walls facing each street.
3. For buildings having no walls facing a street, the grade shall be the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
GREENHOUSE shall mean a building or premises used for growing plants, preparing floral arrangements for off-site delivery to customers, cold storage of flowers or dry storage of materials used for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
GREENHOUSE, NONCOMMERCIAL shall mean a building constructed primarily of glass, plastic or similar material in which temperature and humidity can be controlled for the cultivation of fruit, herbs, flowers, vegetables or other plants intended for private use and not for sale.
GREENWAY shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, dedicated as an easement for access and/or recreation; usually a strip of land set-aside for a walkway, bicycle trail, bridle path, or other similar access-way.
GROSS FLOOR AREA shall mean the total enclosed area of all floors of a building, measured to the inside surfaces of the exterior walls. This definition excludes the areas of basements, elevator shafts, airspaces above atriums, and enclosed off-street parking and loading areas serving a principal use.
GROUNDCOVER shall mean plant material used in landscaping which remains less than 12 inches in height at maturity.
GROUNDWATER shall mean water naturally occurring beneath the surface of the ground that fills available openings in the rock or soil materials such that they may be considered saturated.
GROUP CARE HOME shall mean a home, which is operated under the auspices of an organization which is responsible for providing social services, administration, direction, and control for the home which is designed to provide 24-hour care for individuals in a residential setting.
GROUP HOME shall mean a dwelling with resident staff shared by four or more handicapped persons who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential. As used herein, the term "handicapped" shall mean having: (1) A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities so that such person is incapable of living independently; or (2) A record of having such an impairment.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
20 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
GROUP HOUSING shall mean two or more separate buildings on a lot, each containing one or more dwelling units.
GUEST ROOM shall mean a room, which is designed to be occupied by one or more guests for sleeping purposes, having no kitchen facilities, not including dormitories.
H
HALF-STORY shall mean a story under a sloped roof which has the intersection of the roof line and exterior wall face not more than three feet above the floor of such story.
HALFWAY HOUSE shall mean a licensed home for individuals on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, living together as a single housekeeping unit, wherein supervision, rehabilitation and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently.
HAZARDOUS WASTE shall mean any discarded material, refuse, or waste products, in solid, semisolid, liquid, or gaseous form, that cannot be disposed of through routine waste management techniques because they pose a present or potential threat to human health, or to other living organisms, because of their biological, chemical, or physical properties.
HEALTH CLUB shall mean a privately owned facility operated for profit, such as gymnasiums, athletic clubs, health clubs, recreational clubs, reducing salons, and weight control establishments.
HEDGE shall mean a plant or series of plants, shrubs or other landscape material, so arranged as to form a physical barrier or enclosure.
HOME OCCUPATION shall mean an “in-home” or “home based” or entrepreneurial business operating from a residential dwelling within Cozad. Any portion of a residential property, including a home phone, computer, mailing address, etc., used in deriving income or sales, will require a resident to obtain a Home Occupation Permit. Child Care Homes and Child Care Centers are not considered a Home Occupation.
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION shall mean a private, nonprofit corporation or association of homeowners of properties in a fixed area, established for the purpose of owning, operating, and maintaining various common properties and facilities.
HORTICULTURE shall mean the growing of horticultural and floricultural specialties, such as flowers, shrubs, or trees intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes. This definition may include accessory retail sales under certain conditions. Typical uses include wholesale plant nurseries and greenhouses.
HOSPICE shall mean a facility serving as a medical and residential facility for end of life treatment, providing inpatient services and support services for families of the residents and patients.
HOTEL shall mean a building or portion thereof, or a group of buildings, offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public and providing services associated with restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities. The word "hotel" includes but is not limited to motel, inn, automobile court, motor inn, motor lodge, motor court, tourist court, and motor hotel.
HOUSEHOLD PET shall mean an animal that is customarily kept for personal use or enjoyment within the home. Household pet shall include but not be limited to domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic tropical birds, fish, and rodents.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 21
I
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE shall mean the total horizontal area of all buildings, roofed or covered spaces, paved surface areas, walkways and driveways, and any other site improvements that decrease the ability of the surface of the site to absorb water, expressed as a percent of site area. The surface water area of pools is excluded from this definition.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE shall mean a surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material making the surface highly resistant to infiltration by water, such as compacted sand, rock, gravel, or clay and conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and driveways.
INCIDENTAL USE shall mean a use, which is subordinate to the main use of a premise.
INDUSTRIAL USES shall mean the manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction or destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment thereof in such a manner as to change the form, character, or appearance thereof, and any storage facilities operated in conjunction with an industrial use or for a fee, including storage elevators, truck storage yards, warehouses, wholesale storage and other similar types of enterprise.
INDUSTRIAL, GENERAL shall mean enterprises engaged in the processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or fabrication of materials and products from prepared materials or from raw materials without noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across property lines.
INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY shall mean enterprises involved in the basic processing and manufacturing of products, predominately from raw materials, with noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across property lines; or a use or process engaged in the storage of or processes involving potentially or actually hazardous, explosive, flammable, radioactive, or other commonly recognized hazardous materials.
INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT shall mean establishments engaged in the manufacture or processing of finished products from previously prepared materials, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution. These establishments are characterized by having no major external environmental effects across property lines and include no unscreened or unenclosed outdoor storage. Typical uses include commercial bakeries, dressed beef processing plants, soft drink bottling, apparel assembly from fabrics, electronics, manufacturing, print shops and publishing houses.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT shall mean the construction of a building or structure on a vacant parcel located in a predominantly built up area.
INFILL SITE shall mean any vacant lot, parcel or tract of land within developed areas of the City and where water, sewer, streets, schools, and fire protection have already been constructed or are provided. a predominately built up area.
INFRASTRUCTURE shall mean facilities and services needed to sustain industry, residential, commercial, and all other land-use activities, including water lines, sewer lines, and other utilities, streets and roads, communications, and public facilities such as fire stations, parks, schools, etc.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall mean any motor vehicle which: (1) Does not have a current state license plate; or, (2) Which is disassembled or wrecked in part or in whole, or is unable to move under its own power; or, (3) is not equipped as required by Nebraska State Law for operation upon streets or highways. A vehicle that is wholly or partially dismantled shall not be considered inoperable when said vehicle is inside a completely enclosed building.
INTENSITY shall mean the degree to which land is used referring to the levels of concentration or activity in uses ranging from uses of low intensity being agricultural and residential to uses of highest intensity being heavy industrial uses. High intensity uses are normally uses that generate concentrations of vehicular traffic and daytime population and are less compatible with lower intensity uses.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
22 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
J
JUNK shall be any worn-out, cast-off, old, or discarded articles of scrap, copper, brass, iron, steel, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
JUNK YARD shall mean any lot, land parcel, building, or structure or part thereof for storage, collection, purchase, sale, salvage, or disposal of machinery, farm machinery, and including motor vehicles, parts and equipment result from dismantling or wrecking, or keeping of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials, with no burning permitted. For motor vehicles, see "Automobile Wrecking Yard".
K
KENNEL, BOARDING, or TRAINING shall mean a use on any lot or premises in which dogs, cats or any other household pets, at least four months of age, are raised, boarded, bred, or trained.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL shall mean an establishment where three or more dogs or cats, or any combination thereof, other household pets, or non-farm/non-domestic animals at least four months of age, excluding vicious animals, are raised, bred, boarded, trained, groomed or sold as a business
KENNEL, PRIVATE shall mean an establishment where three or more dogs or cats, or combination thereof, other household pets, or non-farm/non-domestic animals at least four months of age, excluding vicious animals, are raised, bred, or boarded
L
LAGOON shall mean a wastewater treatment facility that is a shallow, artificial pond where sunlight, bacterial action, and oxygen interact to restore wastewater to a reasonable state of purity. This includes both human and livestock wastes. All lagoons shall meet the minimum design criteria established by the NDEQ and the NHHS. All lagoons shall have the proper permits approved prior to starting construction.
LANDFILL, CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL shall mean the use of a site as a depository for solid wastes that do not readily undergo chemical or biological breakdown under conditions normally associated with land disposal operations. Typical disposal material would include ashes, concrete, paving wastes, rock, brick, lumber, roofing materials and ceramic tile.
LANDFILL, SOLID WASTE shall mean the use of a site as a depository for any solid waste except hazardous and toxic waste as defined by the EPA and/or the State of Nebraska. Typical disposal material would include non-putrescible wastes; and putrescible wastes such as vegetation, tree parts, agricultural wastes (garbage) and manure.
LANDSCAPE shall mean plant materials, topography, and other natural physical elements combined in relation to one another and to man-made structures.
LANDSCAPED AREA shall mean the area within the boundaries of a given lot, site or common development consisting primarily of plant material, including but not limited to grass, trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, and other organic plant materials; or grass paver masonry units installed such that the appearance of the area is primarily landscaped.
1. Perimeter Landscaped Area: Any required landscaped area that adjoins the exterior boundary of a lot, site or common development.
2. Interior Landscaped Area: Any landscaped area within a site exclusive of required perimeter landscaping.
LANDSCAPING shall include the original planting of suitable vegetation in conformity with the requirements of this Regulation and the continued maintenance thereof.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 23
LAUNDRY, SELF SERVICE shall mean an establishment that provides home-type washing, drying, and/or ironing facilities for customers on the premises.
LIFE CARE FACILITY shall mean a facility for the transitional residency of the elderly and/or disabled persons, progressing from independent living to congregate apartment living where residents share common meals, culminating in full health, and continuing care nursing home facility. Also, see Congregate Housing.
LIMITS OF GRADING shall mean the outermost edge of the area in which the existing topography is to be altered by cutting and/or filling.
LIQUOR SALES shall mean Establishments or places of business engaged in retail sale for off-premise consumption of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include liquor stores, bottle shops, or any licensed sales of liquor, beer or wine for off-site consumption.
LIVESTOCK SALES shall mean the use of a site for the temporary confinement and exchange or sale of livestock. Typical uses include sale barns.
LOADING AREA/SPACE shall mean an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a main building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading, and which abuts a street, alley, or other appropriate means of ingress and egress.
LOT shall mean a parcel or tract of land which is or may be occupied by a use herein permitted, together with yards, and other open spaces herein required, that has frontage upon an improved street, and is a part of a recorded subdivision plat or has been recorded prior to the adoption of the Regulation, or a parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey, lot-split or sub-parceling map as filed in the office of the Dawson County Register of Deeds and abutting at least one improved public street or right-of-way, two thoroughfare easements, or one improved private road.
LOT, CORNER shall mean a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the angle is greater than 135 degrees, the lot shall be considered an "Interior Lot". The setbacks for a front yard shall be met on all abutting streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE, or THROUGH shall mean a lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, FLAG shall mean an interior lot, the majority of which has frontage and access provided by means of a narrow corridor.
LOT, INTERIOR shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.
LOT AREA shall mean the total area, on a horizontal plane, within the lot lines of a lot.
LOT COVERAGE shall mean the portion of a lot or building site which is occupied by any building or structure, excepting paved areas, walks and swimming pools, regardless of whether said building or structure is intended for human occupancy or not.
LOT DEPTH shall mean the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
24 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
LOT FRONTAGE shall mean the side of a lot abutting on a legally accessible street right-of-way other than an alley or an improved county road. For the purposes of this definition, on corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets or roads shall be considered frontage.
LOT LINE shall mean the property line bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT shall mean the property line abutting a street.
LOT LINE, REAR shall mean a lot line not abutting a street which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE shall mean any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING shall mean a lot having less area or dimension than that required in the district in which it is located and which was lawfully created prior to the zoning thereof whereby the larger area or dimension requirements were established, or any lot, other than one shown on a plat recorded in the office of the Merrick County Register of Deeds, which does not abut a public road or public road right-of-way and which was lawfully created prior to the effective date of this Regulation.
LOT OF RECORD shall mean a lot or parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the records of the Merrick County Register of Deeds at the time of the passage of a regulation establishing the zoning district in which the lot is located.
LOT WIDTH shall mean the average horizontal distance between the side lot line, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.
M
MANUFACTURED HOME see Dwelling, Manufactured Home.
MANUFACTURING shall mean the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. Manufacturing uses are usually described as plants, factories, or mills and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Assembling component parts of manufactured products is also considered manufacturing if the new product is neither a structure nor other fixed improvement. Also included is the blending of material such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors. Manufacturing production is usually carried on for the wholesale market, for interplant transfer, or to order for industrial users, rather than for direct sale to the domestic consumer.
MANUFACTURING, CUSTOM shall mean an establishment primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing, within enclosed structures, involving:
1. The use of hand tools, or
2. The use of domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding 2 horsepower, or
3. A single kiln not exceeding 8 KW or equivalent.
This category also includes the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those goods produced on site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, custom jewelry manufacturing, and candle making shops.
MASSAGE THERAPY shall mean an establishment other than a regularly licensed and established hospital or dispensary where non-medical manipulative exercises or devices are practiced upon the human body manually or otherwise by any person other than a licensed physician, surgeon, dentist, occupational or physical therapist, chiropractor or osteopath with or without the use of therapeutic, electrical, mechanical, or bathing devices. Also, see Adult Uses.
MASTER FEE SCHEDULE shall mean a fee schedule maintained by the City of Cozad and passed, and amended periodically, which establishes the required fees to be collected for specific Planning, Zoning, and Subdivision activities.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 25
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT shall mean equipment, devices, and accessories, the use of which relates to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and similar purposes.
MEDICAL OFFICES shall mean the use of a site for facilities which provide diagnoses and outpatient care on a routine basis, but which does not provide prolonged, in-house medical or surgical care. Medical offices are operated by doctors, dentists, or similar practitioners licensed for practice in the State of Nebraska.
MINI-STORAGE OR MINI-WAREHOUSE see Self-Service Storage Facility.
MISCELLANEOUS STRUCTURES shall mean structures, other than buildings, visible from public ways. Examples are memorials, staging, antennas, water tanks and towers, sheds, shelters, fences, and walls, kennels, and transformers.
MIXED USE shall mean properties where various uses, such as office, commercial, institutional, and residential are combined in a single building or on a single site in an integrated development project with significant functional interrelationships and a coherent physical design.
MIXED USE BUILDING shall mean a building or structure that incorporates two or more use types within a single building or structure, provided that each use type is permitted within the individual Base Zoning District in which the building or structure is to be located.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT shall mean a single development that incorporates complementary land use types into a single development.
MOBILE FOOD UNIT shall mean a temporary food service establishment that is a vehicle-mounted and is designed to be readily movable.
MOBILE HOME see Dwelling, Mobile Home.
MOBILE HOME PARK shall mean a parcel of land under single ownership that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured or mobile housing used or to be used for dwelling purposes and where manufactured or mobile home spaces are not offered for sale or sold. The terms "manufactured home park" or “mobile home park” do not include sales lots on which new or used manufactured or mobile homes are parked for the purposes of storage, inspection, or sale. The terms "manufactured home park" or “mobile home park” shall include the term “trailer camp”, as defined in the Cozad Code.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION shall mean a parcel of land that has been subdivided and used or intended to be used for the purpose of selling lots for occupancy by manufactured or mobile homes.
MOTEL see Hotel.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL shall mean a building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is received, assembled or stored and dispatched for routing by motor truck which may include motor truck storage.
MOTOR VEHICLE shall mean every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated upon rails, except self-propelled wheel Mayors.
N
NIGHTCLUB shall mean a commercial establishment dispensing beverages for consumption on the premises and in which dancing is permitted or entertainment is provided. Also, see Bar.
NONCOMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM shall mean any public water supply system that is not a community water supply system.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
26 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
NONCONFORMING BUILDING/DEVELOPMENT shall mean a building or portion thereof which was lawful when established but which does not conform to subsequently established zoning or zoning regulations.
NONCONFORMING LOT shall mean a lot which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the non-conforming characteristics of the lot.
NONCONFORMING SIGN shall mean a sign that was legally erected prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning ordinance.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE shall mean a structure which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the nonconforming characteristics of the structure.
NONCONFORMING USE shall mean any use existing and lawful at the time of adoption of these regulations occupying a building, structure or land but is no longer allowed.
NON-FARM BUILDINGS shall mean all buildings except those buildings utilized for agricultural purposes on a farm
NUISANCE shall mean anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of property, endangers personal health or safety, or is offensive to the senses such as noise, dust, odor, smoke, gas, pollution, congestion, lighting, and litter.
NURSERY shall mean the use of a premises for the propagation, cultivation, and growth of trees, shrubs, plants, vines, and the like from seed or stock, and the sale thereof, and including the sale of trees, shrubs, plants, vines, and the like purchased elsewhere and transplanted into the soil of the premises. In connection with the sale of plants, such fungicides, insecticides, chemicals, peat moss, humus, mulches, and fertilizers as are intended to be used in preserving the life and health of the plants may be sold.
NURSING HOMES OR CONVALESCENT HOMES shall mean an institution or agency licensed by the State of Nebraska for the reception, board, care, or treatment of three or more unrelated individuals, but not including facilities for the care and treatment of mental illness, alcoholism, or narcotics addiction.
O
OFFICE shall mean a building or a portion of a building wherein services are performed involving, primarily, administrative, professional, or clerical operations.
OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP shall mean a map delineating the boundaries of zoning districts which, along with the zoning text, is officially adopted by the Cozad City Council.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA shall mean all off street areas and spaces designed, used, required, or intended to be used for parking, including driveways or access ways in and to such areas.
OPEN LOTS shall mean pens or similar concentrated areas, including small shed-type areas or open-front buildings, with dirt, or concrete (or paved or hard) surfaces, wherein animals or poultry are substantially or entirely exposed to the outside environment except for possible small portions affording some protection by windbreaks or small shed-type areas.
OPEN SPACE shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, primarily set aside for recreational use and enjoyment, exclusive of land areas used for streets, alleys, roads, driveways, parking areas, structures, and buildings.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 27
OPEN SPACE, COMMON shall mean a separate and distinct area set aside as open space within or related to a development, and not on individually owned lots or dedicated for public use, but which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. Rights-of-way, private streets, driveways, parking lots or other surfaces designed or intended for vehicular use or required yards shall not be included as common open space.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING see Advertising Structure and Sign.
OUTDOOR STORAGE shall mean the storage of materials, parts, or products that are related to the primary use of a site for a period exceeding three days.
OUTDOOR STORAGE CONTAINERS shall mean an “outdoor storage container” is defined as a fully enclosed, detached, and self-supporting structure, by itself incapable of motion or movement and not exceeding 8 feet in width, 12 feet in height, and 40 feet in length or a total enclosed floor area of 320 square feet. The unit must be manufactured/assembled off-site and transportable, by means other than its own, to a location where it is set into place on a graded surface of concrete, asphalt, or gravel and not upon a foundation or wheels. It shall be made of metal or a similar stable, durable, and acceptable material and shall not include a foundation, electricity, plumbing, or other mechanical systems as part of its assembly or use.
OVERLAY DISTRICT shall mean a district in which additional requirements are imposed upon a use, in conjunction with the underlying zoning district. The original zoning district designation does not change.
OWNER shall mean an individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of land.
P
PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE shall mean an establishment in which alcoholic beverages in original containers are sold for consumption off the premises.
PAINTBALL COURSE shall mean a commercial recreational park containing obstacle courses for the purpose of staging paintball battles. Said facility generally collects a fee, either as membership or on a visit by visit basis that allows individuals to participate in paintball activities.
PARCEL shall mean a lot or a contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under single control, which may be considered as a unit for purposes of development.
PARK shall mean any public or private land available for recreational, educational, cultural, or aesthetic use.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE shall mean an area, other than a street, used for the parking of automotive vehicles capable of moving under their own power and restricted from general public use.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC shall mean an area, other than a private parking area or street used for the parking of vehicles capable of moving under their own power, either free or for remuneration.
PARKING LOT shall mean an area consisting of one or more parking spaces for motor vehicles together with a driveway connecting the parking area with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress for motor vehicles.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE shall mean an area, other than a street or alley, reserved for the parking of an automobile, such space having a dimension not less than nine feet by 20 feet, plus such additional area as is necessary to afford adequate ingress and egress.
PAVED shall mean permanently surfaced with poured concrete, concrete pavers, or asphalt.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
28 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE shall mean a financial guarantee to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required by this chapter will be completed in compliance with these regulations as well as with approved plans and specifications of a development.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION shall mean a base constructed from either poured concrete or laid masonry rock or brick and placed on a footing located below ground level to a point below the frost line upon which a building or structure is permanently attached.
PERMANENT STORAGE shall mean the long-term storage on-site within an accessory building or structure.
PERMITTED USE shall mean any land use allowed without condition within a zoning district.
PERMANENTLY ATTACHED shall mean attached to real estate in such a way as to require dismantling, cutting away, unbolting from permanent foundation or structural change in such structure in order to relocate it to another site.
PERSON shall mean an individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, City, County, special district or any other group or combination acting as an entity, except that it shall not include Cozad, Nebraska.
PERSONAL SERVICES shall mean uses providing human services exclusively to private individuals as the ultimate consumer. Personal services shall not be limited to but including grocery shopping services, tailoring and alterations, hair salons, spas, nail salons, barber shops, private household services and temporary personal in-home care.
PET SHOP shall mean a retail establishment primarily involved in the sale of domestic animals, such as dogs, cats, fish, birds, and reptiles, excluding exotic animals and farm animals.
PLANNING COMMISSION shall mean the Planning Commission of Cozad, Nebraska.
PLANT MATERIALS shall mean trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, grass, perennials, annuals, and bulbs and other such vegetation.
PLAT shall mean a map showing the location, boundaries, and legal description of individual properties.
POLE BUILDING shall mean a structure built with no foundation or footings, using poles embedded directly in the ground as its primary support to hold metal, plastic, fiberglass or wood covering to form the building.
POLICY shall mean a statement or document of the Cozad, such as the comprehensive plan, that forms the basis for enacting legislation or making decisions.
PORCH, UNENCLOSED shall mean a roofed or unroofed open structure projecting from an exterior wall of a building and having no enclosed features more than thirty inches above its floor other than wire screening and a roof with supporting structure.
PREMISES shall mean a tract of land, consisting of one lot or irregular tract, or more than one lot or irregular tract, provided such lots or tracts are under common ownership, contiguous, and used as a single tract. A building or land within a prescribed area.
PRESERVATION shall mean the act of protecting an area, parcel of land, or structure from being changed or modified from the present character to another that is not representative of a specific period or condition.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE shall mean the main building or structure on a lot, within which the main or primary use of the lot or premises is located.
PRINCIPAL USE shall mean the main use of land or structure, as distinguished from an accessory use.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 29
PROHIBITED USE shall mean any use of land, other than nonconforming, which is not listed as a permitted use, conditional use or accessory use within a zoning district.
PROMOTIONAL DEVICE shall mean any sign intended to be displayed either with or without a frame, with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or other material, on a fabric of any kind. National flags, flags of political subdivisions, or symbolic flags of any institutions or business shall be considered a promotional device for the purpose of this definition. Banners, pennants, inflatable characters, streamers, or fringe-type ribbons or piping shall be considered as a promotional device.
PROTECTED ZONE shall mean all lands that fall outside the buildable areas of a parcel, all areas of a parcel required to remain in open space, and/or all areas required as landscaping strips according to the provisions of the Zoning Regulation.
PUBLIC UTILITY shall mean any business which furnishes the general public telephone service, telegraph service, electricity, natural gas, water and sewer, or any other business so affecting the public interest as to be subject to the supervision or regulation by an agency of the state or federal government.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY shall mean a water supply system designed to provide public piped water fit for human consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves at least 25 individuals. This definition shall include: (1) Any collection, treatment, storage, or distribution facilities under the control of the operator of such system and used primarily in connection with such system; and (2) Any collection or pretreatment storage facilities not under such control which are used primarily in the connection with such system.
Q
QUARRY shall mean an open pit from which building stone, sand, gravel, mineral, or fill is taken to be processed for commercial purposes.
QUARRY REHABILITATION shall mean providing slopes to be covered with a layer of soil and revegetated where practical. It applies to the rehabilitation of all kinds of sand, gravel, and rock excavations to obtain fill or construction materials and from which no further removal of materials is intended, as well as to resource extraction. Rehabilitation is intended to minimize the hazardous and unsightly nature of abandoned pits, and if practical, to return the area to some productive use.
R
RAILROAD shall mean the land use including the right-of-way abutting railroad properties occupied by uses pertinent to the railroad operation and maintenance, but not including properties owned by the railroad and leased for use by others.
RECREATION, INDOOR shall mean a facility for relaxation, diversion, amusement or entertainment where such activity occurs within a building or structure.
RECREATION, OUTDOOR shall mean a facility for relaxation, diversion, amusement or entertainment in which some or all of the activities occur on the exterior but within the property of the facility.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY shall mean facilities for the use by the public for passive and active recreation including tennis, handball, racquetball, basketball, track and field, jogging, baseball, soccer, skating, swimming, or golf. This shall include country clubs and athletic clubs, but not facilities accessory to a private residence used only by the owner and guests, nor arenas or stadiums used primarily for spectators to watch athletic events. In addition, recreational facilities shall mean museums, amphitheaters, race tracks (including all motor powered vehicles) and wildlife conservation areas (used for public viewing), and theme parks.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) shall mean a vehicular unit primarily designed as a temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use having either its own power or designed to be mounted on or
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
30 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
drawn by a motor vehicle. Recreational vehicle includes motor home, truck camper, travel trailer, camping trailer, and fifth wheel.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARK shall mean a tract of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes by campers, vacationers, or travelers.
RECYCLING CENTER shall mean a building in which used material is separated and processed prior to shipment to others who will use those materials to manufacture new products. The facility is not junkyard.
RECYCLING COLLECTION shall mean a collection point for small refuse items, such as bottles and newspapers, located either in a container or small structure.
RECYCLING PROCESSING shall mean any site which is used for the processing of any postconsumer, nondurable goods including, but not limited to glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, aluminum, tin, or other recyclable commodities.
REDEVELOPMENT shall mean the act of preserving and/or rehabilitating existing buildings. In extreme cases, a building or structure could be demolished for the purpose of a new use or building.
REMOTE PARKING shall mean a supply of off-street parking at a location not on the site of a given development.
RENEWABLE ENERGY shall mean energy sources including wind, solar power, biomass, and hydropower, that can be regenerated and that is much less polluting than nuclear or fossil fuels.
RENEWABLE RESOURCE shall mean a natural resource that is able to regenerate, either by itself or with human assistance, over a short to moderate time period, including food crops and trees.
RESIDENCE shall mean a building used, designed, or intended to be used as a home or dwelling place for one or more families.
RESTAURANT shall mean a public eating establishment operated for profit at which the primary function is the preparation and serving of food primarily to persons seated within the building.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN shall mean a restaurant establishment that has the facilities to serve prepared food and/or beverages to customers seated within motor vehicles for consumption either on or off the premises.
RESTAURANT, ENTERTAINMENT shall mean a restaurant establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed, within a building or structure that integrally includes electronic and mechanical games of skill, simulation, and virtual reality, play areas, video arcades or similar uses, billiards, and other forms of amusement.
RESOURCE EXTRACTION shall mean a use involving on-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources, excluding the grading and removal of dirt. Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, mining.
RETAIL SALES shall mean establishments engaged in selling of goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption.
RETAIL SERVICES shall mean establishments engaged in selling of goods or merchandise including household cleaning and maintenance products; drugs, cards, stationery, notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics, and specialty items; flowers, plants, hobby materials, toys, and handcrafted items; apparel jewelry, fabrics and like items; cameras, photograph services, household electronic equipment, records, sporting equipment, kitchen utensils, home furnishing and appliances, art supplies and framing, arts and antiques, paint and wallpaper, hardware, carpeting and floor covering; interior decorating
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 31
services; office supplies; mail order or catalog sales; bicycles; and automotive parts and accessories (excluding service and installation).
RETAIL SERVICES, GENERAL shall mean establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities of more than 5,000 square feet for any single establishment or more than 10,000 square feet for a multi-tenant facility. Typical establishments provide for general purpose retailing oriented to Cozad and its immediate vicinity.
RETAIL SERVICES, LIMITED shall mean establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities of 5,000 square feet or less for any single establishment or 10,000 square feet or less for a multi-tenant facility. Typical establishments provide for specialty retailing or retailing oriented to Cozad and a local market.
RETENTION BASIN shall mean a pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent storage of stormwater runoff.
RETIREMENT RESIDENCE shall mean a building or group of buildings which provide residential facilities for more than four residents of at least sixty-two years of age, or households headed by a householder of at least sixty-two years of age. A retirement residence may provide a range of residential building types and may also provide support services to residents, including but not limited to food service, general health supervision, medication services, housekeeping services, personal services, recreation facilities, and transportation services. The retirement residence may accommodate food preparation in independent units or meal service in one or more common areas. Retirement residences may include additional health care supervision or nursing care.
REZONING shall mean an amendment to or change in the zoning regulations either to the text or map or both.
REZONING, PIECEMEAL shall mean the zoning reclassification of individual lots resulting in uncertainty in the future compatible development of the area.
RIGHT-OF-WAY shall mean a strip of land, generally linear, occupied or intended to be occupied by a system that conveys people, traffic, fluids, utilities, or energy from one point to another. Rights-of-way may include streets and roads, crosswalks, bicycle paths, recreational trails, railroads or fixed guideway transit, electric transmission lines, gas pipelines, water mains, or sewer mains.
ROAD, PRIVATE shall mean a way, other than driveways, open to vehicular ingress and egress established for the benefit of certain, adjacent properties. Also, see Right-of-way and Street.
ROAD, PUBLIC shall mean all public rights-of-way reserved or dedicated for street or road traffic. Also, see Right-of-Way and Street.
ROOM shall mean an unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit, excluding bathroom, kitchen, closets, hallways, and service porches.
S
SALVAGE SERVICES shall mean places of business engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their original forms.
SANITARY TRANSFER STATION shall mean a collection point for temporary storage of refuse. No processing of refuse would be allowed. The transfer station must be in conformance with the requirements of all State and Federal Agencies.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA shall mean a round, parabolic antenna incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, or cone and used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves. Also, see Antenna.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
32 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
SCHOOL, BUSINESS OR TRADE shall mean a use providing education or training in business, commerce, language, or other similar activity or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college or university, or public or private educational facility.
SCHOOL, DAY, PRE-, OR NURSERY shall mean a school or center for children under school age, whether licensed as a day care center or not. Such shall be approved by the Nebraska State Fire Marshall as being in conformance with safety provisions pursuant to the National Fire Protection Association, Pamphlet 101, known as the Life Safety Code and shall be approved by the Nebraska Department of Health and Welfare as meeting their health and welfare standards.
SCREENING shall mean a structure or planting that conceals from public view the area behind such structure or planting.
SELF-SERVICE STATION shall mean an establishment where motor fuels are stored and dispensed into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than the service station attendant and may include facilities available for the sale of other retail products.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY shall mean a building or group of buildings containing individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers for storage.
SEPARATE OWNERSHIP shall mean ownership of a parcel of land by a person who does not own any of the land abutting such parcel.
SEPTIC SITE shall mean the area bounded by the dimensions required for the proper location of the septic tank system.
SERVICE STATION shall mean buildings and premises where the primary use is the supply and dispensing at retail of motor fuels, lubricants, batteries, tires, and motor vehicle accessories and where light maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrications, and washing may be conducted, but not including heavy maintenance and repair such as engine overhauls, painting, and body repair.
SETBACK shall mean the minimum distance, as prescribed by this regulation, measured from the edge of the eve or other similar building component located closest to the lot line.
SETBACK LINE, FRONT YARD see Yard, Front
SETBACK LINE, REAR YARD see Yard, Rear
SETBACK LINE, SIDE YARD see Yard, Side
SHRUB shall mean a multi-stemmed woody plant other than a tree.
SIGHT TRIANGLE is an area at a street intersection in which nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet and 10 feet above the grades of the bottom of the curb of the intersecting streets, measured from the point of intersection of the centerline of the streets along the centerline of the streets.
SIGN shall mean and include any outdoor sign, display, declaration, device, figure, drawing, illustration, message, placard, poster, billboard, insignia, or other things which are designed, intended, or used for direction, information, identification, or to advertise, to inform, or to promote any business, product activity, service, or any interest, except the following:
Example of Sight Triangle with
Example of Sight Triangle with measurement measurement ofof 90 feet in each 90 feet in each directiondirection
Setback
Setback LinesLines
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 33
1. Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of premises, or other identification of premises not having commercial connotations;
2. Flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion;
3. Legal notices: Identification, informational, or directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies;
4. Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letter, service marks, trademarks, moving parts, or moving lights;
5. Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, but bearing no advertising matter.
SIMILAR USE shall mean the use of land, buildings, or structures of like kind or general nature with other uses within a zoning district as related to bulk, intensity of use, traffic generation and congestion, function, public services requirements, aesthetics or other similarities.
SITE shall mean the parcel of land to be developed or built upon. A site may encompass a single lot; a portion of a lot; or a group of lots developed as a common development under the special and overlay districts provisions of this ordinance.
SITE BREAK shall mean a structural or landscape device used to interrupt long vistas and create visual interest in a site development.
SITE PLAN shall mean a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, drives, parking, drainage, landscape features, and other principal site development improvements for a specific parcel of land.
SKATE, IN-LINE shall mean a boot-type device, which is placed on an individual’s feet. In-line skates contain wheels on the bottom of the boot, which are attached in linear fashion.
SKATE PARK shall mean a recreational facility containing skateboard ramps and other obstacle courses and devices for the use with skateboards and in-line skates.
SKATEBOARD shall mean a foot board mounted upon four or more wheels and is usually propelled by the user who sometimes stands, sits, kneels, or lies upon the device while it is in motion.
SKATEBOARD or HALF PIPE shall mean an outdoor structure that is shaped into a half circle or oval that is designed and principally intended to permit persons on skateboards to move continuously from one side to the other.
SKATEBOARD RAMP shall mean an outdoor structure with an upward inclined surface, essentially one of the sides of a pipe, which are designed and principally intended to permit persons on skateboards to move from horizontal to vertical and back to horizontal.
SLUDGE shall mean solids removed from sewage during wastewater treatment and then disposed of by incineration, dumping, burial, or land application.
SOLID WASTE shall mean waste materials consisting of garbage, trash, refuse, rubble, sewage, offal, dead animals, or paunch manure.
SPOT ZONING shall mean an arbitrary zoning or rezoning of a small tract of land that is not consistent with the comprehensive land use plan and primarily promotes the private interest of the owner rather than the general welfare. Spot zoning usually results from an upzoning to a more intensive use classification.
STABLE AND/OR RIDING ACADEMIES shall mean the buildings, pens and pasture areas used for the boarding and feeding of horses, llamas, or other equine not owned by the occupants of the premises. This use includes instruction in riding, jumping, and showing or the riding of horses/equine for hire.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
34 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
STANDARD SYSTEM shall mean a sewage treatment system employing a building sewer, septic tank, and a standard soil absorption system.
STOCKPILING shall mean the accumulation of manure in mounds, piles, or other exposed and non-engineered site locations for storage or holding purposes for a period of not more than one year.
STORAGE shall mean the keeping, in a roofed or unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles on the same tract or premises for more than 30 days.
STORAGE CONTAINER, PORTABLE shall mean any container that can be loaded onto the chassis of a semi-trailer for the purpose of hauling materials and commodities. Portable storage containers are intended to be used as a load on-site and haul-off for storage off-site. Another name for these containers is Portable On Demand Storage.
STORM DRAIN shall mean a conduit that carries natural storm and surface water drainage but not sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
STORMWATER DETENTION shall mean any storm drainage technique that retards or detains runoff, such as a detention or retention basin, parking lot storage, rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells, or any combination thereof.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT shall mean the collecting, conveyance, channeling, holding, retaining, detaining, infiltrating, diverting, treating, or filtering of surface water, or groundwater, and/or runoff, together with applicable managerial (non-structural) measures.
STORMWATER RETENTION AREA shall mean an area designed by a licensed professional engineer and approved by the City to retain water to control the flow of stormwater.
STORMWATER RUNOFF shall mean surplus surface water generated by rainfall that does not seep into the earth but flows over land to flowing or stagnant bodies of water.
STORY shall mean a space in a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor above, or if there is not floor above, then the space between such floor and the ceiling or roof above.
STREET shall mean a public thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded, or condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except as excluded in this Regulation.
STREET, ARTERIAL shall mean a street designed with the primary function of efficient movement of through traffic between and around areas of a City or county with controlled access to abutting property.
STREET, COLLECTOR shall mean a street or highway, which is intended to carry traffic from minor streets to major streets. Collector streets are usually the principal entrance streets to residential developments and the streets for circulation within the development.
STREET, COURT shall mean an approved private right-of-way which provides access to residential properties and meets at least three of the following conditions:
1. Serves twelve or fewer housing units or platted lots.
2. Does not function as a local street because of its alignment, design, or location.
3. Is completely internal to a development.
4. Does not exceed 600 feet in length.
STREET, CURVILINEAR shall mean local streets that deviate from straight alignment and change direction without sharp corners or bends.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 35
STREET, LOCAL shall mean a street designed for local traffic that provides direct access to abutting residential, commercial, or industrial properties.
STREET, LOOPED shall mean a continuous local street without intersecting streets and having its two outlets connected to the same street.
STREET, MAJOR shall mean a street or highway used primarily for fast or high volume traffic, including expressways, freeways, boulevards, and arterial streets.
STREET, PRIVATE shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a street or alley dedicated to the public, but permanently established as the principal means of vehicular access to abutting properties. The term "private street" includes the term "place".
STREET, SIDE shall mean that street bounding a corner or reversed corner lot and which extends in the same general direction as the line determining the depth of the lot.
STREET CENTERLINE shall mean the centerline of a street right-of-way as established by official surveys.
STREET FRONTAGE shall mean the distance for which a lot line of a zone lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street.
STREET, FRONTAGE ACCESS shall mean a street parallel and adjacent to a major street, major inter-regional highway, or major collection road and primarily for service to the abutting properties, and being separated from the major street by a dividing strip.
STREET HARDWARE shall mean man-made objects other than buildings that are part of the streetscape. Examples include but are not limited to lamp posts, utility poles, traffic signs, benches, litter containers, planting containers, letter boxes, and fire hydrants.
STREET LINE shall mean a dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and the contiguous street.
STREETSCAPE shall mean the scene as may be observed along a public street or way composed of natural and man-made components, including buildings, paving, plantings, street hardware, and miscellaneous structures.
STRUCTURE shall mean anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, including swimming and wading pools and covered patios, excepting outdoor areas such as paved areas, walks, tennis courts, and similar recreation areas.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION shall mean any change in the support members of a building, such as in a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joists, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles, or retaining walls or similar components.
SUBDIVISION shall mean the division of land, lot, tract, or parcel into two or more lots, parcels, plats, or sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose of sale, lease, offer, or development, whether immediate or future. The term shall also include the division of residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, or other land whether by deed, metes, and bounds description, lease, map, plat, or other instrument.
SURFACE WATERS shall mean all waters within the jurisdiction of this state, including all streams, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes, wetlands, watercourses, waterways, springs, canal systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, natural or artificial, public or private, situated wholly or partly within or bordering upon the state.
SURPLUS SALES shall mean businesses engaged in the sale of used or new items, involving regular, periodic outdoor display of merchandise for sale. Typical uses include flea markets and factory outlets or discount businesses with outdoor display.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
36 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE shall mean a pool which is an accessory use to a residence and for the exclusive use of the occupants of the residential building and their guests.
T
TANNING STUDIO shall mean any business that uses artificial lighting systems to produce a tan on an individual’s body. These facilities may be either a stand-alone business or as an accessory use in spas, gymnasiums, athletic clubs, health clubs, and styling salons. This use is not included with any type of adult establishment.
TATTOO PARLOR/BODY PIERCING STUDIO shall mean an establishment whose principal business activity is the practice of tattooing and/or piercing the body of paying customers.
TAVERN see Bar.
TAXIDERMY SERVICES shall mean an operation conducted solely within an enclosed building to include on-site preparation, stuffing, and mounting of heads and skins of animals. Exterior storage or processing of carcasses or parts of animals shall be prohibited.
TEMPORARY USE shall mean a use intended for limited duration to be located in a zoning district not permitting such use.
TERRACE shall mean a raised earthen embankment with the top leveled. A terrace may be supported by a retaining wall.
THEATER shall mean a building or structure used for dramatic, operatic, motion pictures, or other performance, for admission to which entrance money is received and limited audience participation or meal service.
TOWER shall mean a structure situated on a site that is intended for transmitting or receiving television, radio, or telephone communications. Also, see Antenna.
TOWNHOUSE shall mean a one-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance in a group of three or more units where the unit and land are in the ownership of the same owner, which part of a structure whose dwelling units are attached horizontally in a linear arrangement, and having a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for access, light, and ventilation.
TRACT shall mean a lot or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under single control, usually considered a unit for purposes of development.
TRAILER, AUTOMOBILE shall mean a vehicle without motive power, designed and constructed to travel on the public thoroughfares and to be used for human habitation or for carrying property, including a trailer coach.
TREE COVER shall mean an area directly beneath the crown and within the dripline of the tree.
TRUCK REPAIR shall mean the repair, including major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or other work that may include noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in gasoline service stations, of trucks having a hauling capacity of over one ton and buses but excluding pickups and other vehicles designed for the transport of under eight passengers.
TRUCK WASH shall mean a mechanical facility for the washing, waxing and vacuuming of heavy trucks and buses.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 37
U
UPPER STORY HOUSING shall be defined as one or more dwelling units located above the first floor where allowed within a commercial district.
UPZONING shall mean a change in zoning classification of land to a more intensive or less restrictive district such as from residential district to commercial district or from a single family residential district to a multiple family residential district.
USE shall mean the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained.
USE, BEST shall mean the recommended use or uses of land confined in an adopted comprehensive plan. Such use represents the best use of public facilities, and promotes health, safety and general welfare.
USE, CONDITIONAL shall mean a use permitted in a particular zoning district upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of the use as specified in the zoning ordinance and authorized by the approving agency.
USE, HIGHEST shall mean an appraisal or real estate market concept that identifies the use of a specific tract of land that is most likely to produce the greatest net return on investment.
USED MATERIALS YARD shall mean any lot or a portion of any lot used for the storage of used materials. This shall not include "Junk Yards" or "Automobile Wrecking Yards".
UTILITARIAN STRUCTURE shall mean a structure or enclosure relating to mechanical or electrical services to a building or development.
UTILITY EASEMENT see Easement
UTILITY HARDWARE shall mean devices such as poles, crossarms, transformers and vaults, gas pressure regulating assemblies, hydrants, and buffalo boxes that are used for water, gas, oil, sewer, and electrical services to a building or a project.
UTILITIES, OVERHEAD OR UNDERGROUND "LOCAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM OF” shall mean the local service distribution circuit or lines and related appurtenances served from a substation, town border station, reservoir, or terminal facility which is served from a main supply line, main transmission line, or main feeder line as may be applicable to electric, communications, gas, fuel, petroleum, fertilizer, or other chemical utilities. Local electric distribution systems shall include all lines and appurtenances carrying a primary voltage of less than 161 KV from an electric transformer substation to the consumer. The local telephone distribution system shall be limited to include the local exchange lines, the local toll lines, and the local communications equipment facilities structure.
UTILITIES, OVERHEAD OR UNDERGROUND "TRANSMISSION LINE, SUPPLY LINE, WHOLESALE CARRIER OR TRUNK LINE, MAIN FEEDER LINE", or other applicable designation shall mean the main supply or feeder line serving a local distribution system of utilities, and shall include but is not limited to pumping stations, substations, regulating stations, generator facilities, reservoirs, tank farms, processing facilities, terminal facilities, towers, and relay stations, and treatment plants.
UTILITY SERVICE shall mean any device, including wire, pipe, and conduit, which carries gas, water, electricity, oil and communications into a building or development.
V
VALUE shall mean the estimated cost to replace a structure in kind, based on current replacement costs.
VARIANCE shall mean a relief from or variation of the provisions of this chapter, other than use regulations, as applied to a specific piece of property, as distinct from rezoning.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
38 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
VEGETATION shall mean trees, shrubs, and vines.
VEHICLE shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VEHICLE, MOTOR see Motor Vehicle.
VEHICLE STORAGE shall mean storage of operating or non-operating vehicles for a period of no more than 21 days. Typical uses include storage of private parking tow-aways or impound yards but exclude dismantling or salvage.
VEHICLE STORAGE, LONG TERM shall mean storage of operating or non-operating vehicles for a period exceeding 21 days. Typical uses include storage of private parking tow-aways or impound yards but exclude dismantling or salvage.
VENDING MACHINE shall mean any unattended self-service device that, upon insertion of a coin, coins, tokens, debit and/or credit cards or by similar means, dispenses food, beverage, goods, rental materials, wares, merchandise, or services.
VENDING MACHINE, REVERSE shall mean an automated mechanical device that accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers, including but not limited to aluminum cans and glass or plastic bottles and that issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit, provided that the entire process is enclosed within the entire machine. A reverse vending machine may be designed to accept more than one container at a time, paying by weight instead of the container.
VETERINARY SERVICES shall mean services and hospitals for animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals, pet cemeteries, and veterinary hospitals for livestock and large animals.
VISUAL OBSTRUCTION shall mean any fence, hedge, tree, shrub, wall or structure exceeding two feet in height, measured from the crown of intersecting or intercepting streets, alleys or driveways, which limit the visibility of persons in motor vehicles on said streets, alleys, or driveways. This does not include trees kept trimmed of branches below a minimum height of eight feet.
W
WAREHOUSE shall mean a building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
WAREHOUSE AND DISTRIBUTION shall mean a use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment.
WAREHOUSING (ENCLOSED) shall mean uses including storage, warehousing, distribution, and handling of goods and materials within enclosed structures. Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, and van and storage companies.
WAREHOUSING (OPEN) shall mean uses including open air storage, distribution, and handling of goods and materials. Typical uses include monument yards, materials yards, open storage.
WASTEWATER LAGOON see Lagoon.
WATERCOURSE shall mean natural or once naturally flowing water, either perennially or intermittently, including rivers, streams, creeks, and other natural waterways. Includes waterways that have been channelized, but does not include manmade channels, ditches, and underground drainage and sewage systems.
WATERS OF THE STATE shall mean all waters within the jurisdiction of this state, including all streams, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes, wetlands, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 39
systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water surface or underground, material or artificial, public or private, situated wholly within or bordering upon the state.
WETLAND shall mean an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that, under normal circumstances, does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soiled conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT shall mean an establishment for the on-premises sales of goods primarily to customers engaged in the business of reselling the goods.
WHOLESALE TRADE shall mean the selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or buyers acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. The principal types of establishments included are: Merchant wholesalers; sales branches and sales offices (but not retail stores) maintained by manufacturing enterprises apart from their plants for the purpose of marketing their products; agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants; petroleum bulk storage, assemblers, buyers, and associations engaged in cooperative marketing of farm products. The chief functions of uses in wholesale trade are selling goods to trading establishments, or to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm and professional; and bringing buyer and seller together. In additional to selling, functions frequently performed by wholesale establishments include maintaining inventories of goods; extending credit; physically assembling, sorting and grading goods in large lots, breaking bulk and redistribution in smaller lots; delivery; refrigeration; and various types of promotion such as advertising and label designing.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWER shall mean a structure for the transmission or broadcast of cellular, radio, television, radar, or microwaves which exceed the maximum height permitted in the district in which it is located; provided, however, that noncommercial radio towers not exceeding 50 feet in height shall not be considered wireless communication towers.
X
Y
YARD shall mean any open space on the same lot with a building or a dwelling group, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward to the sky, except for building projections or for accessory buildings or structures permitted by this Regulation.
YARD, FRONT shall mean a space between the front yard setback line and the front lot line or highway setback line, and extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, REAR shall mean a space between the rear yard setback line and the rear lot line, extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE shall mean a space extending from the front yard or from the front lot line where no front yard is required by this Regulation, to the rear yard, or rear lot line, between a side lot line and the side yard setback line.
Example of different Yard Requirements
Example of different Yard Requirements
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
40 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Z
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR shall mean the person or persons authorized and empowered by the City to administer and enforce the requirements of this chapter.
ZONING DISTRICT see District
ZONING DISTRICT, CHANGE OF shall mean the legislative act of removing one or more parcels of land from one zoning district and placing them in another zoning district on the zone map of the City.
ARTICLE 3: DISTRICTS AND OFFICIAL MAP
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 41
Article 3: Districts and Official Map
Section 3.01 Districts
In order to regulate and restrict the height, location, size and type of buildings, structures and uses allowed on land in the City and the area within one mile of the corporate boundaries, the City is hereby divided into districts.
Section 3.02 Provision for Official Zoning Map
3.02.01 The City is hereby divided into districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 3.02 of Ordinance No. (___) of the City of Cozad, Nebraska", together with the date of the adoption of this Ordinance. If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, changes are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council.
3.02.02 In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council may by resolution adopt a new Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (Ordinance No. (_______)) of the City of Cozad Nebraska." Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
ARTICLE 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
42 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Article 4: General Provisions
Section 4.01 Planning Commission Recommendations
Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-901, it shall be the purpose of the Planning Commission to hold public hearings upon, and make recommendation to the legislative body, regarding proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan and zoning regulations within the jurisdiction of the City.
The Commission shall make a preliminary report and hold public hearings thereon before submitting its final report, and the City Council shall not hold its public hearings or take action until it has received the final report of the Commission.
Section 4.02 District Regulations, Restrictions, Boundary Creation
No such regulation, restriction, or boundary shall become effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearings shall be given by publication thereof in a paper of general circulation in the City at least one time ten days prior to such hearing.
Section 4.03 Jurisdiction
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of Cozad, Nebraska, and within the territory beyond said corporate limits as now or hereafter fixed, for a distance of one mile, as established on the map entitled "The Official Zoning Map of the City of Cozad, Nebraska", and as may be amended by subsequent annexation.
Section 4.04 Provisions of Ordinance Declared to be Minimum Requirements
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Whenever the provisions of this Ordinance are in conflict with the provisions of any other ordinance or municipal law, the ordinance or municipal law with the most restrictive provisions shall govern.
Section 4.05 Zoning Affects Every Building and Use
No building or land shall hereafter be used or reused and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless for a use expressly permitted by and in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, except that any structure damaged or destroyed may be restored if such structure does not involve a non-conforming use.
Section 4.06 Lot
4.06.01 Every building hereafter erected, reconstructed, converted, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot or lot of record and in no case shall there be more than one principal building on a lot unless otherwise provided.
4.06.02 More than one principal building of a single permitted use may be located upon a lot or tract in the following instances if recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
1. Institutional buildings
2. Public or semi-public buildings
3. Multiple-family dwellings
4. Commercial or industrial buildings
5. Home for the aged
6. Agricultural buildings
7. Planned Unit Developments
Section 4.07 Reductions in Lot Area Prohibited
No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot area per family, lot width, building area, or other requirements of this Ordinance are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose.
ARTICLE 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 43
Section 4.08 Obstructions to Vision at Street Intersections
On a corner lot, within the area formed by the center line of streets at a distance of 90 feet from their intersections, there shall be no obstruction to vision between a height of two and one-half feet and a height of 10 feet above the grades of the bottom of the curb of the intersecting streets, measured from the point of intersection of the centerline of the streets. At the intersection of major or arterial streets, the 90-foot distance shall be increased to 120 feet for each arterial leg of the intersection. The requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall. See “Sight Triangle,” as defined in Article 2 of this Ordinance.
Section 4.09 Yard Requirements
4.09.01 Yard requirements shall be set forth under the Schedule
of Lot, Yard, and Bulk Requirements for each zoning district. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations hereinafter indicated and shall be unobstructed from the ground level to the sky, except as herein permitted.
4.09.02 No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space, required in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this regulation, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space required for another building and or lot.
4.09.03 No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this regulation shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this regulation shall meet the minimum requirements herein.
4.09.04 All accessory buildings when connected to the principal building (e.g., attached garages) shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building, unless otherwise specified.
4.09.05 The Zoning Administrator may permit a variation in front yard setbacks to allow new or relocated structures to conform to the average existing setback provided that 1.) More than 40 percent of the frontage on one side of a street between intersecting streets is occupied by structures on the effective date of this Ordinance, and 2.) A minority of such structures have observed or conformed to an average setback line, see illustration for different provisions:
4.09.06 Any side or rear yard in a residential district which is adjacent to any existing industrial or commercial use shall be no less than 25 feet and shall contain the owner shall install and maintain landscaping and planting suitable to provide effective screening.
4.09.07 Any yard for a commercial or industrial use located within any Commercial or Industrial Zoning District, which is adjacent to any residential use, or district shall be increased to 40 feet and shall contain landscaping and planting suitable to provide effective screening; except in the Downtown Commercial District.
Section 4.10 Drainage
No building, structure, or use shall be erected on any land and no change shall be made in the existing contours of any land, including any change in the course, width, or elevation of any natural or other drainage channel, that will obstruct, interfere with, or substantially change the drainage from such land to the detriment of neighboring lands.
Example of Sight Triangle with the
Example of Sight Triangle with the measurement of 90 feet in each directionmeasurement of 90 feet in each direction
ARTICLE 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
44 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Anyone desiring to build or otherwise change the existing drainage situation shall be responsible for providing to the City or their designated agent that such changes will not be a detriment to the neighboring lands.
Section 4.11 Permitted Obstructions in Required Yards
The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards:
4.11.01 All Yards:
 Steps and accessibility ramps used for wheelchair and other assisting devices which are four feet or less above grade which will not exceed minimum requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act are necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a lot from a street or alley;
 Chimneys projecting 24 inches or less into the yard;
 Approved freestanding signs;
 Flag poles;
 Window air conditioners projecting not more than 18 inches into the required yard; and
 Fences or walls subject to applicable height restrictions are permitted in all yards.
4.11.02 Rear and Side Yards:
 Playground and other recreational equipment;
 Clothes lines;
 Arbors and trellises
 Open off-street parking spaces
 Outside elements of central air conditioning systems;
 Emergency egress systems for basements on an existing structure.
4.11.03 Double Frontage Lots: The required front yard shall be provided on each street.
4.11.04 Building Groupings: For the purpose of the side yard regulation a group of business or industrial buildings separated by a common party wall shall be considered as one building occupying one lot.
Section 4.12 Accessory Building and Uses
4.12.01 No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on a lot without a principal building or structure.
4.12.02 In no event shall an accessory building be used as a dwelling unless otherwise allowed.
4.12.03 In no event shall a portable storage container be used as permanent storage/accessory building within any residential district.
4.12.04 No detached accessory building or structure shall exceed the maximum permitted height allowed in the individual district, unless otherwise provided.
4.12.05 No accessory building shall be constructed in the required front yard.
4.12.06 No accessory building shall be erected in or encroach upon the required front yard on a corner lot or the front yard of a double frontage lot.
a. Where the lot size is ½ acre or more, the accessory building may be located in front of the front building line if the building maintains a minimum distance of 20 feet beyond the front setback.
4.12.07 Detached accessory buildings or structures shall be located no closer to any other accessory or principal building than 10 feet.
4.12.08 When a detached garage or other outbuilding is built within the required setback for a principal structure, the principal structure and detached building shall remain as separate structures and maintain the required separation distances found in Section 4.12.06 above.
4.12.09 When a detached garage has access to an alley, the rear yard setback shall be increased to 20 feet for garages directly accessing the alley from the garage and door is parallel to the alley. Otherwise it shall be a minimum of five feet.
4.12.10 With the exception of a detached garage, the total of all accessory buildings shall not exceed 1.5% of the total lot area with a TA-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-M district.
Graphic reference for Section 4.12.09
ARTICLE 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 45
4.12.11 Temporary and portable carports may be allowed in designated zoning districts provided the following criteria shall be met:
1. The carport shall be anchored to the ground with a permanent footing.
2. Carport shall not be allowed to have more than two sides covered with a siding material.
3. Siding material shall match the style of the primary structure on the lot.
4. Shall meet all minimum setbacks.
4.12.12 Detached private garages and outbuildings in the Residential Districts within the corporate limits of Cozad for automobiles and/or storage use and other structures customary and appurtenant to the permitted uses and detached accessory garages shall be constructed of materials customarily used in residential construction and meet the following:
1. Be constructed of materials that are in good repair,
2. The sidewalls of said building shall not exceed 10 feet in height,
3. Garages shall have an overhang of at least six inches,
4. Garages shall have a maximum width of 36 feet,
5. Garages shall be constructed and finished in materials customary to residential construction.
4.12.13 Regulation of accessory uses shall be as follows:
1. Except as herein provided, no accessory building shall project beyond a required yard line along any street.
2. Service station pumps and pump island may occupy the required yards, provided, however, that they are not less than 15 feet from street lines.
3. Storage of any boat, boat trailer, camp trailer, or other vehicle shall not be permitted in any required front yard; except that a boat, boat trailer, camp trailer may be placed on rock or concrete surfacing in a side yard or rear yard.
Section 4.13 Permitted Modifications of Height Regulations
4.13.01 The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to:
Air-Pollution Prevention Devices
Flag Poles
Belfries
Ornamental Towers and Spires
Chimneys
Public Monuments
Church Spires
Radio/Television Towers less than 125 feet tall
Conveyors
Silos and grain elevators
Cooling Towers
Smoke Stacks
Elevator Bulkheads
Stage Towers or Scenery Lots
Commercial Elevator Penthouses
Tanks
Fire Towers
Water Towers and Standpipes
Web cameras and meteorological equipment
Provided that the appropriate yard setbacks are increased by one foot for every two feet in excess of the maximum height requirement for the given zoning district.
4.13.02 When permitted in a district, public or semi-public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, or schools may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet when each required yard line is increased by at least one foot for each one foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is located.
Section 4.14 Occupancy of Basements and Cellars
No basement or cellar shall be occupied for residential purposes until the remainder of the building has been substantially completed, and any required emergency egress requirements of the City of Cozad have been installed as required per state and life-safety codes.
ARTICLE 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
46 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 4.15 Nonconforming, General Intent
It is the intent of this ordinance to permit lawful non-conformities to continue until they are removed, but not encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this ordinance that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district except as may be authorized in this title.
Section 4.16 Nonconforming Lots of Record
In any district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provision of this ordinance, a primary structure and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both that are generally applicable in the district provided that the yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustment.
Section 4.17 Nonconforming Structures
4.17.01 Authority to continue: Any structure which is devoted to a use which is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, but which is located on a lot which does not comply with the applicable lot size requirements and/or the applicable bulk regulations, may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the restrictions of this section.
4.17.02 Enlargement, Repair, Alterations: Any such structure described in Section 4.17.01 may be enlarged, maintained, repaired or remodeled, provided, however, that no such enlargement, maintenance, repair or remodeling shall either create any additional nonconformity or increase the degree of existing nonconformity of all or any part of such structure, except that as to structures located on a lot that does not comply with the applicable lot size requirements, the side yard requirements shall be in conformance with this section, and unless otherwise permitted by conditional use permit unless otherwise approved or as specified in the Residential District.
4.17.03 Damage or Destruction: In the event that any structure described in Section 4.17.01 is damaged or destroyed, by any means other than intentional destruction, to the extent of more than 50 percent of its structural value, such structure shall not be restored unless it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located; provided that structures located on a lot that does not comply with the applicable lot size requirements in Section 4.16, shall not have a side yard of less than five feet. When a structure is damaged to the extent of less than 50 percent of its structural value, no repairs or restoration shall be made unless a building permit is obtained and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
Complete reconstruction of a nonconforming structure may be allowed through a Conditional Use Permit if the structure is damaged or destroyed by natural means and not through intentional destruction or actions of the property owner or tenant. Reconstructed structures shall not be allowed to increase the level of nonconformity with regard to setbacks or lot coverage.
4.17.04 Moving: No structure shall be moved in whole or in part for any distance whatever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being moved.
Section 4.18 Nonconforming Uses
4.18.01 Nonconforming Uses of Land: Where at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment or this ordinance;
ARTICLE 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 47
2. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
3. If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 12 consecutive months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such land is located.
4.18.02 Nonconforming Uses of Structures: If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions:
1. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located;
2. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building;
3. If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure or structures and premises may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the board of adjustment either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguard in accord with the provisions of this ordinance;
4. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed;
5. When a nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises in combination is discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive months, the structure or structure and premises in combination shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located;
6. Where nonconforming use status is applied to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
Section 4.19 Repairs and Maintenance
4.19.01 On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage of amendment of this ordinance shall not be increased.
4.19.02 Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
Section 4.20 Uses under Conditional Use Permit not Nonconforming Uses
Any use for which a special exception has been issued as provided in previous ordinances shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be deemed a conforming use in such district.
Section 4.21 Rear Yard Setbacks Reduction
The rear yard setback may be the lesser of the required setback in a district or 20% of the depth of the lot.
ARTICLE 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
48 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 4.22 Temporary Uses and Permits
4.22.01 The administrator shall issue temporary permits for buildings to be constructed and used for storage incidental to construction of buildings on the property and for signs advertising a subdivision or tract of land or the lots thereon. The permits shall not exceed 180 days in duration unless the following conditions apply:
1. Model homes or apartments, if contained within the development to which they pertain.
2. Development sales offices. Such offices may remain in place until 90% of the lots or units within the development are sold and may not be located within a mobile home or manufactured home/structure.
3. Public assemblies, displays, and exhibits.
4. Christmas tree or other holiday-related merchandise sales lots, provided that such facilities are not located in a residential zoning district.
5. Construction site offices, if located on the construction site itself.
6. Outdoor special sales, provided that such sales operate no more than three days in the same week and five days in the same month; and are located in commercial or industrial zoning districts.
7. Construction Batch Plants, provided that:
a. No plant may be located within 600 feet of a developed residential use, park, or school.
b. Hours of operation do not exceed 12 hours per day.
c. The duration of the plant's operation does not exceed 180 days, but may be extended by the Zoning Administrator if unforeseen circumstances have delayed the project.
4.22.02 Required Conditions of All Temporary Uses
1. Each site shall be left free of debris, litter, or other evidence of the use upon its completion or removal.
2. The Planning Commission, or its designee, may establish other conditions which he/she deems necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses.
4.22.03 Permit Application and Issuance
1. An application to conduct a temporary use shall be made to the Zoning Administrator and shall include at a minimum a description of the proposed use; a diagram of its location; information regarding hours and duration of operation; and other information necessary to evaluate the application.
2. The Planning Commission, or its designee, may authorize a temporary use only if he/she determines that:
a. The use will not impair the normal operation of a present or future permanent use on the site.
b. The use will be compatible with surrounding uses and will not adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare.
3. The duration of the permit shall be explicitly stated on the permit.
Section 4.23: Prohibited Uses
All uses which are not specifically permitted or are not permissible as a Conditional Use throughout each district of this Ordinance are prohibited until such time as the Ordinance is amended accordingly.
Section 4.24: Fees
The payment of any and all fees for any zoning or subdivision related action or permit request shall be required prior to the issuance or investigation of any said action or permit request. Such fees shall be adopted and published by the City Council by separate Resolution.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 49
Article 5: Zoning Districts
Section 5.01 Districts; Use
For the purpose of this Chapter, the Municipality is hereby divided into 14 districts, designated as follows:
(TA-1) Transitional Agricultural District
(R-1) Low Density Residential District
(R-2) Medium Density Residential District
(R-3) High Density Residential District
(R-M) Mobile Home Residential District
(C-1) Downtown Commercial District
(C-2) General Commercial District
(C-3) Highway Commercial District
(F-1) Commercial/Industrial Flex District
(I-1) General Industrial District
(I-2) Intensive Industrial District
FP/FW Floodplain/Floodway Fringe Overlay District
AA Airport Overlay Zoning District
HDO Historic District Overlay District
Section 5.02 Districts; Boundaries and Official Zoning Map
The boundaries of the districts are hereby established as shown on the map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Cozad, Nebraska." Said maps and all explanatory matter thereon accompany and are hereby made a part of this Ordinance as if fully written herein. The Official Zoning District Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk. No changes shall be made on the Zoning District Map except as may be required by amendments to this Ordinance. Such changes shall be promptly indicated on the Zoning District Map with the Ordinance number, nature of change, and date of change noted on the map.
Section 5.03 Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries on the Official Zoning Map
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;
3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits;
4. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks;
5. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line;
6. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines;
7. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) to (6) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map;
8. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) to (7) above, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries;
9. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this Ordinance, The Board of Zoning Adjustment may permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.
10. When a district boundary line splits a lot, tract, or parcel that is in sole ownership, the zoning district with the most restrictive requirements may be extended over the entire property without amending the zoning map through the public hearing process.
11. When a lot, tract, or parcel is bisected by the extraterritorial jurisdiction boundary line, the jurisdiction with the greatest portion of the property shall have controlling interest.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
50 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 5.04 Land Use Categories Matrix Explanation
The Matrix found in Section 5.06 of this Ordinance is a listing of uses that may be allowed within the variety of Zoning Districts.
1. The different uses are grouped into specific “Land Use Categories”.
2. The “Land Use Categories” are listed in each of the Zoning Districts in lieu of specific uses. It is important to note, if a “Land Use Category” is listed within a specific Zoning District, it DOES NOT indicate every use in the “Land Use Category” is allowed within the specific District.
The different uses within Section 5.06 are Permitted (P), Allowed upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit (C), Temporary (T) or not permitted (-).
In order to determine if a specific use is allowed in a Zoning District, the following steps need to be followed:
1. Find the Use Type that matches your application
2. Look across the table and determine which of the Zoning Districts it may be allowed.
3. Determine any special criteria for the use(s) by referring to the specific District.
4. Determine where the specific Zoning Districts are by reviewing the Official Zoning Map.
5. Determine the necessary procedures to receive required permits after the land or property is the control of the applicant.
6. When doubt, please confer with Planning staff.
The Table in Section 5.06 also lists Accessory Uses which may be allowed or not allowed in any specific Zoning District. The Accessory Use listing can be found at the end of the Table.
Section 5.05 Annexation and Conformance with the Land Use Plan
Areas annexed into the corporate limits of Cozad shall be zoned to conform to the Future Land Use Plan.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 51
Section 5.06 Land Use Categories/Matrix
P = Permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit
T = Temporary
“-“= not permitted
*1 = Floodplain regulations shall be met
Use Category
Use Type
TA-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 F I-1 I-2
Additional Requirements
Agriculture & Horticulture Uses
Agricultural buildings for general ag. use
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Agricultural operations
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Class I LFO
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Class II LFO
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Community Gardens
P
P
C
C
C
-
-
-
P
-
-
Crop Production
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Greenhouse
P
-
-
-
-
T
T
T
T
T
T
Livestock for 4-H purposes as a Secondary use
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Livestock sales
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Wineries/Vineyards
C
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Agricultural Sales & Service
Agricultural chemicals, fertilizer, anhydrous ammonia-storage & distribution for commercial use.
C
-
-
-
-
-
C
-
-
C
P
Agricultural chemicals, fertilizer, anhydrous ammonia-storage & distribution for personal use.
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
=
Agricultural implement & vehicle sales and service
P
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
-
C
P
Agricultural research farm
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
P
Agricultural processing
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Agriculture feed mixing and blending, seed sales and grain handling operations
P
-
-
-
-
-
C
-
-
C
P
Equestrian centers and stables
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Horses and other non-commercial livestock on residential lots
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Residential Living
Seasonal dwelling or cabins
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Multi-family dwelling (max. of 4 units per building)
-
P
P
P
-
C
C
C
C
-
-
Multi-family dwelling (more than 4 units per building)
-
-
P
P
-
C
C
C
C
-
-
Condominiums (max. of 4 units)
-
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Condominiums (4 units or more)
-
-
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Mobile Home Dwelling
P
-
-
-
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
Mobile Home Dwelling as secondary dwelling
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Single-family attached dwelling (max. of 4 units)
-
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Single-family attached dwelling (more than of 4 units)
-
-
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Single-family detached dwellings
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
Two-family/Duplex
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
Upper story housing
-
-
-
-
-
P
C
C
-
-
-
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
52 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
P = Permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit
T = Temporary
“-“= not permitted
*1 = Floodplain regulations shall be met
Use Category
Use Type
TA-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 F I-1 I-2
Additional Requirements
Residential/ Commercial
Institutions
Adult care homes
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
P
P
Assisted Living Facilities
P
P
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
-
-
Bed and Breakfast
P
P
C
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
See Section 9.14
Convents
P
P
C
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Emergency Residential Services/Shelters
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
C
C
Group Care Home
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Group Home
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
Hospice
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
Life Care Facility
P
P
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
C
C
Monasteries
P
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Nursing Homes
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
-
-
Retirement Homes
-
C
C
C
-
C
C
C
C
-
-
Transitional housing
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Community Services/
Civic Uses
Animal shelters
P
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
C
-
Cemetery
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Churches, synagogues, temples & similar
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
Church, Storefront
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
-
-
Community centers & buildings
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
Fire and Rescue facilities
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Fraternal Organization
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
P
-
Governmental offices and uses
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Law enforcement centers
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Public Libraries and museums
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
-
Philanthropic Organizations
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
P
-
Museums
C
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
-
Planetariums
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
-
-
Senior citizen centers
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
C
-
Treatment, Rehabilitation, Incarceration Facilities
Community correction centers
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Drug & alcohol rehabilitation centers
C
C
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
-
-
Halfway houses
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Public Detention Center
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Juvenile Detention Center
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Private Prisons
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Public Prisons
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 53
P = Permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit
T = Temporary
“-“= not permitted
*1 = Floodplain regulations shall be met
Use Category
Use Type
TA-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 F I-1 I-2
Additional Requirements
Day-Care, Public & Private Schools
Adult day-care home
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
Child Care Center
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Child Care Home
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Colleges and Universities
C
C
C
C
C
-
P
P
P
-
-
Day care centers
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Family Child Care Home I
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Family Child Care Home II
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Preschools
C
P
P
P
P
P
C
C
C
-
-
Public & private schools (K-12)
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
-
-
Trade, career & technical schools
C
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
C
C
Public Parks & Open Space
Arboretums
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Athletic fields
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
Campground
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Nature centers
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Parks, trails, picnic areas, & playgrounds
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
State parks
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Public pools and/or water parks
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
Public/Private Utilities & Communication Services
Natural gas exploration and pumping
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Natural gas depots
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Private Wells
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Wind Energy Conversion Sys. – Commercial/Utility Grade
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
See Section 9.07
Public works facilities incl. storage/maintenance areas
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Wireless telecommunication facilities sys. - new tower
C
C
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
C
C
See Section 9.03
Wireless telecommunication facilities sys. - collocated
P
P
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
See Section 9.03
Radio and tower transmitter (Shortwave and Ham operations)
P
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
See Section 9.19
Animal Care
Animal Shelter
P
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
P
P
Kennel boarding or training
P
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
P
P
Kennel, commercial
P
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
P
P
Kennel, private
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Pet cemetery
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Pet crematorium
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Pet grooming, Pet training
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Animal hospital
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
54 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
P = Permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit
T = Temporary
“-“= not permitted
*1 = Floodplain regulations shall be met
Use Category
Use Type
TA-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 F I-1 I-2
Additional Requirements
Business and Household Services
Building maintenance & cleaning services
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Copying, printing, mailing, & packaging services
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Lawn, garden & yard maintenance services
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Locksmiths and key duplication
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Pest control services
C
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
P
P
Small appliances & household equipment repair
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Well drilling/septic tank cleaning
C
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
Financial Services
Banks
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Automatic Teller Machine (ATM)
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Brokerages
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Credit Unions
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Insurance offices
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Financial advisory services
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Specialty loan services
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Food And Beverage Services
Food And Beverage Services, cont.
Banquet/reception facility
C
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
-
-
Brew-on Premises Store
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Brewery
C
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
C
C
Craft Brewery (Commercial)
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
C
C
Catering service
C
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
C
C
Donut and pastry shops
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Mobile Food Units
T
-
-
-
-
T
T
T
T
T
T
See Section 9.18
Restaurants
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Roadside produce stands
T
T
-
-
-
T
T
T
T
T
T
Sidewalk Café
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Tavern or bar
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Coffee houses, coffee shops
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Brew pub
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Micro-brewery (Commercial)
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Coffee kiosks
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
General Commercial
General Commercial, cont.
Antiques and collectables shop
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Art galleries
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Artisan production shop
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Artist Studio
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Bridal sales & services
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Clothing & accessories
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Computer hardware/software sales
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Dance studios & schools
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Electronic/appliance sales & service
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Equipment sales/storage/rental
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Equipment repair services
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Fabric and sewing supply stores
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Farmer’s Market
P
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 55
P = Permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit
T = Temporary
“-“= not permitted
*1 = Floodplain regulations shall be met
Use Category
Use Type
TA-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 F I-1 I-2
Additional Requirements
Firearms and ammunition sales
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
C
C
Florists
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Food store (specialty) including bakeries, meat lockers, butchers, delicatessen, not a full-service grocery
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Funeral homes and mortuaries, including crematoriums
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Garden center
C
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
-
-
Gift store
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Grocery
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Hardware store
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Heating and cooling sales and services
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Lawn and garden equipment sales and service
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Photographic equipment & supplies
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Pottery store
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Religious book, card and articles stores
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Secondhand store, thrift or consignment store
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Self-services laundry and Laundromat
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Tanning Studio
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Taxidermy Services
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Special Commercial
Billiard halls
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Commercial greenhouses
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Business Center
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Concrete and cinder block sales
C
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
Convenience store
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
C
C
Fencing dealers
C
-
-
-
-
C
P
P
P
P
P
Fireworks stands
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Gasoline filling stations, including Self-Service
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
C
C
Liquor stores/sales
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Monument sales
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Motels and hotels
P
-
-
-
-
C
P
P
P
-
-
Nurseries, retail sales
P
-
-
-
-
C
P
P
P
P
P
Piercing Studio
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Tattoo Parlor
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Vending Machines
-
-
-
-
-
A
A
A
A
A
A
Vending Machine, Reverse
-
-
-
-
-
A
A
A
A
A
A
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
56 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
P = Permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit
T = Temporary
“-“= not permitted
*1 = Floodplain regulations shall be met
Use Category
Use Type
TA-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 F I-1 I-2
Additional Requirements
Medical Uses
Acupuncture offices
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Chiropractor offices
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Dental offices incl. orthodontics
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Massage therapy
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Medical offices
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Optical sales & services
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Laser Treatment
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Rehabilitation facilities including out-patient services
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Office Uses
Accountant and investment counseling
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Business offices
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Consultant offices
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Lawyer/Attorney offices
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Photographic studios
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Real Estate offices
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Utility and telephone company offices
C
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Recreational Commercial
Bowling alley
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Commercial stables
P
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Golf courses, public & private
P
P
-
-
-
-
C
-
-
-
-
Golf driving ranges
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Gun clubs
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Miniature golf courses
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
-
-
Paintball Course
C
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Recreational facility, Indoor
C
C
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
C
C
Recreational facility, outdoor
C
C
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
C
Recreational vehicle (RV) Park
C
-
-
-
-
-
C
-
-
-
-
Riding Academies
P
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Amusement arcade
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Auto Services/ Commercial
Auto body repair
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
P
P
See Section 9.12
Automotive/machinery repair shop
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
P
P
See Section 9.12
Automobile/truck sales, rental & leasing
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
P
P
See Section 9.12
Automobile/truck washes, self-services or automatic
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
P
P
See Section 9.12
Motor home dealers
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
P
P
See Section 9.13
Motorcycle dealers, incl. moped and scooters
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
P
P
See Section 9.13
Muffler sales & services
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
P
P
See Section 9.12
Recreational vehicle sales & rentals
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
P
P
See Section 9.13
Transmission repair shops
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
P
P
See Section 9.12
Travel trailer dealers
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
P
P
See Section 9.13
Vehicle Storage
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
P
P
Vehicle Storage, Long-term
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
P
P
Trailer, RV, & boat storage
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
P
P
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 57
P = Permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit
T = Temporary
“-“= not permitted
*1 = Floodplain regulations shall be met
Use Category
Use Type
TA-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 F I-1 I-2
Additional Requirements
Adult Uses
Adult Entertainment
P
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
See Section 9.21
Warehousing & Storage
Fireworks storage
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Mini-warehouses & self-service storage
C
-
-
-
-
-
C
-
-
C
C
See Section 9.11
Motor Freight Terminals
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
-
-
C
C
Outdoor Storage
C
-
-
-
-
-
C
-
-
P
P
Outdoor Storage Containers
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Portable On-demand storage facilities
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
Warehouse and distribution
C
-
-
-
-
-
C
-
-
C
C
Warehousing (enclosed)
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Warehousing (Open)
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Wholesale business and storage
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Contractors, Contractor Yards, Storage & Supply
Bulk materials or machinery storage (fully enclosed)
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Carpenters
C
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
P
P
Carpet & rug cleaning plants
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Construction batch plants
C
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
P
P
Construction yards incl. offices & equipment storage yards excl. heavy machinery
C
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
P
P
Electricians
C
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
Heating & ventilating contractors
C
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
Masons & bricklayers
C
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
Plumbers
C
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
Trade shops (incl. cabinet makers)
C
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
Large Contracting/ Materials Manufacturing
Asphalt contractors
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Concrete block manufacturing
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Concrete contractors
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Concrete products
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Excavating contractors
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Heavy construction companies
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Highway/street construction co.
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Manufactured housing fabrication
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Prefabricated buildings & components manufacturing
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Wrecking & demolition contractors
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
58 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
P = Permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit
T = Temporary
“-“= not permitted
*1 = Floodplain regulations shall be met
Use Category
Use Type
TA-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 F I-1 I-2
Additional Requirements
Food Processing
Bakery Products Manufacturing
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Beverage Blending and Bottling (Except Breweries)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Coffee, Tea and Spice Processing and Packaging
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Creamery and Dairy Operations
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Dairy Products Manufacturing
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Egg Processing Plants
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Mining & Excavation
Brick, firebrick and clay products manufacturing
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
See Section 9.17
Monument & architectural stone manufacturing
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
Quarry
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
See Section 9.17
Metal Processing, Stamping
Culvert manufacturing
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
P
Welding
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
P
Wire Rope and Cable Manufacturing
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
P
Waste Handling
Landfill, Construction Material
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Landfill, Solid Waste
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Recycling Center
C
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
C
Recycling Processing
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Sanitary Transfer Station
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
Wood Products Manufacturing
Basket & hamper (wood, reed, rattan, etc.) manufacturing
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Millwork manufacturing
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Electronics manufacturing
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Machinery manufacturing
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Musical instruments manufacturing
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Tool, die, gauge and machine shops
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Wind turbine manufacturing
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
General Manufacturing
(High Hazard)
Bio-Fuels Manufacturing, including Ethanol production
C
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
See Section 9.09
Grain Elevator and Storage Facilities
C
-
-
-
-
-
C
-
-
-
-
Salvage Operations
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Scrap or Salvage Yards
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Waste Recovery Facilities – Commercial, Industrial & Residential
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Wood Preserving Treatment
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 59
P = Permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit
T = Temporary
“-“= not permitted
*1 = Floodplain regulations shall be met
Use Category
Use Type
TA-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 F I-1 I-2
Additional Requirements
Accessory Uses
Barns
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Bins, silos, grain storage
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
Decks, gazebos, patios (elevated or on-grade)
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
See section 4.12
Fences
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
See section 9.04
Freestanding canopy
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
See section 4.12
Fuel storage
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Fuel tanks and dispensing equipment
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
Garages, Private
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
P
P
See section 4.12
Garage, Storage
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
P
P
See section 4.12
Carports
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
See section 4.12
Greenhouses, Non-commercial
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
See section 4.12
Home Occupations
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
See Section 9.01 and 9.02
Home based Businesses
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
See Section 9.01 and 9.02
Portable on-demand storage containers
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
See section 9.16
Porch, unenclosed
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
P
P
See section 4.12
Storage sheds
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
P
P
See section 4.12
Storage building using multiple storage containers
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Swimming pools
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
Tennis courts
P
P
P
P
P
-
-
-
-
-
-
Solar energy systems for use on individual properties or buildings
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
See Section 9.10
Wind Energy Conversion System
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
See Section 9.06
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
60 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 5.07 TA-1: Transitional Agricultural District
5.07.01 Intent:
The Transitional Agriculture District is established for the purpose of preserving agricultural resources that are compatible with adjacent urban growth. It is not intended for commercial feedlot operations for livestock or poultry. Because the areas are not in the identified growth areas for the community, the district is designed to limit urban sprawl.
5.07.02 Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.07.03 Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the TA-1 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
5.07.04 Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section 4.23.
5.07.05 Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table 5.06 and Article 4 for more detail.
5.07.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
The minimum lot size is 5 acres. The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows: 

Use Lot Area (acres) Lot Width (feet) A Front Yard (feet)* B Rear Yard (feet)** C Side Yard (feet) Max. Height (feet) Max. Building Coverage (%)****
Single-family dwelling
5
300
30
50
20
35
10
Other Permitted Uses
5
300
30
50
20
35
10
Conditional Uses
5
300
30
50
20
35
10
Accessory Structures
-
-
30
10
10
15
-
* Front yard setback shall be 58 feet from the centerline of a County Road, or shall 25 feet when abutting any other platted street, road or highway.
** Rear yard setback shall be 53 feet from the centerline of a County Road, or shall be 20 feet abutting any other platted street, road or highway or interior property line.
*** Side yard setback shall be 53 feet from the centerline of a County Road, or shall be 20 feet when abutting any other platted street, road, or highway or interior property line.
**** Percentage applies to the buildable area of the lot.
5.07.07 Other Applicable Provisions:
1. The following uses shall be a minimum of 2,640 feet from any residential, commercial, industrial, or public use, as measured from the nearest point on the lot line.
a. Commercial auction yards or barns.
b. Commercial production and husbandry of poultry, fish, and small animals.
c. Commercial feedlots.
d. Mining and extraction of natural resources.
e. Feed mills.
f. Auto wrecking yards, junk yards, salvage yards, and scrap processing yards.
g. Storage and distribution of anhydrous ammonia, fuel, fertilizer, and other chemicals.
2. No new residential, commercial, industrial, or public use shall be located nearer than 3,960 feet to any existing use listed in Section 5.07.07 (1).
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 61
Section 5.08 R-1 Low Density Residential
5.08.01 Intent:
This district is intended to provide for low-density residential neighborhoods, characterized by single-family dwellings on large lots with supporting community facilities. Its regulations are intended to minimize traffic congestion and to assure that density is consistent with the carrying capacity of infrastructure.
5.08.02 Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.08.03 Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the R-1 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
5.08.04 Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section 4.23.
5.08.05 Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table 5.06 and Sections within Article 4 for more detail.
5.08.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
The minimum lot size is 10,000 square feet.
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows: 
Use Lot Area (Sq. Ft.) Lot Width (feet) A Front Yard (feet) B Rear Yard (feet) C Side Yard (feet) Max. Height (feet) Max. Building Coverage (%) Max. Impervious Coverage (%)
Single-family dwelling detached
10,000*
100
30
25
15
35
25
35
Other Permitted Uses
10,000*
100
30
25
15
35
25
35
Conditional Uses
10,000*
100
30
25
15
35
25
35
Accessory Structures
-
-
30
10
15
15
-
* If lot is not connected to municipal water then the minimum lot size shall be one acre.
Example of different Yard
Example of different Yard RequirementsRequirements
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
62 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 5.09 R-2 Medium Density Residential District
5.09.01 Intent:
This district is intended to provide for medium to higher density residential neighborhoods, characterized by single-family and two-family dwellings, townhouse and condominiums up to four horizontal units on small to moderately sized lots with supporting community facilities.
5.09.02 Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.09.03 Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the R-2 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
5.09.04 Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section 4.23.
5.09.05 Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table 5.06 and Sections within Article 4 for more detail.
5.09.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
The minimum lot size per unit is 3,000 square feet
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows: Use Lot Area (Sq. Ft.) Lot Width (feet) A Front Yard (feet)** B Rear Yard (feet) C Side Yard (feet) Max. Height (feet) Max. Building Coverage (%)**** Max. Impervious Coverage (%)
Single-family dwelling
7,500
75
20*
25
15
35
40
50
Single-family attached/Townhouses (max. 2 units)
3,000/unit
40/unit
20*
25
15*****
35
40
50
Two-family dwelling/duplex
6,000
75
20*
25
15
35
40
50
Condominiums (max. 2 units)
3,000/unit
40/unit
20*
25
15
35
40
50
Other Permitted Uses
7,500
75
20*
25
15
35
40
50
Conditional Uses
7,500
75
20*
25
15
35
40
50
Accessory Structures
-
-
20*
5***
5
15
-
* The minimum front yard setback shall be 20 feet along any street NOT designated as an Arterial; Front yard setbacks along a street designated an Arterial shall be increased to 30 feet.
** See Section 4.09.05
*** See Section 4.12.09
**** Percentage applies to the buildable area of the lot
***** The minimum side yard on single-family attached/townhouses and condominiums shall be zero feet for all interior lots and shared property lines. See Section 5.09.07 for additional requirements.
5.09.07 Supplemental Residential Regulations
1. Single-family Attached/Townhouses and Condominiums
A. Common wall shall have a zero-lot line setback and be located on the property line separating both dwellings.
B. Each unit is separated by a two-hour fire rated wall from the lowest level and continuing through the roof structure.
C. Each unit shall be serviced by separate facilities.
D. When each unit is in separate ownership, the accompanying lot shall not be in common ownership with any other unit.
E. No more than three units shall be connected in this district.
Example of different Yard
Example of different Yard RequirementsRequirements
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 63
Section 5.10 R-3 High Density Residential District
5.10.01 Intent:
This district is intended to provide for higher density residential neighborhoods, characterized by two-family dwellings, townhouses, condominiums, and apartment units on small to moderately sized lots with supporting community facilities.
5.10.02 Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.10.03 Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the R-3 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
5.10.04 Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section 4.23.
5.10.05 Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table 5.06 and Sections within Article 4 for more detail.
5.10.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
The minimum lot size per unit is 1,500 square feet
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows: Use Lot Area (Sq. Ft.) Lot Width (feet) A Front Yard (feet)*** B Rear Yard (feet) C Side Yard (feet) Max. Height (feet) Max. Building Coverage (%)***** Max. Impervious Coverage (%)
Single-family dwelling
5,000
50
20*
25
15
35
60
65
Single-family attached/Townhouses
3,000/unit; average
20/unit**
20*
25
15******
35
60
65
Two-family dwelling/duplex
6,000
75
20*
25
15
35
60
65
Condominium
3,000/unit; average
20/unit
20*
25
15
35
60
65 Multi-family 1-story 2-story 3-story Per Unit 3,000 2,500 1,500
25
15
35
60
65
50
20*
25
15
35
60
65
50
20*
25
15
35
60
65
50
20*
25
15
35
60
65
Other Permitted Uses
6,000
50
20*
25
15
35
60
65
Conditional Uses
6,000
50
20*
25
15
35
60
65
Accessory Structures
-
-
20*
5****
5
15
-
-
* The minimum front yard setback shall be 20 feet along any street NOT designated as an Arterial; Front yard setbacks along a street designated an Arterial shall be increased to 30 feet.
** The minimum lot width for Townhouses and Condominiums with more than two units shall be 20 feet for interior units and 40 feet for the exterior units. See Section 5.09.07 see addition requirements.
*** See Section 4.09.05
**** See Section 4.12.09
***** Percentage applies to the buildable area of the lot
****** The minimum side yard on single-family attached/townhouses and condominiums shall be zero feet for all interior lots and shared property lines. See Section 5.09.07 for additional requirements.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
64 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
5.10.07 Supplemental Residential Regulations
1. Single-family Attached/Townhouses and Condominiums
A. Common wall shall have a zero-lot line setback and be located on the property line separating both dwellings.
B. Each unit is separated by a two-hour fire rated wall from the lowest level and continuing through the roof structure.
C. Each unit shall be serviced by separate facilities.
D. When each unit is in separate ownership, the accompanying lot shall not be in common ownership with any other unit.
E. No more than three units shall be connected in this district.
Example of different Yard
Example of different Yard RequirementsRequirements
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 65
Section 5.11 RM Mobile Home Residential District
5.11.01 Intent:
This district recognizes that mobile home development, properly planned, can provide important opportunities for affordable housing. It provides opportunities for mobile home development within planned parks or subdivisions, along with the supporting services necessary to create quality residential neighborhoods.
5.11.02 Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.11.03 Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the RM District as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
5.11.04 Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section 4.23
5.11.05 Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table 5.06 and Sections within Article 4 for more detail.
5.11.06 Special Design Criteria for this District
1. A mobile home development shall have a lot area of not less than two acres. No mobile homes or other structures shall be located less than 65 feet from the road centerline when contiguous to or having frontage to a County Road or 25 feet when contiguous from a State Highway. The setback on all other court property lines shall be 10 feet. These areas shall be landscaped. The minimum lot depth in a mobile home court shall be 200 feet.
2. Each lot provided for occupancy of a single mobile home dwelling shall have an area of not less than 4,000 square feet, excluding road right-of-way, and a width of not less than 40 feet. Each individual lot shall have:
a. Side yard setback (C) shall not be less than five feet, except that on corner lots, the setback for all buildings shall be a minimum of 25 feet on the side abutting a street/road.
b. Front yard setback (A) shall not be less than 25 feet.
c. Rear yard setback (B) of not less than 25 feet.
3. There shall be a minimum livable floor area of 500 square feet in each mobile home.
4. Height of buildings shall be:
a. Maximum height for principal uses shall be 35 feet.
b. Maximum height for accessory uses shall be 10 feet.
5. Each lot shall have access to a hard surfaced drive not less than 24 feet in width, excluding parking.
6. Community water and community sewage disposal facilities shall be provided with connections to each lot, in accordance with design standards for the City. The water supply shall be sufficient for domestic use and for fire protection.
7. Service buildings including adequate laundry and drying facilities. Common toilet facilities for mobile homes which do not have these facilities within each unit may be provided.
8. Storm shelters shall be required and shall meet the following criteria:
a. Shelter space equivalent to two persons per mobile home lot,
b. Designed in conformance with “National Performance Criteria for Tornado Shelters” by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and any other referenced material by FEMA,
c. Shelters shall be sited in order to provide maximum protection to park occupants and so that residents may reach a shelter within the maximum safe time frame as directed by FEMA.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
66 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
9. All trailer pad locations shall be hard surfaced with properly reinforced Poured in Place Concrete.
10. Not less than 10 percent of the total court area shall be designated and used for park, playground and recreational purposes.
11. Each mobile home dwelling shall be provided with a paved patio or equivalent, other than parking spaces, of not less than 150 square feet.
5.11.07 Special Requirements
All lots must be platted in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Cozad and shall also contain the following information:
a. A complete plan of the mobile home development shall be submitted showing:
b. A development plan and grading plan of the court.
c. The area and dimensions of the tract of land.
d. The number, location, and size of all mobile home spaces.
e. The area and dimensions of the park, playground and recreation areas.
f. The location and width of roadways and walkways.
g. The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures.
h. The location of water and sewer lines and sewage disposal facilities.
i. Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home court.
5.11.08 Supplemental Residential Regulations
1. Townhouses and Condominiums
A. Common wall shall have a zero-lot line setback and shall be located on the property line separating both dwellings.
B. Each unit is separated by a two-hour fire rated wall from the lowest level and continuing through the roof structure.
C. Each unit shall be serviced by separate facilities.
D. When each unit is in separate ownership, the accompanying lot shall not be in common ownership with any other unit.
E. No more than three units shall be connected in this district.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 67
Section 5.12 C-1 Downtown Commercial District
5.12.01 Intent:
This district is intended to provide appropriate development regulations for Downtown Cozad. Mixed uses are encouraged within the C-1 District, without allowing activities which would have a negative effect on the town center. The grouping of uses is designed to strengthen the town center’s role as a center for trade, service, and civic life.
5.12.02 Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.12.03 Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the C-1 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
5.12.04 Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section 4.23.
5.12.05 Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table 5.06 and Sections within Article 4 for more detail.
5.12.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows: Use Lot Area (Sq. Ft.) Lot Width (feet) A Front Yard (feet) B Rear Yard (feet)** C Side Yard (feet)* Max. Height (feet) Max. Building Coverage (%) Max. Impervious Coverage (%)
Permitted Uses
-
-
0
0
0
35
100
100
Conditional Uses
-
-
0
0
0
35
100
100
Accessory Structures
-
-
0
0
0
15
-
-
* None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the Side Yard setback shall be 10 feet, except when separated by an alley.
** None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the Rear Yard setback shall be 25 feet, except when separated by an alley.
5.12.07 Use Limitations:
1. When adjacent to any residential district, no parking, drives or signs shall be allowed in the required front yard within 15 feet of such residential district.
2. When adjacent to any residential district, new construction shall provide permanent screen with a height of six feet or six feet four inches if a fence, in order to minimize impacts on residentially zoned property, pursuant to Section 9.04.
3. No outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the public, shall be permitted.
4. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any residential property and/or District and so that no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street.
5. All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display on property abutting or facing a lot in a residential district shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, unless screened from the residential district by a sight-obscuring fence permanently maintained at least six feet in height.
6. Openings to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from a residential district shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause glare, excessive noise or other adverse effects on residential properties.
7. Motor vehicle, boat, or trailer rental or sales lots shall be drained and surfaced with crushed rock or pavement, except in those portions of the lot maintained as landscape area.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
68 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
8. All new buildings constructed within the C-1 Downtown Commercial District shall have a brick or concrete/plaster style façade on the front face of the building and any exposed side facades.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 69
Section 5.13 C-2 General Commercial District
5.13.01 Intent:
This district is applied to parcels throughout the community. These areas are commercial in nature; however, the area does not fall into the typical uses found in the downtown area or along highways in the community.
5.13.02 Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.13.03 Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the C-2 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
5.13.04 Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section 4.23.
5.13.05 Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table 5.06 and Sections within Article 4 for more detail.
5.13.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows unless otherwise noted: Use Lot Area (Sq. Ft.) Lot Width (feet) A Front Yard (feet)* B Rear Yard (feet)** C Side Yard (feet)* Max. Height (feet) Max. Building Coverage (%) Max. Impervious Coverage (%)
Permitted Uses
10,000
100
20
0
10
45
70
90
Conditional Uses
10,000
100
20
0
10
45
70
90
Accessory Structures
-
-
20
0
10
15
-
-
* The front yard setback of 25 feet only required when no parking is present in the front yard. If parking is located in the front yard, then the front yard setback shall be increased to 50 feet.
5.13.07 Use Limitations:
1. When adjacent to any residential district, no parking, drives or signs shall be allowed in the required front yard within 15 feet of such residential district.
2. When adjacent to any residential district, new construction shall provide permanent screen with a height of six feet of six feet four inches if a fence, in order to minimize impacts on residentially zoned property, pursuant to Section ***.
3. No outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the public, shall be permitted.
4. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street.
5. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting direct light on any property located in a residential or mobile home district.
6. All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display on property abutting or facing a lot in a residential district shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, unless screened from the residential district by a sight-obscuring fence permanently maintained at least six feet in height.
7. Openings to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from a residential district shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause glare, excessive noise or other adverse effects on residential properties.
8. Motor vehicle, boat, or trailer rental or sales lots shall be drained and surfaced with crushed rock or pavement, except in those portions of the lot maintained as landscape area.
9. 35% of the required front yard shall be maintained in landscaping.
10. Lots along the highways shall be required to gain access through a paved service road.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
70 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 5.14 C-3 Highway Commercial District
5.14.01 Intent:
This district is applied to parcels along US Highway 30. The district permits a mixture of uses. Uses will tend to serve the traveling public or larger commercial properties needing space for parking and turning.
5.14.02 Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.14.03 Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the C-3 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
5.14.04 Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section 4.23.
5.14.05 Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table 5.06 and Sections within Article 4 for more detail.
5.14.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows unless otherwise noted: Use Lot Area (Sq. Ft.) Lot Width (feet) A Front Yard (feet)* B Rear Yard (feet)** C Side Yard (feet)* Max. Height (feet) Max. Building Coverage (%) Max. Impervious Coverage (%)
Permitted Uses
10,000
100
20
25
10
45
60
80
Conditional Uses
10,000
100
20
25
10
45
60
80
Accessory Structures
-
-
20
10
10
15
-
-
* The front yard setback of 25 feet only required when no parking is present in the front yard. If parking is located in the front yard then the front yard setback shall be increased to 50 feet.
5.14.07 Use Limitations:
1. When adjacent to any residential district, no parking, drives or signs shall be allowed in the required front yard within 15 feet of such residential district.
2. When adjacent to any residential district, new construction shall provide permanent screen with a height of six feet of six feet four inches if a fence, in order to minimize impacts on residentially zoned property, pursuant to Section ***.
3. No outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the public, shall be permitted.
4. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street.
5. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting direct light on any property located in a residential or mobile home district.
6. All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display on property abutting or facing a lot in a residential district shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, unless screened from the residential district by a sight-obscuring fence permanently maintained at least six feet in height.
7. Openings to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from a residential district shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause glare, excessive noise or other adverse effects on residential properties.
8. Motor vehicle, boat, or trailer rental or sales lots shall be drained and surfaced with crushed rock or pavement, except in those portions of the lot maintained as landscape area.
9. 35% of the required front yard shall be maintained in landscaping.
10. Lots along the highways shall be required to gain access through a paved service road.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 71
Section 5.15 F-1 Commercial/Industrial Flex District
5.15.01 Intent:
The purpose of this district is to provide for a wide range of commercial and industrial uses including retail sales and services; warehousing and distribution; and industrial uses which are compatible with other uses permitted in this district and in adjacent districts.
5.15.02 Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.15.03 Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the F-1 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
5.15.04 Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section 4.23.
5.15.05 Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table 5.06 and Sections within Article 4 for more detail.
5.15.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows unless otherwise noted: Use Lot Area (Sq. Ft.) Lot Width (feet) A Front Yard (feet)* B Rear Yard (feet)** C Side Yard (feet)* Max. Height (feet) Max. Building Coverage (%) Max. Impervious Coverage (%)
Permitted Uses
10,000
100
20
10
10
45
60
80
Conditional Uses
10,000
100
20
10
10
45
60
80
Accessory Structures
-
-
20
10
10
15
-
-
* The front yard setback of 25 feet only required when no parking is present in the front yard. If parking is located in the front yard, then the front yard setback shall be increased to 50 feet.
5.15.07 Use Limitations:
1. When adjacent to any residential district, new construction shall provide permanent screen with a height of six feet of six feet four inches if a fence, in order to minimize impacts on residentially zoned property, pursuant to Section ***.
2. Outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the public, shall not be permitted.
3. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so no direct light is cast upon any residential property and so no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street.
4. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting direct light on any property located in a residential or mobile home district.
5. All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display on property abutting or facing a lot in a residential district shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, unless screened from the residential district by a sight-obscuring fence permanently maintained at least six feet in height.
6. Openings to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from a residential district shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause glare, excessive noise or other adverse effects on residential properties.
7. Motor vehicle, boat, or trailer rental or sales lots shall be drained and surfaced with crushed rock or pavement, except in those portions of the lot maintained as landscape area.
8. Lots along the highways shall be required to gain access through a paved service road.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
72 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 5.16 I-1 Industrial District
5.16.01 Intent:
This district is intended to reserve sites appropriate for the location of industrial uses with relatively limited environmental effects. The district is designed to provide appropriate space and regulations to encourage good quality industrial development, while assuring that facilities are served with adequate parking and loading facilities.
5.16.02 Permitted Uses:
Permitted Uses are allowed outright provided the uses and/or structure meet the minimum bulk requirements of the District.
5.16.03 Conditional Uses:
The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this section as well as any conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the I-1 District as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
5.16.04 Temporary Uses:
Temporary uses may be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit. See Section 4.23.
5.16.05 Accessory Uses and Structures:
Refer to the definitions of Accessory Uses and Structures, as well as Table 5.06 and Sections within Article 4 for more detail.
5.16.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows unless otherwise noted: Use Lot Area (Sq. Ft.) Lot Width (feet) A Front Yard (feet)* B Rear Yard (feet)** C Side Yard (feet)* Max. Height (feet) Max. Building Coverage (%) Max. Impervious Coverage (%)
Permitted Uses
10,000
100
20
10
10
-
70
90
Conditional Uses
10,000
100
20
10
10
-
70
90
Accessory Structures
-
-
20
10
10
15
-
-
* The front yard setback of 25 feet only required when no parking is present in the front yard. If parking is located in the front yard, then the front yard setback shall be increased to 50 feet.
5.16.07 Use Limitations:
1. When adjacent to any residential district, no parking, drives or signs shall be allowed in the required front yard within 15 feet of such residential district.
2. When adjacent to any residential district, new construction shall provide permanent screen with a height of six feet of six feet four inches if a fence, in order to minimize impacts on residentially zoned property, pursuant to Section 9.04.
3. No outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the public, shall be permitted.
4. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street.
5. When adjacent to an alley, the width of the alley shall be included in computing the minimum rear yard setback.
6. All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display on property abutting or facing a lot in a residential district shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, unless screened from the residential district by a sight-obscuring fence permanently maintained at least six feet in height.
7. Openings to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from a residential district shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause glare, excessive noise or other adverse effects on residential properties.
8. Motor vehicle, boat, or trailer rental or sales lots shall be drained and surfaced with crushed rock or pavement, except in those portions of the lot maintained as landscape area.
5.16.08 Performance Standards:
See Section 9.05 of the Supplemental Regulations.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 73
Section 5.17 HPO Historic Preservation Overlay District
5.17.01 Intent
The HD Historic Overlay District enables the adoption of special performance and development standards in combination with site development regulations of a base district for areas of special historical or architectural significance within the City of Cozad. The District recognizes the importance of historically and architecturally significant districts to the character of Cozad and provides for their conservation.
5.17.02 Procedure for Adoption
1. Proposal
The creation of an H-1 Historic Overlay District may be initiated by the Planning Commission; the City Council; or by petition of the owner or owners of 51% of the property area within the proposed district.
2. Requirements for Application
An application for the creation of an HD Overlay District must include:
a. A statement describing the proposed district's special historical or architectural characteristics and stating the reasons for proposal of the district
b. A map indicating the boundaries of the proposed HD Overlay District, specifying the base district(s) included within these boundaries.
c. An inventory of the buildings or historically important sites located within the boundaries of the proposed district.
d. Supplemental site development regulations, design criteria, and performance standards that apply to the proposed district.
5.17.03 Adoption of District
1. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate each H-1 Overlay District application.
2. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon each application.
3. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to H-1 district applications.
4. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council for final action.
5. The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon any Ordinance establishing an H-1 Historic Overlay District.
6. The Ordinance adopting the H-1 District shall include a statement of purpose, a description of district boundaries, and a list of supplemental site development regulations and performance standards.
7. An Ordinance adopting an H-1 Overlay District shall require a favorable vote of a simple majority of the City Council for approval.
8. Upon approval by the City Council, each H-1 Overlay District shall be shown on the Zoning Map, identified sequentially by order of enactment and referenced to the enacting Ordinance.
9. Any protest against an H-1 Overlay District shall be made and filed as provided by Section 14-405, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, and amendments thereto.
5.17.04 Building Permits
Building or other development permits issued by the City in an H-1 District shall follow procedures for review and approval established within the City's Landmarks Preservation Ordinance, should such an ordinance be adopted by the City of Cozad.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
74 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 5.18 AH Airport Hazard Overlay District
5.18.01 Intent:
The intent of this district is be appended and to overlay any of the primary zoning districts as described in this Resolution to protect the safe use of public airports and their Airport Hazard Area, in Cozad, by limiting the location and height of structures within the operation, approach, transition and turning zones around airports which are registered with the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics, as designated on the Official Zoning Map of Cozad, Nebraska.
Designated Public Airport
The designated public airport for which these regulations have been prepared is the Cozad Municipal Airport located more or less in Sections 1 Township 10 N Range 24 W. In addition, the existing and proposed Instrument Approach Zones of the Lexington and Gothenburg.
Airport Hazard Area Description
In accordance with Neb. Rev. Stat. §3-303, every political subdivision that has adopted a comprehensive plan and zoning regulations, and has an airport hazard area within the area of its zoning jurisdiction, must adopt, administer, and enforce the regulations in this section for such airport hazard area.
5.18.02 Definitions:
Airport shall mean an area of land or water designed and set aside that is used or intended to be used for the landing and taking off takeoff of aircraft and utilized or to be utilized in the interest of the public for such purposes; includes any related buildings and facilities. Airport includes only public-use airports with state or federally approved airport layout plans and military airports with military service-approved military layout plans.
Airport hazard shall mean any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft; that penetrates any approach, operation, transition, or turning zone.
Airport hazard area shall mean any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided in the act, but such area shall not extend in any direction a distance in excess of three miles from the adjacent boundary of an airport; the limits provided for approach, operation, transition, and turning zones.
Airport layout plan shall mean a scaled drawing of existing and proposed land, buildings, and facilities necessary for the operation and development of an airport prepared in accordance with state rules and regulations and federal regulations and guidelines.
Approach zone shall mean a zone that extends from the end of each operation zone and is centered along the extended runway centerlines.
Electric facility shall mean an overhead electrical line, including poles or other supporting structures, owned or operated by an electric supplier as defined in section 70-1001.01, for the transmission or distribution of electrical power to the electric supplier’s customers.
Existing runway shall mean an instrument runway or a visual runway that is paved or made of turf that has been constructed or is under construction.
Instrument runway shall mean an existing runway with precision or non-precision instrument approaches as developed and published by the Federal Aviation Administration or an existing or proposed runway with future precision or non-precision instrument approaches reflected on the airport layout plan. After the effective date of this act, an airport shall not designate an existing or proposed runway as an instrument runway if the runway was not previously designated as such without the approval of the airport’s governing body after a public hearing on such designation.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 75
Operation zone shall mean a zone that is longitudinally centered on each existing or proposed runway.
Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, company, association, joint-stock association, or body politic and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
Political subdivision shall mean any municipality, city, village, or county.
Proposed runway shall mean an instrument runway or a visual runway that has not been constructed and is not under construction but that is depicted on the airport layout plan that has been conditionally or unconditionally approved by, or has been submitted for approval to, the Federal Aviation Administration.
Runway shall mean a defined area at an airport that is prepared for the landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length;
Structure means any object constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission or distribution lines.
Transition zone shall mean a zone that extends outward at a right angle to the runway centerline and upward at a rate of one foot vertically for every seven feet horizontally. The height limit of a transition zone begins at the height limit of the adjacent approach zone or operation zone and ends at a height of one hundred fifty feet above the highest elevation on the existing or proposed runway.
Tree shall mean any object of natural growth.
Turning zone’s outer limit shall mean the area located at a distance of three miles as a radius from the corners of the operation zone of each runway and connecting adjacent arcs with tangent lines, excluding any area within the approach zone, operation zone, or transition zone. The height limit of the turning zone is one hundred fifty feet above the highest elevation on the existing or proposed runway.
Visual runway shall mean a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures, with no straight-in instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an airport layout plan approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, a military service-approved military layout plan, or any planning documents submitted to the Federal Aviation Administration by a competent authority.
5.18.03 Airport Zones
The following are intended for use with this specific overlay zoning district.
Airport Hazard Area consists of Operation Zones, Approach Zones, Turning Zones, and Transition Zones.
Approach Zones extend from the end of each operation zone and are centered along the extended runway centerlines. The zones’ dimensions are:
1. Instrument Runways:
A. Length and Width: The approach zones extend from the operation zone to the limits of the turning zone, measured along the extended runway centerline. The approach zones are 1,000 feet wide at the end nearest the runway and expand uniformly so that at a point on the extended runway centerline 10 miles from the operation zone where it is 16,840 feet wide.
B. Height Limit: The height limit of the approach zones begins at the elevation of the operation zone and rises one foot vertically for every 50 feet horizontally (50:1) up to a maximum of 150 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end. At three miles
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
76 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
from such operation zone, the height limit resumes sloping one foot vertically for every 50 feet horizontally and continues to the 10-mile limit.
2. Visual Runways:
A. Length and Width: The approach zones extend from the operation zone to the limits of the turning zone, measured along the extended runway centerline. The approach zones are 500 feet wide at the end nearest the runway and expand uniformly so that at a point on the extended runway centerline three miles from the operation zone, the approach zone is 3,700 feet wide.
B. Height: The height limit of the approach zones begins at the elevation of the operation zone and rises one foot vertically for every 40 feet horizontally (40:1) up to a maximum of 150 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.
Operation Zones are longitudinally centered on each existing or proposed runway:
1. Length:
A. For existing and proposed paved runways, the operation zones begin and end 200 feet beyond the end of each runway.
B. For existing and proposed turf runways, the operation zones begin and end at the runway ends.
C. For existing and proposed instrument runways, the operation zone is 1,000 feet wide, with 500 hundred feet on either side of the runway centerline.
D. For all other existing and proposed runways, the operation zone is 500 feet wide, with 250 feet on either side of the runway centerline;
2. Height: The height limit of the operation zones is the same as the nearest point on an existing or proposed runway or the surface of the ground, whichever is higher.
Transition Zones extend outward at right angles to the runway centerline and upward at a rate of one foot vertically for every seven feet horizontally (7:1). The height limit of these zones begins at the height limit of the adjacent operation zones or approach zones. The transition zones end at a height of 150 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.
Turning Zones extend three miles as a radius from the corners of the operation zone of each runway and connecting adjacent arcs with tangent lines, excluding any area within the approach zone, operation zone, or transition zone. The height limit of the turning zones is 150 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.
5.18.04 Height Restrictions:
No building, transmission line, pole, tower, chimney, wires, or other structure or appurtenance of any kind or character shall hereafter be erected, constructed, repaired, or established, nor shall any tree or other object of natural growth be allowed to grow, above the heights described in subsection 4.18.03 above.
5.18.05 Airport Zoning Map and Location
The boundaries, operation zones, approach zones, transition zones, and turning zones of the airport are indicated on the Airport Zoning Map, which is attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference. A copy of the Airport Zoning Regulations and Airport Zoning Map shall at all times be on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator and City Clerk.
5.18.06 Permit Requirements, Exceptions, Application Forms, And Fees
1. Anyone wishing to erect, construct, reconstruct, repair, or establish any building, transmission line, communication line, pole, tower, smokestack, chimney, wires, or other structure or appurtenance thereto of any kind or character; or to plant or replant any tree or other object of natural growth which, when mature, would not violate the requirements of Section 5.18.03 above, within the Airport Hazard Area must first obtain a permit from Zoning Administrator.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 77
2. Exception:
Within the Turning Zones, no permit shall be required for any construction, reconstruction, repair, or planting of anything which, when completed, or, in the case of natural growth, when mature, does not exceed seventy-five 75 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.
3. Application Form:
Application for a permit as required under these regulations shall be made on a form to be available in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall indicate the approximate location, ground elevation with reference to the end of the nearest runway or landing strip and height of the proposed structure or planting. (Mean Sea Level Elevation)
4. Permit Fee:
The fee for each permit issued shall be established by the City Council as a separate Resolution to the Zoning Ordinance, and all fees so paid shall be deposited into the airport’s revenue fund.
5.18.07 Non-Conforming Structures
1. Within the Airport Hazard Area, no non-conforming building, transmission line, pole, tower, chimney, wires, or other structure or appurtenance of any kind or character or object of natural growth; and no such structures or objects of natural growth have been torn down, destroyed, have deteriorated or decayed to an extent of 50% or more of their original condition, or abandoned for a period of 12 months or more; shall hereafter be replaced, substantially reconstructed, repaired, altered, replanted, or allowed to grow, as the case may be, to a height above the heights permitted by these regulations. Transmission lines and other communication lines shall be interpreted as all poles, wires, guys and all other equipment necessary for the operation and maintenance of same within the regulated zone.
2. Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section for certain electric facilities, all such airport zoning regulations adopted under the act shall provide that before any nonconforming structure or tree may be replaced, substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher, or replanted, a permit authorizing any replacement, alteration, repair, reconstruction, growth, or replanting must be secured from the administrative agency authorized to administer and enforce the regulations. A permit shall be granted under this subsection if the applicant shows that the replacement, alteration, repair, reconstruction, growth, or replanting of the nonconforming structure, tree, or nonconforming use would not result in an increase in height or a greater hazard to air navigation than the condition that existed when the applicable regulation was adopted. For nonconforming structures other than electric facilities, no permit under this subsection shall be required for repairs necessitated by fire, explosion, act of God, or the common enemy or for repairs which do not involve expenditures exceeding more than sixty percent of the fair market value of the nonconforming structure, so long as the height of the nonconforming structure is not increased over its preexisting height.
3. An electric supplier owning or operating an electric facility made nonconforming by the adoption of airport zoning regulations under the Airport Zoning Act may, without a permit or other approval by the political subdivision adopting such regulations, repair, reconstruct, or replace such electric facility if the height of such electric facility is not increased over its preexisting height. Any construction, repair, reconstruction, or replacement of an electric facility, the height of which will exceed the preexisting height of such electric facility, shall require a permit from the political subdivision adopting such regulations. The permit shall be granted only upon a showing that the excess height of the electric facility will not establish or create an airport hazard or become a greater hazard to air navigation than the electric facility that previously existed.
5.18.08 Marking of Non-Conforming Structures
Whenever the Zoning Administrator determines that a specific structure or object in the Airport Hazard Area exceeds the height restrictions and existed prior to the promulgation of these regulations, the owner(s) and/or the lessor(s) of the premises on which the structure or object is located shall be notified in writing by the Zoning Administrator. The owner(s) and lessor(s) shall, within a reasonable time, permit the marking and lighting of the structure or object. The Zoning
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
78 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Administrator shall specify the required marking and lighting, consistent with these regulations entitled “Marking and Lighting of Structures”. The cost of marking or lighting shall not be assessed against the owner or lessor of said premises.
5.18.09 Administrative Agency; Enforcement
The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce these regulations and shall be the administrative agency provided for in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 3-319, and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the administrative agency as provided in the Airport Zoning Act.
5.18.10 Variance from Regulations
1. Any person desiring to erect any structure, increase the height of any structure, permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use his or her property in a manner inconsistent with the airport zoning regulations adopted under this regulation may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from the zoning regulations in question. Such variances shall be allowed only if the board of adjustment makes the same findings for the granting of variances generally as set forth in subsection section 23-168.03, except that if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed structure or alteration of a structure does not require any modification or revision to any approach or approach procedure as approved or written by the Federal Aviation Administration on either an existing or proposed runway and the applicant provides signed documentation from the Federal Aviation Administration that the proposed structure or alteration of the structure will not require any modification or revision of any airport minimums, such documentation may constitute evidence of undue hardship and the board of adjustment may grant the requested variance without such findings. Any variance may be allowed subject to any reasonable conditions that the board of adjustment may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this regulation.
2. In granting any permit under or variance from any airport zoning regulation adopted under this regulation, the administrative agency or board of adjustment may, if it deems such action is advisable to effectuate the purposes of the regulation and reasonable in the circumstances, so condition such permit or variance as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the political subdivision, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard.
5.18.11 Zoning Board of Adjustment
The Cozad Board of Adjustment shall be the board of adjustment with respect to these regulations. Said board shall have and exercise the powers conferred by Neb. Rev. Stat. §3-320 et. seq. and such other powers and duties as are conferred and imposed by law.
5.18.12 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures:
Any use or structure that is permitted in the primary zoning district where this district is overlain, provided all buildings, structures and other obstacles comply with the height restrictions established in Section 5.17.03 above.
5.18.13 Conditional Uses:
Any conditional use that is permitted in the primary zoning district where this district is overlain where such conditional use has been duly authorized by the City Council in accordance with the requirements and procedures specified in this Resolution, provided all buildings, structures and other obstacles comply with the height restrictions set forth in Section 5.18.03 above.
5.18.14 Accessory Structures:
Any accessory use or structure that is permitted in the primary zoning district where this district is overlain, provided all buildings, structures and other obstacles comply with the height restrictions established in Section 5.18.03 above.
5.18.15 Conflicting Regulations:
In the event of any conflict between any airport zoning regulations adopted under this regulation and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 79
the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, and whether such other regulations were adopted by the political subdivision which adopted the airport zoning regulations or by some other political subdivision, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
80 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 5.19 PUD Planned Unit Development
5.19.01 Intent:
The Planned Unit Development District (PUD) is to encourage the creative design of new living and retail areas, as distinguished from subdivisions of standard lot sizes, in order to permit such creative design in buildings, open space, while promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of existing and future residents of surrounding neighborhoods.
When a PUD District is requested, it will require a change of zone with the PUD being attached to the primary district. Once the rezoning is approved, the allowed uses and standards herein shall modify the minimum requirements of the underlying district.
5.19.02 Permitted Uses:
The following uses are permitted in the Planned Unit Development District provided the requirements of this Article are met.
1. All uses allowed as permitted in the primary district
5.19.03 Conditional Uses
The following uses may be allowed through the approval of a Conditional Use Permit, as established by this Ordinance, provide all noted, as well as any special conditions required by the City Council are met.
1. All uses allowed as a conditional use in the primary district.
5.19.04 Temporary Uses:
The following temporary uses shall be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit
1. All uses allowed as a temporary use in the primary district
5.19.05 Accessory Uses and Structures:
1. All accessory uses allowed within the primary district.
5.19.06 Supplemental Requirements:
1. The Planning Commission, in its minutes, shall set forth its reasons for recommendation of approval or denial of the application for a PUD plan approval, along with specific evidence and facts showing that the proposal meets or does not meet the following conditions.
A. Said PUD shall be in general conformity with the provisions of the Cozad Comprehensive Plan.
B. Said PUD shall not have a substantially adverse effect on the development of the neighboring area.
C. The minimum size allowed for a PUD District by type of use shall be as follows:
Residential (only), three acres;
Residential - Commercial (combination), five acres.
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 81
D. Height, bulk, and yard requirements shall be reflected on the Development Plan and shall promote an efficient and creative use of land.
2. Use Limitations:
In a PUD no building, structure, land, or premises shall be used, and no building shall be erected, constructed, or altered, except for any use permitted in this District. All uses must be approved as shown on the Development Plan as specified in this division.
3. Standards and conditions for development:
A development proposed for land classified as the PUD district shall be consistent with the following general standards for use of land, and the use, type, bulk, and location of buildings, the density or intensity of use, open space, public facilities, and the Development Plan shall, where applicable, reflect compliance.
A. The applicant shall satisfy the Planning Commission and City Council that there is the ability to carry out the proposed plan, including financial assurances and the phasing of the project, and shall prepare and submit a schedule of construction, if necessary. The proposed construction shall begin within a period of 12 months following the approval of the final application by the City Council. A minimum of 50% of the total planned construction shown on the final plan shall be completed within a period of five years following such approval or the approval shall expire. If the approval expires under this section, the applicant shall show good cause to the Planning Commission to extend the plan approval.
B. The developer shall provide and record easements and covenants, shall make such other arrangements, and shall furnish such performance bonds, escrow deposit, or other financial guarantees for public improvements as may be determined by the City Council to be reasonably required to assure performance in accordance with the Development Plan and to protect the public interest in the event of abandonment of said plan before completion.
C. The site shall be accessible from public roads that are adequate to carry the traffic that will be imposed upon them by the proposed development. The streets and driveways on the site of the proposed development shall be adequate to serve the residents or occupants of the proposed development.
D. The development shall not impose an undue burden on public services and facilities, such as fire and police protection.
E. The entire tract or parcel of land to be occupied by the PUD development shall be held in single ownership or control, or if there are two or more owners, the application for such PUD development shall be filed jointly by all owners. This provision may be waived provided that the land contains existing improvements.
F. The location and arrangement of structures, parking areas, walks, lighting, and appurtenant facilities shall be compatible with the surrounding land uses, and any part of a PUD development not used for structures, parking and loading areas, or access ways shall be landscaped or otherwise improved as shown on the Development Plan.
G. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the parking and loading regulations of the City of Cozad.
H. When a commercial use within a PUD District abuts a residential district, the Development Plan shall reflect screening consisting of landscaping and/or fencing provided adjacent to any adjoining residential district; except in the event the adjacent residential use and the commercial use are separated by a street right-of-way.
I. All residential and commercial buildings shall set back not less than 25 feet from the perimeter of the land zoned PUD. Additional setback from a heavily traveled thoroughfare may be required, when found reasonable by the planning commission for protection of health, safety, and general welfare.
J. Building coverage area shall not exceed the following percentages of the net developable area of each individual parcel of the total development:
Residential: 60 percent maximum;
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
82 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Commercial: 50 percent maximum.
NOTE: Building coverage area, is the area covered by building(s) or structure(s) on each individual lot or parcel (not including such impervious improvements such as but not limited to walkways, driveways, patios etc.). The net developable area shall be the area of each parcel and the net of any required yard required under the Development Plan. The Development Plan shall reflect the calculations used to demonstrate compliance with this requirement.
K. A minimum of 20 percent of the net area of that part of a PUD development reserved for residential use shall be provided for Common Areas as defined by these regulations under subsection (p) below. The term “net area” shall be the gross area, measured in square feet, of the Development Plan devoted to residential use less the area dedicated for public streets. Common Areas shall be defined as playgrounds, street medians, landscaped green space, or other similar areas designed to be used by the residents of the development in common with each other. Common Areas for the leisure and recreation of development residents shall be owned and maintained in common by them, through a homeowner's association.
L. The PUD District shall include such provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the Common Areas as are reasonably necessary to insure its continuity, care, conservation, and maintenance, and to insure that remedial measures will be available to the City Council if the common open space is permitted to deteriorate, or is not maintained in a condition consistent with the best interests of the planned unit development or of the entire community. The applicant shall submit any protective covenants and organizational documents of the homeowner’s association with the Development Plan.
M. No residential use shall have direct access onto an arterial street unless approved by the City Council in the Development Plan.
N. Any commercial use must reflect its traffic flow on the Development Plan. All commercial areas must have indirect access via a collector or arterial street; however, no individual commercial use may have direct access onto collector or arterial streets.
O. Sidewalks shall be built to City specifications along all public and private streets; however, an alternative pedestrian and sidewalk plan may be developed which provides pedestrian access between each use in the PUD development.
P. Common Areas as defined under this zoning district shall mean land area of the site not covered by buildings, parking, structures, community buildings, or accessory structures, except recreational structures. Common Areas shall include open space that is accessible and available to all owners or residents in common pursuant to an Owner’s Association.
5.19.07 Application for approval of Planned Unit Development:
1. An application for a PUD shall be handled in the same manner prescribed for amending this Ordinance. The same requirements for notice, advertisement of public hearing, protests, and adoption shall be required as zoning changes.
2. The applicant shall prepare and submit 11 copies of the development plan (the “Development Plan”) of the proposed development in the PUD District for review and approval by the Planning Commission. The Development Plan shall include:
A. A site plan showing:
 Contours at intervals of two feet or spot elevations on a 100-foot grid shall be required on flat land;
 Location, size, height, and use of all proposed structures and proposed yards on each lot;
 All points of ingress and egress, driveways, circulation aisles, parking lots, parking spaces, and service areas;
 All streets adjoining subject property and the width of the existing right-of-way;
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 83
 Areas set aside for Common Areas with the type of use or recreational facilities planned for each;
 Designation of individual parcels if the proposed development is to be set up in separate construction phases;
 Designation of individual lots if such lots are proposed to be sold to individual owners;
 Location of required screening;
 Location of natural features such as ponds, tree clusters, and rock outcropping;
 Existing development on adjacent properties within 200 feet.
B. The above-described site plan shall also include a section designated as "general provisions," and said section shall include the following when, said items are applicable:
 Net area in square feet of the development. (Note: Net area shall be computed as the gross area less the land dedicated or necessary to be dedicated for public street right-of-way.
 Density of dwelling units per acre of the total dwelling units for the entire plan.
 Building coverage of the net area of the development by individual parcel or total development.
 The percentage of the Development Plan provided for common open space as defined by this regulation. (Note: 20 percent is the minimum).
 If more than one parcel is proposed, a statement relating to the sequence of development shall be included.
 Required number of parking spaces and location.
 Gross floor area proposed for commercial buildings.
 All proposed land uses shall be listed by parcel.
C. A statement or adequate drawings shall be included describing the manner for the disposition of sanitary waste and storm water.
D. The full legal description of the boundaries of the property or properties to be included in the PUD development.
E. A vicinity map showing the general arrangement of streets within an area of 1,000 feet from the boundaries of the proposed PUD development.
F. An elevation drawing of the general characteristics of the proposed buildings may be submitted if the applicant desires.
G. When a PUD development includes provisions for common space and/or recreational facilities, a statement describing how such open space and/or facility be owned and maintained when not under the ownership of a governmental entity. A homeowner association or other controlling entity shall provide the City of Cozad with copies of the proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws of such entity.
3. The Planning Commission shall meet within 45 days of an application being filed. Plans shall be filed with the City at least four weeks prior to a scheduled Planning Commission meeting. After the application for a PUD development is filed, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on said development after giving required notice for hearings in amendments. Said public hearing may be adjourned from time to time and, within a reasonable period of time after the conclusion of said public hearing, the planning commission shall prepare and transmit to the City Council and the applicant specific findings of fact with respect to the extent which the Development Plan complies with those regulations, together with its recommendations in respect to the action to be taken on the Development Plan and PUD requirements. The planning commission may recommend disapproval, approval, or approval with amendments, conditions or restrictions.
4. The City Council shall or shall not approve the Development Plan and authorize the submitting of the final Development Plan.
5. Substantial or significant changes in the preliminary plat and PUD design shall only be made after rehearing and approval unless the changes were otherwise required by the Planning Commission or the City Council.
5.19.08 Final approval:
1. After approval of a Development Plan and prior to the issuance of any building permit or zoning permit, the applicant shall submit an application for final approval with the PUD development compliance review committee. The PUD development compliance committee shall consist of members of the Cozad Planning Commission, Cozad City Council, the Zoning
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
84 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Administrator, the Cozad City Attorney, and/ or the Cozad City Engineer; this committee will be assembled only on an as needed basis. Said final application may include the entire PUD District or may be for a unit or section thereof as set forth in the approval of the preliminary plan. The application shall include 11 copies of such drawings, specifications, covenants, easements, conditions, and any other conditions including but not limited to performance bonds. As set forth in the approval of the Development Plan preliminary plan and in accordance with the conditions established in this chapter for a PUD District. The final plan shall include the same information, as the preliminary plan except the following shall also be provided:
A. A surveyor's certificate certifying to the accuracy of the boundary surveys shown.
B. Location, names, tangent lengths, centerline radius of each curve and its interior width and angle of all proposed public right-of-way;
C. All easements and appropriate building setback lines;
D. All lot lines, and lot dimensions including chord distances for curvilinear lot lines;
E. Lot and/or parcel numbers;
F. Location, size, height, and use of all proposed or present buildings;
G. Dedication of all streets, public highways, or other land intended for public use, signed by the owner and by all other parties who have a mortgage or lien interest in the property, together with any restrictions or covenants which apply to the property.
H. A waiver of claim by the applicant for damages occasioned by the establishment of grades or the alteration of the surface of any portion of streets and alleys to conform to grades established.
2. A plan submitted for final approval shall be deemed to be in substantial compliance with the plan previously given tentative approval, provided any modification of the Development Plan does not:
A. Vary the proposed gross residential density or intensity of use by more than five percent or involve a reduction in the area set aside for common open space, nor the substantial relocation of such area; nor
B. Increase by more than 10 percent the floor area proposed for non-residential use; nor
C. Increase by more than five percent the total ground area covered by buildings nor involve a substantial change in the height of buildings.
D. Substantially change the design of the plan so as to significantly alter:
 Pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow.
 The juxtaposition of different land uses.
 The relation of open space to residential development.
 The proposed phasing of construction.
 Proposed use of one or more buildings to a more intensive use category as delineated in this chapter.
3. A public hearing need not be held for the approval of a final plan if it is in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plan. The planning commission shall, within thirty 30 business days of the time of filing, review the final plan for compliance with the approved preliminary plan. Upon review approval, said final plan shall be filed with the City Council for final approval and acceptance.
4. In the event that the final plan submitted contains changes in excess of those permitted under Subparagraph (2) above, applicant shall resubmit the original plan. The Development Plan shall be modified in the same manner prescribed in this division as for original approval.
5.19.09 Enforcement and modification of plan:
1. To further the mutual interest of the residents and owners of the PUD development and of the public in the preservation of the integrity of the PUD plan, as finally approved, and to insure that modifications, if any, in the plan shall not impair the reasonable reliance of the said residents and owners upon the provisions of the plan, nor result in changes that would adversely affect the public interest, the enforcement and modification of the provisions of the plan as finally approved, whether recorded by plan, covenant, easement or otherwise, shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. The use of land and the use, bulk, and location of buildings and structures; and
B. The quality and location of common space; and
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 85
C. The intensity of use or the density of residential units shall run in favor of the City and
D. Shall be enforceable in law or in equity, by the City, without limitation on any powers or regulation otherwise granted by law. The development of any land pursuant to an approved Development Plan shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of Section 5.19 and the approved Development Plan.
5.19.10 Amendments:
The PUD District agreement or an approved Development Plan may be amended in the same manner prescribed in this division for approval of a preliminary or final plan. Application for amendment maybe made by the homeowner's association or 51 percent of the owners of the property within the PUD District.
5.19.11 Platting:
For unplatted tracts or tracts being re-platted, the approval of the Development Plan shall be considered as the approval of a preliminary plan. To complete the platting process, the applicant need only submit a final plat. Said final plat shall be in accordance with the subdivision regulations, except the scale shall be 100 feet, 50 feet, or 20 feet to the inch.
5.19.12 Fees:
For the following applications, fees shall be paid to the City:
A. Development Plan, filing fee shall be set by the City Council by separate ordinance;
B. Final plan, filing fee shall be set by the City Council by separate ordinance.
These fees are separate and do not include any Preliminary and Final Plat Fees and/or any Change of Zone Fees required by the City of Cozad.
ARTICLE 6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
86 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Article 6: Conditional Use Permits
Section 6.01 General Provisions
The City Council may authorize and permit a conditional use as designated in the use regulations of each district, after the following:
1. Planning Commission Public Hearing,
2. Referral by the Planning Commission; and
3. City Council Public Hearing
Approval or denial shall be based on findings that the location and characteristics of the use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the area.
Allowable uses may be permitted, enlarged, or altered upon application for a conditional use permit in accordance with the rules and procedures of this ordinance. The City Council may grant or deny a conditional use permit in accordance with the intent and purpose of this ordinance.
In granting a conditional use permit, the City Council may:
1. Authorize the use and
2. Shall prescribe and impose appropriate conditions, safeguards, and a specified time limit for the implementation of the identified conditional use permit.
Section 6.02 Application for Conditional Use Permit
A request for a conditional use permit or modification of a conditional use permit may be initiated by a property owner or his or her authorized agent by filing an application with the City upon forms prescribed for the purpose.
The application shall be accompanied by a drawing or site plan and other such plans and data showing the dimensions, arrangements, descriptions data, and other materials constituting a record essential to an understanding of the proposed use and proposed modifications in relation to the provisions set forth herein. A plan as to the operation and maintenance of the proposed use shall also be submitted.
The application shall be accompanied with a non-refundable fee as established by the City Council.
Section 6.03 Public Hearing
Before issuance of any conditional use permit, both the Planning Commission and City Council shall hold a Public Hearing after proper and legal notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing has been given by publication in a legal paper of general circulation in the City of Cozad, one time at least 10 days prior to such hearing.
The City Council will consider the application for the Conditional Use Permit together with the recommendations of the Planning Commission.
Section 6.04 Decisions
A majority vote of the City Council shall be necessary to grant a Conditional Use Permit.
The applicant shall have 12 months from the approval of the Conditional Use Permit to commence the use, unless the City Council specifically grants a longer period of time upon the recommendation of the City Planning Commission. If the use stated within the Conditional Use Permit has not been commenced within 12 months, or approved time period, said Permit shall become invalid and any activity shall be required to apply for a new Conditional Use Permit.
All decisions by the City Council and the recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be required to provide findings of fact for their decision for either approval or denial.
Section 6.05 Transferability
Any approved Conditional Use Permit is automatically transferable upon sale of the property from the original applicant to another party. However, the new owner shall assume the responsibility for complying with:
ARTICLE 6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 87
1. the conditions of the granted permit,
2. The use shall not change or be expanded unless a new Conditional Use Permit is approved,
3. Failure to comply with the conditions of the permit shall subject the new owner to the revocation process of this Article.
Section 6.06 Revocation
Any approved Conditional Use Permit may be revoked for failure to comply with the conditions approved by the City Council. Revocation shall require that the City notify the applicant of any noncompliance, in writing, and provide the applicant 30 days to correct the issue(s).
Failure to comply with the notice shall cause a Public Hearing to be scheduled by the City Council, to review the permit and the approved conditions and the failure to act by the applicant. If the applicant is found to be noncompliant with the issued permit and conditions, the City Council shall revoke the permit and order the use to cease and desist.
Failure to follow a Cease and Desist order shall cause action to be filed by the City Attorney in District Court.
Revocation may also occur, if the City documents that the use has ceased operations for 12 consecutive months. The City shall notify the applicant of the revocation in writing. The permit shall become invalid within 30 days.
Section 6.07 Standards
No conditional use permit shall be granted unless the Planning Commission or City Council has found:
1. The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, moral, comfort, or general welfare of the community.
2. The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
3. The establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
4. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and/or necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
5. Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
6. The use shall not include noise, which is objectionable due to volume, frequency, or beat unless muffled or otherwise controlled.
7. The use shall not involve any pollution of the air by fly-ash, dust, vapors or other substance which is harmful to health, animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling, discomfort, or irritation.
8. The use shall not involve any malodorous gas or matter, which is discernible on any adjoining lot or property.
9. The use shall not involve any direct or reflected glare, which is visible from any adjoining property or from any Public Street, road, or highway.
10. The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the movement of traffic on public streets unless procedures are instituted to limit traffic hazards and congestion.
11. The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the burden on any public utilities or facilities unless provisions are made for any necessary adjustments.
ARTICLE 7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS
88 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Article 7: Parking Requirements
Section 7.01 Purpose
The Off-Street Parking Regulations require developments provide parking in proportion to the need created by each use. The regulations further establish standards for the functional design of parking facilities. These regulations are intended to accommodate vehicles in a functionally satisfactory manner and to minimize external effects on neighboring properties.
Section 7.02 Off-Street Automobile Storage
7.02.01 Off-street automobile storage or standing space shall be provided on any lot on which any of the uses or similar uses found in Section 7.03.
7.02.02 Off-street automobile storage or standing space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or an alley.
7.02.03 For purposes of computing the number of parking spaces available in a given area, the ratio of 250 square feet per parking space shall be used. Where calculations in accordance with the foregoing list results in requiring a fractional space, any fraction less than one-half shall be disregarded and any fraction of one-half or more shall require one space.
7.02.04 All parking spaces for single-family, two-family, and multi-family dwellings, rooming and boarding houses, convalescent homes, and mobile homes shall be either gravel or paved with asphalt or concrete.
7.02.05 In Districts R-1 and R-2 required off-street parking for residential uses shall be provided on the lot on which the use is located. In all other Districts, if the vehicle storage space or standing space required in section 7.03 cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted in the opinion of the Planning Commission and City Council, the City Council may permit such space to be provided on another off-street property, provided such space lies within 400 feet of an entrance to such principal use. Such vehicle standing space shall be deemed to be required open space associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner.
7.02.06 Where off-street parking is located on a lot other than the lot occupied by the use, which requires it, site plan approval for both lots is required.
7.02.07 Some uses may require two different use types to be calculated together in order to determine the total parking requirement, i.e. primary schools may require one a calculation for classrooms and another for assembly areas.
7.02.08 The parking requirements herein do not apply to the C-1 Downtown Commercial District.
7.02.09 All off-street parking conditions shall meet the ADA requirements in Section 7.05 of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 89
Section 7.03 Schedule of Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
Uses Parking Requirements Loading Requirements Commercial and Office including but not limited to:
Adult entertainment establishments
1 space/2 persons of licensed capacity
None required
Agricultural Sales/Service
1 space/500 s.f. of gross floor area
1 space/establishment
Auditoriums/Stadiums/Arenas
1 space/4 seats in main assembly area
None required
Automotive Car Wash
5 spaces/car wash bay
1 space/establishment
Automotive Rental/Sales
1 space/500 s.f. of gross floor area
1 space/establishment
Automotive Servicing
4 spaces/repair stall
None required
Banks and Business offices
1 space/200 sf of gross floor area up to 1000 sf; then 1 /400 sf of add. Gross floor space
1 space/establishment
Boarding Houses/Bed and Breakfasts
1 space/rental unit
None required
Body Repair
5 spaces/repair stall
None required
Bowling Alleys
4 spaces/alley plus 1 space per 2 employees
1 space/establishment
Campground
1 space/camping unit
None required
Child Care Centers
1 space/employee + 1 space or loading stall/5 persons of licensed capacity
None required
Churches, Synagogues, and Temples
1 space/3 seats in main worship area
None required
Clubs, including fraternal organizations
1 space/500 s.f. of gross floor area
None required
Commercial Recreation
1 space/2 persons of licensed capacity
1 space/establishment
Communication Services
1 space/500 s.f. of gross floor area
1 space/establishment
Construction Sales/Service
1 space/500 s.f. of gross floor area
1 space/establishment
Dance Hall, skating rink
1 space/100 square feet of floor area + 1 space/2 employees
None required
Educational Uses, Primary facilities
2 spaces/classroom
2 spaces/structure
Educational Uses, Secondary facilities
8 spaces/classroom + 1 space/employee on largest shift
2 spaces/structure
Equipment Rental/Sales
1 space/500 s.f. of gross floor area
1 Space/establishment
Food sales
1 space/200 s.f. of gross floor area
2 spaces/establishment
Funeral homes, Mortuaries and Chapels
8 spaces/reposing room
2 spaces/establishment
Furniture and Appliance Stores
1 space/800 sf of floor area
1 space/establishment
General retail sales establishments
1 space/200 s.f. of gross floor area
1 space/establishment
Guidance Services
1 space/300 s.f. of gross floor area
None required
Hospitals
1 space/2 licensed beds
3 spaces/structure
Hotels and Motels
1 space/rental unit + 1 space/each 200 s.f. of public meeting area
1 space/establishment
Libraries
1 space/400 s.f. of gross floor area + 1 space/ 2 employees
1 space/structure
Medical Clinics
5 spaces/staff doctor, dentist, chiropractor
None required
Offices not providing customer services or sales on the premises
1 space/400 s.f. of gross floor area
None required
Personal Service Establishments in Commercial Districts, including:
(a) Barber and Beauty Shops.
(b) Tailor and Shoe Shops.
(c) Apparel and Accessory Shops.
1 space/200 sf of gross floor area.
1 space/structure
Professional Offices of Attorneys C.P.A.'s, Architects, Engineers, etc.
3 spaces/1000 sf of gross floor area.
For offices less than 1000 gross s.f., the minimum requirement shall be 4 spaces.
None required
Public buildings
1 space/ 3 employee, + 1 space/100 sf used for public assembly.
1 space/establishment
Restaurants w/ drive-thru
Greater of the two:
1 space/40 s.f. of dining area, or
1 space/150 s.f. of gross floor area
1 space/establishment
Restaurants (General)
Parking equal to 30% of licensed capacity
2 spaces/establishment
Roadside stands
4 spaces/establishment
None required
Service Oriented Establishments
1 space/200 s.f. of gross floor area
1 space/establishment
Taverns, Poll and Billiard Halls
1 space/3 seats, or 3 spaces/50 s.f. of gross floor area used for assembly, whichever is greater.
None required
Veterinary Establishments
1 spaces/500 square feet/staff doctor
None required Residential/Housing including but not limited to:
Assisted-living facilities
.5 space/dwelling unit
1 space/structure
Convalescent & Nursing Home Services
1 space/4 beds + 1/employee on the largest shift
2 space/structure
Duplex
2 spaces per dwelling unit
None required
Group Care Facility
1 space/4 persons of licensed capacity
2 space/structure
Group Home
1 space/4 persons of licensed capacity
2 space/structure
Multi-family / Apartments
1.25 space/sleeping unit – spaces to be sited in the general proximity of where the sleeping units are located
None required
Mobile Home Park
2/dwelling unit
None required
Residential (Single-family, attached and detached)
2 spaces/dwelling unit (1 may be enclosed or semi-enclosed)
None required Industrial Uses including but not limited to:
General Manufacturing
.75 times the maximum number of employees during the largest shift
2 spaces/establishment
Manufacturing Uses, Research and Testing Laboratories, Creameries, Bottling Establishments, Bakeries, Canneries, Printing and Engraving Shops, Etc.
1 space/2 employee on maximum shift + 1 space/company vehicle.
2 spaces/establishment
Wholesaling / Distribution Operations
1 space/2 employee on the largest shift
2 spaces/establishment
ARTICLE 7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS
90 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 7.04 Off-Street Parking: Shared Parking Requirements
7.04.01 Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 7.03, in cases where parking and building patterns are such that overlapping uses of a majority of the total number of parking spaces in a common parking lot is likely to occur, compliance with the standard parking ratios may be decreased by the Planning Commission and City Council.
Section 7.05 Off-Street Parking: Parking for Individuals with Disabilities
7.05.01 In conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the Nebraska Accessibility Guidelines, if parking spaces are provided for self-parking by employees or visitors, or both, then accessible spaces shall be provided in each parking area in conformance with the table in this section. Spaces required by the table need not be provided in the particular lot. They may be provided in a different, if equivalent or greater accessibility, in terms of distance from an accessible entrance, cost and convenience, is ensured.
Total Parking Spaces
Required Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces
1 to 25
1
26 to 50
2
51 to 75
3
76 to 100
4
101 to 150
5
151 to 200
6
201 to 300
7
301 to 400
8
401 to 500
9
501 to 1,000
2 percent of the total
1,001 and over
20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
7.05.02 Access aisles adjacent to accessible spaces shall be 60 inches wide at a minimum.
1. One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one,
shall be served by an access aisle 96 inches wide minimum and shall be designated “van accessible” as required by Section 7.05.04 of this Ordinance. The vertical clearance at such spaces shall comply with 7.05.05 of this Ordinance. All such spaces may be grouped on one level of a parking structure.
2. Parking access aisles shall be part of an accessible route to the building or facility entrance. Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle.
3. Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width of an accessible route.
4. Parking spaces and access aisles shall be level with slopes not exceeding two percent in all directions.
5. If passenger-loading zones are provided, then at least one passenger loading zone shall comply with 7.05.06 of this Ordinance.
6. At facilities providing medical care and other services for persons with mobility impairments, parking spaces complying with 7.05 of this Ordinance shall be provided in accordance with 7.05.01 of this Ordinance; except as follows:
a Outpatient units and facilities: 10 percent of the total number of parking spaces provided serving each such outpatient unit or facility;
b Units and facilities that specialize in treatment or services for persons with mobility impairments: 20 percent of the total number of parking spaces provided serving each such unit or facility.
7. Valet parking: valet parking facilities shall provide a passenger loading zone complying with 7.05.06 of this Ordinance located on an accessible route to the entrance of the facility. Sections 7.05.01, 7.05.02 (1), and 7.05.02 (3) of this Ordinance do not apply to valet parking.
Source: http://www.ada.gov/adastd94.pdf
ARTICLE 7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 91
7.05.03 Location of accessible parking spaces serving a particular building shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible entrance.
1. In parking facilities that do not serve a particular building, accessible parking shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel to an accessible pedestrian entrance of the parking facility.
2. In buildings with multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking, accessible parking spaces shall be dispersed and located closest to the accessible entrances.
7.05.04 Signage of accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved by a sign showing the symbol of accessibility. Spaces complying with Section 7.05.02 (1) shall have an additional sign stating the stall is “Van Accessible” mounted below the symbol of accessibility. Such signs shall be located so they cannot be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space.
7.05.05 Minimum vertical clearance of 114 inches at accessible passenger loading zones and along at least one vehicle access route to such areas from site entrance(s) and exit(s). At parking spaces complying with 7.05.02 (1), provide minimum vertical clearance of 98 inches at the parking space and along at least one vehicle access route to such spaces from site entrance(s) and exit(s).
7.05.06 Passenger Loading Zones shall provide an access aisle at least 60 inches wide and 240 inches long adjacent and parallel to the vehicle pull-up space. If there are curbs between the access aisle and the vehicle pull-up space, then a curb ramp complying with accessibility standards shall be provided. Vehicle standing spaces and access aisles shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding two percent in all directions.
Section 7.06 Off-Street Parking Design Criteria
7.06.01 Standard parking stall dimensions shall not be less than 10 feet by 18 feet, plus the necessary space for maneuvering into and out of the space. Where the end of the parking space abuts a curbed area at least five feet in width (with landscaping or sidewalk), an overhang may be permitted which would reduce the length of the parking space by two feet. Such overhang shall be measured from the face of the curb. For standard parking lots, minimum dimensions shall be as follows:
Parking Configuration
90-degree
60-degree
45-degree
Aisle Width (A)
One-way traffic
-----
18 feet
14 feet
Two-way traffic
24 feet
20 feet
20 feet
End Parking Bay Width (B)
Without overhang
18 feet
20 feet
19 feet
With overhang
16 feet
18 feet
17 feet
Center Parking Bay Width (C)
18 feet
18 feet
16 feet
7.06.02 Minimum dimensions for a parallel parking space shall be nine feet by 23 feet.
7.06.03 Minimum parking dimensions for other configurations or for parking lots with compact car spaces shall be determined by the Planning Commission and City Council upon recommendation of the City Engineer.
7.06.04 Parking facilities shall be designed to provide visibility of and between pedestrians and vehicles when circulating within or entering or leaving the facility; and shall not create blind, hidden, or hazardous areas.
ARTICLE 7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS
92 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
7.06.05 Circulation patterns shall be designed in accord with accepted standards of traffic engineering and safety.
7.06.06 All parking facilities shall be maintained to assure the continued usefulness and compatibility of the facility. Acceptable maintenance includes keeping the facility free of refuse, debris, and litter; maintaining parking surfaces in sound condition; and providing proper care of landscaped areas.
7.06.07 Lighting:
1. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be arranged to direct light away from adjoining properties in any residential district.
2. Lighting standards or shall not exceed 22 feet in height and shall be equipped with top and side shields when necessary to prevent glare onto adjacent properties.
3. The average maintained lighting levels for multi-family units shall not exceed 10 foot-candles at buildings/parking lots/other areas within a residential district. The maximum to average ratio shall not exceed 2.5 to 1.
ARTICLE 8: SIGN REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 93
Article 8: Sign Regulations
Section 8.01 Compliance with Sign Regulations
All signs constructed, erected, modified or moved after the effective date of this Ordinance shall comply with the regulations herein, unless expressly exempted.
Section 8.02 Sign Definitions
The following are the definitions relating to signs within the Cozad zoning jurisdiction.
ADVERTISING SIGN shall mean a sign which directs attention to any product, activity, or service; provided, however, that such sign shall not be related or make reference to the primary use, business activity, or service conducted on the premises.
ANIMATED SIGN shall mean any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
ARCHITECTURAL CANOPY SIGN shall mean an enclosed, illuminated or non-illuminated structure that is attached to the wall of a building with the face of the sign approximately parallel to the wall and with the sign's area integrated into its surface.
AWNING OR CANOPY SIGN shall mean any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
BANNER SIGN shall mean any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or building by a permanent frame at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
BILLBOARD SIGN shall mean a sign that identifies or communicates a commercial or noncommercial message related to an activity conducted, a service rendered, or a commodity sold at a location other than where the sign is located.
BUILDING SIGN shall mean any sign supported by, painted on or otherwise attached to any building or structure.
BUILDING MARKER SIGN shall mean any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN shall mean a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without, altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance. A sign on which the only copy changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a “time and temperature” portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance.
CLOSED SIGN shall mean a sign in which more than 50 percent of the entire area is solid or tightly closed or covered.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE SIGN shall mean any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
DESTINATION SIGN shall mean a sign used to inform and direct the public to important public places and buildings, landmarks, and historical sites in the simplest, direct, and concise manner possible.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD SIGN shall mean a sign that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes.
ARTICLE 8: SIGN REGULATIONS
94 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
FLASHING SIGN shall mean a sign, which, by method or manner of illumination, flashes on or off, winks, or blinks with varying light intensity, shows motion, or creates the illusion of being on or off.
FREESTANDING SIGN shall mean any sign supported by uprights or braces placed on or in the ground, which is used principally for advertising or identification purposes and is not supported by any building.
GROUND SIGN shall mean a sign mounted directly to the ground with a maximum height not to exceed six feet.
ILLUMINATED SIGN shall mean a sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source.
INCIDENTAL SIGN shall mean a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as “no parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” “telephone,” and other similar directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the zone lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
MARQUEE SIGN shall mean any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
NAMEPLATE SIGN shall mean a sign not exceeding 2 square feet for each dwelling.
NON-CONFORMING SIGN shall mean any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance.
OBSOLETE SIGN shall mean a sign that advertises a business no longer in existence or a product no longer offered for sale and has advertised such business or product for a period of six months after the termination of the existence of such business or the termination of sale of the product advertised.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN shall mean a sign including the supporting sign structure which directs the attention of the general public to a business, service, or activity not usually conducted, or a product not offered or sold, upon the premises where such sign is located.
ON-PREMISE SIGN shall mean a sign, display, or device-advertising activities conducted on the property on which such sign is located.
OPEN SIGN shall mean a sign attached to or hung from a marquee, canopy, or other covered structure, projecting from and supported by the building and extending beyond the building wall, building line, or street lot line.
PENNANT SIGN shall mean any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
POLE SIGN shall mean a sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above grade.
PORTABLE SIGN shall mean a sign, usually of a temporary nature, not securely anchored to the ground or to a building or structure and which obtains some or all of its structural stability with respect to wind or other normally applied forces by means of its geometry or character. Examples are: menu and sandwich board signs, balloons used as signs, umbrellas used for advertising, and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
PROJECTING SIGN shall mean a projecting sign attached to a building in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than eight inches beyond the surface of such building or wall.
ARTICLE 8: SIGN REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 95
ROOF SIGN shall mean a sign identifying the name of a business, enterprise, or the product sold on the premises and erected on and over the roof of a building and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
ROOF (INTEGRAL) SIGN shall mean any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches.
SIGN AREA shall mean the entire area including the background of a sign on which copy can be placed but not including the minimal supporting framework or bracing. The area of individually painted letter signs, individual letter signs or directly or indirectly illuminated individual letter signs, shall be calculated on the basis of the smallest geometric figure that will enclose the entire copy area of the sign. Any such calculation shall include the areas between the letters and lines, as well as the areas of any devices, illuminated or non-illuminated.
SIGN SETBACK shall mean the horizontal distance from the property line to the nearest projection of the existing or proposed sign.
SIGN SURFACE shall mean the entire area of a sign.
SUBDIVISION SIGN identification shall mean a sign erected on a subdivision identification lot that identifies the platted subdivision where the sign is located.
SUSPENDED SIGN shall mean a sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
TEMPORARY SIGN shall mean a sign constructed of cloth, fabric, or other material with or without a structural frame intended for a limited period of display, including displays for holidays or public demonstrations. Temporary signs shall include portable signs as defined in this section.
WALL SIGN shall mean any sign attached parallel to, but within eight inches of, a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
WINDOW SIGN shall mean any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
Animated Sign
Awning Sign
Banner/Flag Sign
Banner Sign
Blade Sign
Building Marker Sign
Canopy Sign
Changeable Copy Sign
Commemorative Sign
Double-faced Sign
ARTICLE 8: SIGN REGULATIONS
96 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Electronic Message Sign
Ground Monument Sign
Off-Premises Sign
Painted Wall Sign
Parapet Sign
Pole Sign
Projecting Sign
Traffic Information Sign
Roof Sign
Roof (integrated) Sign
Sign Stacking
Subdivision Identification
Suspended Sign
Wall Sign
Window Sign
Section 8.03 Sign Area Computation
8.03.01 Computation of Area of Individual Signs
The area of a sign face shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning regulations and is clearly identical to the display itself.
8.03.02 Computation of Height
The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the lot, parcel, or tract of land, whichever is lower. When a sign is placed on a berm, the height of the sign shall include the height of the berm above grade level at the base of the berm.
ARTICLE 8: SIGN REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 97
Section 8.04 Sign Schedules
8.04.01 Signs shall be permitted in the various districts according to the following schedule: TA-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 F-1 I-1 I-2 Animated - - - - - + + + + + +
Architectural Canopy
+
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
+ Changeable Copy + - - - - + + + + + +
Electronic Message Board
+
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
+ Flashing - - - - - - - - - - -
Freestanding
T
-
-
-
T
T
T
T
T
T
T Ground - - - - - + + + + + +
Illuminated
+
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
+ Incidental - - - - + + + + + + +
Marquee
-
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
+ Nameplate + + + + + + + + + + +
Off-Premises (Billboard)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- On-Premises (Billboard) + - - - - + + + + + +
Pennant
+
-
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+ Pole - - - - - - + + + + +
Projecting
+
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
+ Portable T T T T T T T T T T T
Roof
+
-
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+ Roof-Integrated + - - - - - + + + + +
Subdivision
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ Suspended + - - - - + + + + + +
Temporary
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T Wall + - - - - + + + + + +
Window
+
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+: permitted -: not permitted T: Temporary
8.04.02 Signs shall be permitted in the various districts at the listed square footage and heights according to the following schedule: TA-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 F-1 I-1 I-2 Animated Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 200 45 1 200 45 1 200 45 1 200 45 1 200 45 1
Architectural Canopy
Max. Square Ft.
Max. Height Ft.
Max. Number
250
45
17
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
250
45
17
250
45
17
250
45
17
250
45
17
250
45
17 Banner Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 32 NA NA - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 32 NA NA 32 NA NA 32 NA NA 32 NA NA 32 NA NA
Changeable Copy
Max. Square Ft.
Max. Height Ft.
Max. Number
32
NA
NA
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
32
NA
NA
32
NA
NA
32
NA
NA
32
NA
NA
32
NA
NA Electronic Message Board Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 100 20 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 100 20 1 100 20 1 100 20 1 100 20 1 100 20 1 Flashing Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Freestanding Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 Ground Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 50 10 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 322 10 1 322 10 1 322 10 1 503 10 1 503 10 1 Illuminated Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
ARTICLE 8: SIGN REGULATIONS
98 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
TA-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 RM C-1 C-2 C-3 F-1 I-1 I-2 Incidental Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 25 each 45 1/40* - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 25 each 45 1/406 25 each 45 1/406 25 each 45 1/406 25 each 45 1/406 25 each 45 1/406 Marquee Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 250 45 1 250 45 1 250 45 1 250 45 1 250 45 1 Nameplate Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 2 - 1 2 - 1 2 - 1 2 - 1 2 - 1 2 - 1 2 - 1 2 - 1 2 - 1 2 - 1 2 - 1 Off-Premises Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - On-Premises Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 640 30 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 320 30 1 320 30 1 320 30 1 320 30 1 320 30 1 Pennant Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 32 NA NA - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 32 NA NA 32 NA NA 32 NA NA 32 NA NA 32 NA NA Pole Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1004 40 1 1004 40 1 1004 40 1 2004 40 1 2004 40 1 Projecting Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 16 45 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 16 45 1 16 45 1 16 45 1 16 45 1 16 45 1 Portable Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 32 4 1 Roof Max. Square Ft.45 Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 250 45 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 250 45 1 250 45 1 250 45 1 250 45 1 250 45 1 Roof-Integrated Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 250 45 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 250 45 1 250 45 1 250 45 1 250 45 1 250 45 1 Subdivision Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number Max. Lot area s.f. 500 35 1 5,000 500 35 1 5,000 500 35 1 5,000 500 35 1 5,000 500 35 1 5,000 500 35 1 5000 500 35 1 5,000 500 35 1 5,000 500 35 1 5,000 500 35 1 5,000 500 35 1 5,000 Suspended Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 20 10 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 20 10 1 20 10 1 20 10 1 20 10 1 20 10 1 Temporary Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 32 6 2 8 4 1 8 4 1 8 4 1 8 4 1 32 6 2 32 6 2 32 6 2 32 6 2 32 6 2 32 6 2 Wall Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 2001 15 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2001 45 1 2001 45 1 2001 45 1 2001 45 1 2001 45 1 Window Max. Square Ft. Max. Height Ft. Max. Number 2001 15 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2001 15 1 2001 15 1 2001 15 1 2001 15 1 2001 15 1
1 Wall/Window signs shall not exceed 10 percent of the total wall area or the number indicated whichever is greater.
2 Ground signs may be increased from 32 square feet in area to 50 square feet in area when all uses/storefronts within a development are included on one sign as opposed to each having an individual ground sign for every use/storefront.
3 Ground signs may be increased from 50 square feet in area to 75 square feet in area when all uses/storefronts within a development are included on one sign as opposed to each having an individual ground sign for every use/storefront.
4 Pole signs may be increased from 100 square feet in area to 150 square feet in area when all uses/storefronts within a development are included on one sign as opposed to each having an individual pole sign for every use/storefront.
5 Pole signs may be increased from 200 square feet in area to 300 square feet in area when all uses/storefronts within a development are included on one sign as opposed to each having an individual pole sign for every use/storefront.
6 One Incidental sign per 40 lineal feet of storefront
7 One Canopy per window – canopy shall meet all minimum height requirements for accessibility.
NA = Not Applicable – Refer to specific structural sign types
ARTICLE 8: SIGN REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 99
8.04.03 A building or use having frontage on a second street may install a sign on the second street side no greater in size than 20 percent of the total allowed on one facade.
Section 8.05 Signs, Special Conditions
8.05.01 Billboard Signs. Billboards, signboards, and other similar advertising signs shall be subject to the same height and location requirements as other structures in the district and shall also be subject to the following conditions and restrictions.
1. No billboard, signboard, or similar advertising signs shall be located at intersections so as to obstruct vision, hearing, or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular safety.
2. No billboard, signboard, or similar advertising signs shall be located within 50 feet of any lot in a residential district.
3. No billboard, signboard, or similar advertising signs shall be so constructed or located where it will unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjoining property.
8.05.02 Stand-alone ATM’s may have the following:
1. One wall sign on each exterior wall provided each wall sign does not exceed 10 percent of the applicable exterior wall and the total shall not exceed 40 square feet in size.
2. Where a canopy is integrated into the ATM, a canopy sign may be placed on each face of the ATM, provided the overall height of the canopy and sign do not exceed 24 inches. In addition, the overall size of all canopy signs shall not exceed 40 square feet.
3. Directional signage shall be contained on the ATM, painted within a drive lane or in any curbing defining a drive lane.
4. All signs are subject to the required permitting process of these Regulations.
5. Said signage may be incorporated with lighting plan and backlit in order to provide for greater security on the premises.
8.05.04 Coffee Kiosks and other Kiosks may have the following:
1. One wall sign on each exterior wall not used for drive-up service, provided each wall sign does not exceed 10 percent of the applicable exterior wall and the total shall not exceed 40 square feet in size.
2. Where a canopy is integrated into the Coffee Kiosks/Kiosks, a canopy sign may be placed on each face of the Coffee Kiosk/Kiosks, provided the overall height of the canopy and sign do not exceed 24 inches. In addition, the overall size of all canopy signs shall not exceed 40 square feet.
3. Directional signage shall be contained on the Coffee Kiosk/Kiosk, painted within a drive lane or in any curbing defining a drive lane
4. Window signs limited to menu boards and daily specials shall not require a sign permit.
5. All signs are subject to the required permitting process of these Regulations, unless otherwise noted.
8.05.05 Signs hung from canopies and awnings shall maintain 80 inches of clear space, as measured from the bottom edge of the sign to the grade below.
8.05.06 Temporary Signs
Temporary signs for which a permit has been issued shall be issued only for signs meeting the following criteria:
1. Temporary signs may be for a continual period. Said temporary signs shall not be in place for more than four days prior to the event and shall be removed within 36 hours of the conclusion of said event.
2. Temporary signs may be allowed in a manner where they are put in place during certain periods of time (set up in the morning and taken down in the evening) without a specific end date to the permit and these signs may advertise an off-premises business and/or organization.
8.05.07 Emergency Signs (Permitted)
Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the public right-of-way.
ARTICLE 8: SIGN REGULATIONS
100 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
8.05.08 Other Signs Forfeited
Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformance with the requirements of this section, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition, to other remedies hereunder, the City shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign.
8.05.09 Signs Exempt from Regulation Under this Ordinance
The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this ordinance, except no sign in this provision shall create an obstruction to vision, as per Section 4.08 of this Ordinance and/or a collision hazard to the public:
 Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation or ordinance;
 Any religious symbol;
 Construction signs when equal to six square feet or less;
 Any sign identifying a public facility or public/civic event;
 Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is not legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the zone lot or parcel on which such sign is located
 Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message;
 Traffic control signs on private property, such as Stop, Yield, and similar signs, the face of which meets the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices standards and which contain no commercial message of any sort; and
8.05.10 Signs Prohibited Under These Regulations
All signs not expressly permitted in these regulations or exempt from regulation hereunder in accordance with the previous section are prohibited in the City. Such signs include, but are not limited to:
1. Beacons; and
2. Audible Signs
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 101
Article 9: Supplemental Regulations
Section 9.01 Home Occupations and Home Based Businesses in Residential Districts
9.01.01 Intent:
A home occupation or home based business shall be permitted when said occupation or business is conducted on residentially used and/or zoned property and is considered customary, traditional, and incidental to the primary use of the premises as a residence, and shall not be construed as a business.
9.01.02 Procedure:
1. Home Occupations: An application for a home occupation, within residentially zoned areas shall be made to the Cozad Zoning Administrator on a form provided. Said application shall be approved, provided the performance criteria are met.
2. Home Based Businesses: An application for a home-based business, within residentially zoned areas shall be made to the Cozad Zoning Administrator on a form provided. Said application shall be approved, provided the performance criteria are met.
9.01.03 Permitted home occupations:
1. Workrooms for dressmaking, millinery, sewing, weaving, tailoring, ironing, washing, jewelry making, custom home furnishings work, carpentry work, and furniture repair.
2. Offices for professionals such as, but not limited to, attorneys, architects, engineers, planners, real estate agents, insurance, notary public, manufacturer’s representative, clergy, journalists, painters, photographers, draftspersons, insurance agents, accountants, editors, publishers, contract management, graphic design, construction contractors, landscape design, surveyors, cleaning services, salespersons, and travel agents.
3. Child Nurseries or Child Care
4. Personal services, including Barber and Beauty Shops (limited to one chair), manicure and pedicure shops, pet grooming, catering, and chauffeuring services.
5. Instructional services, including music, dance, art and craft classes and tutoring.
6. Repair services, including watch and clock, small appliances, computers, electronic devices, lawnmowers including engines (limited to garage areas).
7. Distribution and sales of products such as cosmetics, home/health care products, mail order, and other similar uses.
8. Offices for services provided outside the home such as lawn care, snow removal, and other similar uses.
9. Kennels, stables, veterinarian clinics/hospitals.
9.01.04 Prohibited home occupations:
1. Medical and dental clinics, hospitals.
2. Restaurants, clubs, drinking establishments.
3. Motor vehicle / small engine repair.
4. Adult Entertainment Uses
9.01.05 Performance Standards for Home Occupations:
1. The primary use of the structure or dwelling unit shall remain residential and the operator of the home occupation shall remain a resident in the dwelling unit.
2. The operator conducting the home occupation shall be the sole entrepreneur, and the operator shall not employ any other person other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises.
3. No structural additions, enlargements, or exterior alterations changing the residential appearance to a business appearance shall be permitted.
4. No more than 25 percent of the floor area of any one story of the dwelling unit shall be devoted to such home occupation.
5. Such home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the primary building or dwelling unit used as a residence.
6. Additional and/or separate entrance(s) that do not match the residential structural design shall not be constructed for the purpose of conducting the home occupation or home based business.
7. Additional off-street parking or loading facilities, including additional driveway construction, other than the requirements for the permitted residence, shall be permitted.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
102 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
8. The display of goods and/or external evidence of the home occupation shall not be permitted, except for one non-animated, non-illuminated, non-flashing announcement plate, indicating not more than the name and address of the resident. Said plate shall be attached flat against the wall of the residence and shall not exceed two sq. ft. in total surface area.
9. No retail sales are permitted from the site other than incidental sales related to services provided.
10. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, heat, or glare shall be noticeable at or beyond the property line.
11. No electrical or mechanical equipment shall interfere with local radio communications and television reception, or cause fluctuation in line voltage off the premises.
12. All businesses related to Child Care Homes and Child Care Centers shall be in accordance with Nebraska State Statutes.
9.01.06 Permitted home based businesses:
1. Workrooms for custom home furnishings work, carpentry work, and furniture repair.
2. Offices for professionals such as, but not limited to, attorneys, architects, engineers, planners, real estate agents, insurance, notary public, manufacturer’s representative, clergy, journalists, painters, photographers, draftspersons, insurance agents, accountants, editors, publishers, contract management, graphic design, construction contractors, landscape design, surveyors, cleaning services, salespersons, and travel agents.
3. Personal services, including Barber and Beauty Shops (limited to two chairs), manicure and pedicure shops, pet grooming, catering, and chauffeuring services.
4. Repair services, including watch and clock, small appliances, computers, electronic devices, lawnmowers including engines (limited to garage areas).
5. Distribution and sales of products such as cosmetics, home/health care products, mail order, and other similar uses.
6. Offices for services provided outside the home such as lawn care, snow removal, and other similar uses.
7. Child Nurseries or Child Care
8. Kennels, stables, veterinarian clinics/hospitals.
9.01.07 Prohibited home based businesses:
1. Medical and dental clinics, hospitals.
2. Restaurants, clubs, drinking establishments.
3. Motor vehicle / small engine repair.
4. Adult Entertainment Uses
9.01.08 Performance Standards for Home Based Businesses:
1. The primary use of the structure or dwelling unit shall remain residential and the operator of the home-based business shall remain a resident in the dwelling unit.
2. The operator conducting the home-based business shall be the sole entrepreneur. However, the operator may employ immediate family members residing on the premises, as well as, an additional two unrelated individuals for purposes of conducting business.
3. Structural additions, enlargements, or exterior alterations may be completed in order to provide space for the home-based business. Any alterations and additions are limited to a one-time expansion and shall be limited to 25 percent of the floor area of the main floor at the time of application. All alterations and additions shall meet all building and zoning criteria of Cozad.
4. No more than 25 percent of the floor area of any one story of the dwelling unit shall be devoted to such home based business.
5. Such home based business shall be conducted entirely within the primary building or dwelling unit used as a residence. Home based businesses may also be located with an existing Accessory Building.
6. Home based businesses conducted within an Accessory Building shall be confined to the structure of the said Accessory Building. In addition, the applicant must prove that the Accessory Building meets all Life Safety Codes including electrical compliance for a commercial business.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 103
7. All alterations and additions shall be completed in a manner that matches the existing structure and shall have a residential appearance to the exterior. All separate entrance(s) shall be discrete and match the residential design.
8. Additional off-street parking or loading facilities, beyond the parking provided for the residence, shall be provided and shall meet the following standards:
a. Two additional spaces for the unrelated employees;
b. Two additional spaces to be used for client/visitor parking;
c. The additional parking required in items (a) and (b) shall not be provided in any required Front, Side or Rear Yard setback;
d. All additional parking and loading spaces shall be screened using landscaping materials and opaque privacy fencing not more than six feet in height;
e. Applicant shall not relocate parking for the residence into any Front, Side or Rear Yard Setback in order to provide the additional parking.
f. All new off-street parking is encouraged to be toward the rear yard portion of the property and screened from view from the street.
9. The display of goods and/or external evidence of the home-based business shall not be permitted, except for one non-animated, non-illuminated, non-flashing announcement plate, indicating not more than the name and address of the resident. Said plate shall be attached flat against the wall of the residence and shall not exceed two sq. ft. in total surface area.
10. No retail sales are permitted from the site other than incidental sales related to services provided.
11. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, heat, or glare shall be noticeable at or beyond the property line.
12. No electrical or mechanical equipment shall interfere with local radio communications and television reception, or cause fluctuation in line voltage off the premises.
13. All businesses related to Child Care Homes and Child Care Centers shall be in accordance with Nebraska State Statutes.
9.01.09 Revocation:
1. Conditions. A home occupation and home based business permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this section may be terminated if the Zoning Administrator makes any of the following findings:
a. That any condition of the home occupation or home based business permit has been violated;
b. That the use has become detrimental to the public health or safety or is deemed to constitute a nuisance;
c. That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;
d. That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or has been suspended for six consecutive months or more; and
e. That the condition of the premises, or the district of which it is a part, has changed so that the use may no longer be justified under the purpose and intent of this section.
2. Appeal. Within five working days of a revocation, an appeal may be made to the Cozad Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Administrator within ten working days of the receipt of an appeal of his or her revocation shall report his or her findings of fact and decision to the Cozad Board of Adjustment. The Cozad Board of Adjustment shall determine the facts and may revoke, modify or allow to remain unchanged the home occupation or home based business permit in accordance with the Board’s final determination.
3. Nontransferable. A home occupation or home based business permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be transferred, assigned, nor used by any person other than the permittee, nor shall such permit authorize such home occupation at any location other than the one for which the permit is granted.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
104 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 9.02 Home Occupations and Home Based Businesses within the TA-1 Districts
9.02.01 Intent:
A home occupation or home based business shall be permitted when said occupation or business is conducted on agriculturally used and/or zoned property and is considered customary, traditional, and incidental to the primary use of the premises as a residence, and shall not be construed as a business.
9.02.02 Procedure:
1. Home Occupations: An application for a home occupation, within agriculturally zoned areas shall be made to the Cozad Zoning Administrator on a form provided. Said application shall be approved, provided the performance criteria are met.
2. Home Based Businesses: An application for a home-based business, within agriculturally zoned areas shall be made to the Cozad Zoning Administrator on a form provided. Said application shall be approved, provided the performance criteria are met.
9.02.03 Permitted home occupations:
1. Workrooms for dressmaking, millinery, sewing, weaving, tailoring, ironing, washing, jewelry making, custom home furnishings work, carpentry work, and furniture repair.
2. Offices for professionals such as, but not limited to, attorneys, architects, engineers, planners, real estate agents, insurance, notary public, manufacturer’s representative, clergy, journalists, painters, photographers, draftspersons, insurance agents, accountants, editors, publishers, contract management, graphic design, construction contractor services, landscape design, surveyors, cleaning services, salespersons, and travel agents.
3. Child Nurseries or Child Care.
4. Personal services, including Barber and Beauty Shops (limited to one chair), manicure and pedicure shops, pet grooming, catering, and chauffeuring services.
5. Instructional services, including music, dance, art and craft classes and tutoring.
6. Repair services, including watch and clock, small appliances, computers, electronic devices, lawnmowers including engines, and motor vehicles (limited to no more than two at one time).
7. Offices and shops in association to one another, including motorized and non-motorized racing vehicles, construction services with equipment storage and maintenance, monument sales and engraving, freight hauling with equipment storage and maintenance (not including warehousing of freight), aerial spraying with equipment storage and maintenance, welding, and excavating services with equipment storage and maintenance.
8. Warehousing and storage of products associated with agri-businesses, including seed sales, fertilizer sales (as allowed by state and federal regulations), and herbicide and pesticide sales (as allowed by state and federal regulations).
9. Distribution and sales of products such as cosmetics, home/health care products, mail order, and other similar uses.
10. Offices for services provided outside the home such as lawn care, snow removal, and other similar uses.
9.02.04 Prohibited home occupations:
1. Medical clinics and hospitals.
2. Restaurants, clubs, drinking establishments.
3. Undertaking and funeral parlors.
9.02.05 Performance Standards for Home Occupations:
1. The primary use of the structure or dwelling unit shall remain residential and the operator of the home occupation shall remain a resident in the dwelling unit.
2. The operator conducting the home occupation shall be the sole entrepreneur, and the operator shall not employ any other person other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises.
3. No structural additions, enlargements, or exterior alterations changing the residential appearance to a business appearance shall be permitted.
4. No more than 25 percent of the floor area of any one story of the dwelling unit shall be devoted to such home occupation when contained within the principal structure.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 105
5. Home occupations may be located within an accessory structure including machine sheds, barns, and garages. Said accessory structure shall be required to meet all pertinent State codes for Life Safety including electrical wiring depending upon the nature of the business.
6. When a home occupation is located in an accessory structure there shall not be any additional storage allowed in the open. All storage shall be contained within appropriate facilities and out of site.
7. Home occupations focused on repairs and maintenance of vehicles and motors shall not be allowed to storage damaged, unlicensed, salvaged, vehicles or parts on site and outside the structure where said home occupations are taking place.
8. When storage of chemicals associated with agricultural businesses are stored on site, the storage shall comply with all state and Federal regulations and shall be kept in a place that is secured, dry and locked from general access.
9. Additional and/or separate entrance(s) that do not match the residential structural design shall not be constructed for the purpose of conducting the home occupation or home based business.
10. Additional off-street parking or loading facilities, including additional driveway construction, other than the requirements for the permitted residence, shall be permitted.
11. The display of goods and/or external evidence of the home occupation shall not be permitted, except for one non-animated, non-illuminated, non-flashing announcement plate, indicating not more than the name and address of the resident. Said plate shall be attached flat against the wall of the residence and shall not exceed two sq. ft. in total surface area.
12. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, heat, or glare shall be noticeable at or beyond the property line.
13. No electrical or mechanical equipment shall interfere with local radio communications and television reception, or cause fluctuation in line voltage off the premises.
14. All businesses related to Child Care Homes and Child Care Centers shall be in accordance with Nebraska State Statutes.
9.02.06 Permitted home based businesses:
1. Workrooms for dressmaking, millinery, sewing, weaving, tailoring, ironing, washing, jewelry making, custom home furnishings work, carpentry work, and furniture repair.
2. Offices for professionals such as, but not limited to, attorneys, architects, engineers, planners, real estate agents, insurance, notary public, manufacturer’s representative, clergy, journalists, painters, photographers, dentists, doctors, draftspersons, insurance agents, accountants, editors, publishers, psychologists, contract management, graphic design, construction contractor services, landscape design, surveyors, cleaning services, salespersons, and travel agents.
3. Child Nurseries or Child Care.
4. Personal services, including Barber and Beauty Shops (limited to one Mayor), manicure and pedicure shops, pet grooming, catering, and chauffeuring services.
5. Instructional services, including music, dance, art and craft classes and tutoring.
6. Repair services, including watch and clock, small appliances, computers, electronic devices, lawnmowers including engines, and motor vehicles (limited to no more than two at one time).
7. Offices and shops in association to one another, including motorized and non-motorized racing vehicles, construction services with equipment storage and maintenance, monument sales and engraving, freight hauling with equipment storage and maintenance (not including warehousing of freight), aerial spraying with equipment storage and maintenance, welding, and excavating services with equipment storage and maintenance.
8. Warehousing and storage of products associated with agri-businesses, including seed sales, fertilizer sales (as allowed by state and federal regulations), and herbicide and pesticide sales (as allowed by state and federal regulations).
9. Distribution and sales of products such as cosmetics, home/health care products, mail order, and other similar uses.
10. Offices for services provided outside the home such as lawn care, snow removal, and other similar uses.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
106 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
9.02.07 Prohibited home based businesses:
1. Medical clinics and hospitals.
2. Restaurants, clubs, drinking establishments.
3. Undertaking and funeral parlors.
9.02.08 Performance Standards for Home Based Businesses:
1. The primary use of the structure or dwelling unit shall remain residential and the operator of the home-based business shall remain a resident in the dwelling unit.
2. The operator conducting the home-based business shall be the sole entrepreneur. However, the operator may employ immediate family members residing on the premises, as well as, an additional two unrelated individuals for purposes of conducting business.
3. Structural additions, enlargements, or exterior alterations may be completed in order to provide space for the home-based business. Any alterations and additions are limited to a one-time expansion and shall be limited to 25 percent of the floor area of the main floor at the time of application. All alterations and additions shall meet all building and zoning criteria of Cozad.
4. No more than 25 percent of the floor area of any one story of the dwelling unit shall be devoted to such home based business when contained within the principal structure.
5. Home based businesses may be located within an accessory structure including machine sheds, barns, and garages. Said accessory structure shall be required to meet all pertinent State codes for Life Safety including electrical wiring depending upon the nature of the business.
6. When a home-based business is located in an accessory structure there shall not be any additional storage allowed in the open. All storage shall be contained within appropriate facilities and out of site.
7. Home based businesses focused on repairs and maintenance of vehicles and motors shall not be allowed to storage damaged, unlicensed, salvaged, vehicles or parts on site and outside the structure where said home based business is taking place.
8. When storage of chemicals associated with agricultural businesses are stored on site, the storage shall comply with all state and Federal regulations and shall be kept in a place that is secured, dry and locked from general access.
9. All alterations and additions shall be completed in a manner that matches the existing structure and shall have a residential appearance to the exterior. All separate entrance(s) shall be discrete and match the residential design.
10. Additional off-street parking or loading facilities, beyond the parking provided for the residence, shall be provided and shall meet the following standards:
a. Two additional spaces for the unrelated employees;
b. Two additional spaces to be used for client/visitor parking;
c. The additional parking required in items (a) and (b) shall not be provided in any required Front, Side or Rear Yard setback;
d. All additional parking and loading spaces shall be screened using landscaping materials and opaque privacy fencing not more than six feet in height;
e. Applicant shall not relocate parking for the residence into any Front, Side or Rear Yard Setback in order to provide the additional parking.
f. All new off-street parking is encouraged to be toward the rear yard portion of the property and screened from view from the street.
11. The display of goods and/or external evidence of the home-based business shall not be permitted, except for one non-animated, non-illuminated, non-flashing announcement plate, indicating not more than the name and address of the resident. Said plate shall be attached flat against the wall of the residence and shall not exceed two sq. ft. in total surface area.
12. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, heat, or glare shall be noticeable at or beyond the property line.
13. No electrical or mechanical equipment shall interfere with local radio communications and television reception, or cause fluctuation in line voltage off the premises.
14. All businesses related to Child Care Homes and Child Care Centers shall be in accordance with Nebraska State Statutes.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 107
9.02.09 Revocation:
1. Conditions. A home occupation and home based business permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this section may be terminated if the Zoning Administrator makes any of the following findings:
a. That any condition of the home occupation or home based business permit has been violated;
b. That the use has become detrimental to the public health or safety or is deemed to constitute a nuisance;
c. That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;
d. That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or has been suspended for six consecutive months or more; and
e. That the condition of the premises, or the district of which it is a part, has changed so that the use may no longer be justified under the purpose and intent of this section.
2. Appeal. Within five working days of a revocation, an appeal may be made to the Cozad Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Administrator within ten working days of the receipt of an appeal of his or her revocation actions, shall report his or her findings of fact and decision to the Cozad Board of Adjustment. The Cozad Board of Adjustment shall determine the facts and may revoke, modify or allow to remain unchanged the home occupation or home based business permit in accordance with the Board’s final determination.
3. Nontransferable. A home occupation or home based business permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be transferred, assigned, nor used by any person other than the permittee, nor shall such permit authorize such home occupation at any location other than the one for which the permit is granted.
Section 9.03 Radio, Television and Wireless Communication Towers
8.03.01 Intent:
Based upon the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the Spectrum Act of 2012 (the Act) grants the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over certain aspects of telecommunication services. This section is intended to regulate towers, telecommunications facilities and antennas in the City in conformance with the Act without prohibiting or tending to prohibit any person from providing wireless telecommunication service. Telecommunication facilities, towers and antennas in the City, to protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact of installation of towers and antennas through careful design, siting, and camouflaging, to promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers and other antenna support structures rather than the construction of additional single use towers, to avoid potential damage to property caused by towers, telecommunications facilities and antennas by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, repaired and removed when no longer used or are determined to be structurally unsound and to ensure that towers and antennas are compatible with surrounding land uses.
9.03.02 Definitions:
All terms in this Section which are not specifically defined herein shall be construed in accordance with the Communications Act of 1934, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the Spectrum Act of 2012 and the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Base Station shall mean a structure that supports or houses an antenna, transceiver, or other associated equipment that constitutes part of a base station at the time of the application is filed.
Broadcasting Tower shall mean a structure for the transmission or broadcast of radio, television, radar, microwaves or other electromagnetic frequencies which exceeds the maximum height permitted in the district in which it is located; provided, however, that noncommercial towers not exceeding 50 feet in height shall not be considered broadcast towers.
Collocation shall mean the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
108 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Conforming commercial earth station shall mean a satellite dish which is two meters or less in diameter and is located in an area where commercial or industrial uses are generally permitted under this regulation.
Eligible facilities request is defined as any request for modification of an existing wireless tower or base station that involves (a) collocation of new transmission equipment; (b) removal of transmission equipment; or (c) replacement of transmission equipment.
In Writing refers to the means in which an applicant for a telecommunications tower is notified. The “in writing” clause has been defined to include the minutes of the governing body’s proceedings including findings of fact.
Owner shall mean any person with a fee simple title or a leasehold exceeding ten years in duration to any tract of land within the zoning jurisdiction of the County who desires to develop, construct, modify, or operate a tower upon such tract of land.
Replacement shall mean the removal and upgrade of transmission equipment and not the structure on which it is located.
Specific and absolute timeframe this refers to the timeframe allowed for processing a telecommunication application under Section 6409 (a) of the Spectrum Act of 2012.
Stealth: Any telecommunications facility, tower, or antenna which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including, but not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than a tower, such as light poles, power poles and trees.
Telecommunications Facilities shall mean any cables, wires, lines, waive guides, antennas, or any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications which a person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure. However, telecommunications facilities shall not include: a. Any Conforming Commercial Earth Station antenna two meters or less in diameter. b. Any earth station antenna or satellite dish antenna of one meter or less in diameter.
Tower shall mean any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any Commission-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities.
Tower owner shall mean any person with an ownership interest of any nature in a proposed or existing tower.
Transmission Equipment: any equipment that facilitates transmission for any Commission-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas and other relevant equipment associated with and necessary to their operation, including coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply.
9.03.03 Tower Construction Standards:
Listed below are tower construction standards.
1. Towers shall be permitted conditional uses of land in only those zoning districts where specifically listed and authorized in this regulation.
2. No person shall develop, construct, modify or operate a tower upon any tract of land within the zoning jurisdiction of the City prior to approval of its application for a Conditional Use Permit by the City Council and issuance of the permit by the City.
3. All towers, telecommunications facilities and antennas on which construction has commenced within the zoning jurisdiction of the City after the effective date of this regulation shall conform to the Building Codes and all other construction standards set forth by the City, County, federal, and state law and applicable American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Upon completion of construction of a tower and prior to the commencement of use, an engineer’s certification that the tower is structurally sound
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 109
and in conformance with all the aforementioned applicable regulatory standards shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
9.03.04 Application to Develop a Tower:
1. Prior to commencement of development or construction of a tower, an application shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for a Conditional Use Permit and shall include the following:
A. Name, address, and telephone number of the owner and if applicable, the lessee of the tract of land upon which the tower is to be located. Applicants shall include the owner of the tract of land and all persons having an ownership interest in the proposed tower. The application shall be executed by all applicants.
B. The legal description and address of the tract of land on which the tower is to be located.
C. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers or useable antenna support structures within a one-mile radius of the proposed tower, including publicly and privately owned towers and structures.
D. An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant has made diligent but unsuccessful efforts to obtain permission to install or collocate the applicants’ telecommunications facilities on a tower or useable antenna support or written technical evidence from an engineer that the applicants’ telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another tower or useable antenna support structure.
E. Written technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed tower will meet the established Building Code, and all other applicable construction standards set forth by the City Council and federal and state and ANSI standards.
F. Color photo simulations showing the proposed location of the tower with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would appear viewed from the nearest residentially used and / or zoned property and nearest roadway, street or highway.
G. Descriptions and diagrams of the proposed tower, telecommunications facilities and/or antenna, manufacturers literature, appurtenances such as buildings, driveways, parking areas, and fences or other security enclosures with significant detail to allow persons reviewing the application to understand the kind and nature of the proposed facility.
H. The application, based upon the specific and absolute timeframe established by the FCC, shall be processed and decided within 60 days of the application becoming completed. However, the 60-day application processing period may be extended only:
i. By mutual agreement between the City of Cozad and the applicant, or
ii. By Cozad’s determination that the application is incomplete.
1. If the City of Cozad deems the application to be incomplete, the City shall notify the applicant of the incompleteness within 30 days of the initial filing.
2. The City shall clearly and specifically delineate writing the missing information
3. The clock shall resume when the information is provided, but may tolled again if the City of Cozad notifies the applicant within 10 days that the application remains incomplete.
4. The City shall not request new information beyond what is already required.
iii. If the application is not acted upon within 60 days, the application shall be deemed to be approved by the governing body.
9.03.05 Setbacks and Separation or Buffer Requirements
Listed below are setbacks and separation requirements for towers and exception to height restrictions of towers.
1. All towers up to 50 feet in height shall be setback on all sides a distance equal to the underlying setback requirement in the applicable zoning district. Towers in excess of 50 feet in height shall be set back one additional foot for each foot of tower height in excess of 50 feet. The height of the tower shall be measured from the grade at the foot of the base pad to the top of any telecommunications facilities or antennas attached thereto. Setback requirements shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property line of the tract of land on which it is located.
2. Freestanding and guyed towers shall be located so that the distance from the base of the tower to any adjoining property line or the supporting structure of a separate neighboring tower is a minimum of 100 percent of the tower height. The Planning Commission and City Council may reduce the setback with a conditional use permit if it determines that such reduction does not constitute a hazard to safety or property on adjacent properties or rights-of-way.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
110 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
3. Towers exceeding 100 feet in height may not be located in any residentially zoned district and must be separated from all residentially zoned districts and occupied structures other than those utilized by the tower owner, by a minimum of 200 feet or 100 percent of the height of the proposed tower, whichever is greater.
4. Towers of 100 feet or less in height may be located in residentially zoned districts provided said tower is separated from any residential structure, school, church, and/or occupied structures other than those utilized by the tower owner, by a minimum of one hundred percent (100%) of the height of the tower.
5. Towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from other towers:
A. Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other towers, whether monopole, self-supporting lattice, or guyed by a minimum of 750 feet.
B. Self-supporting lattice or guyed towers shall be separated from all other self-supporting lattice or guyed towers by a minimum of 1,500 feet.
6. Towers shall be held to all height requirements as prescribed in the Airport Hazard Area District.
7. As part of its conditional use approval process, the Planning Commission and City Council may, after public notice and hearing, permit the tower to exceed the height restrictions otherwise allowable in the district.
9.03.06 Structural Standards for Towers Adopted:
The Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures, 1991 Edition (ANSI/EIA/TIA 222-E-1991) is hereby adopted, together with any amendments thereto as may be made from time to time, except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by regulation and set forth in this Article of the Zoning Regulation.
9.03.07 Illumination and Security Fences:
1. Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the FAA. Any tower subject to this Section that is required to be lit under FAA requirements and using a strobe light shall be equipped with dual mode lighting. In no case, shall said tower be allowed to operate a strobe lighting system after sunset and before dawn.
2. All self-supporting lattice or guyed towers shall be enclosed within a security fence or other structure designed to preclude unauthorized access. Monopole towers shall be designed and constructed in a manner which will preclude to the extent practical, unauthorized climbing of said structure.
9.03.08 Exterior Finish:
Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish which enhances compatibility with adjacent land uses, subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission and City Council as part of the application approval process. All towers that must be approved as a conditional use shall be stealth design unless stealth features are impractical or the cost of such features represents an undue burden on the applicant.
9.03.09 Landscaping:
All tracts of land on which towers, antenna support structures, telecommunications facilities and/or antennas are located shall be subject to the landscaping requirements of the City.
9.03.10 Prohibitions
According to the FCC, “[A] state or local government may not deny, and shall approve, any eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing wireless tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station.”
9.03.11 Substantial Change
The City of Cozad may only require an amended conditional use permit for changes/modifications on a telecommunication tower/system that are defined by the FCC as substantial.
1. Substantial Change shall mean any of the following:
A. Towers outside the public right-of-way, a “substantial change”
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 111
• increases the height of the tower by more than 10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater, or
• Protrudes from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater.
B. Towers in the right-of-way, and all base stations, a “substantial change”  increases the height of the tower or base station by more than 10% or 10 feet, whichever is greater, or  protrudes from the edge of the structure more than 6 feet
C. All Towers and base stations, a substantial change:  involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets;  entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site of the tower or base station;  defeats the existing concealment elements of the tower or base station; or  does not comply with conditions associated with the prior approval of construction or modification of the tower or base station unless the non-compliance is due to any of the “substantial change” thresholds identified above.
2. Changes in Height
A. Changes in height are to be measured from the original support structure in cases where the deployments are or will be separated horizontally.
B. In other circumstances, changes in height are to be measured from the dimensions of the original tower or base station and all originally approved appurtenances, and any modifications approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act.
C. Note, the changes are measured cumulatively; otherwise a series of small changes could add up to a cumulative change that exceeds the “substantial change” threshold.
9.03.12 Inspections
The City reserves the right to conduct inspection of towers, antenna support structures, telecommunications facilities and antenna upon reasonable notice to the tower owner or operator to determine compliance with this Section and to prevent structural and equipment failures and accidents which may cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. Inspections may be made to determine compliance with the City’s Zoning Codes and any other construction standards set forth by the City, federal, and state law or applicable ANSI standards. Inspections shall be made by either an employee of Cozad’s Zoning Office, or a duly appointed independent representative of the City.
9.03.13 Maintenance
The towers, antenna support structures, telecommunications facilities and antennas shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair so that the same does not constitute a nuisance to or a danger to the life or property of any person or the public.
9.03.14 Abandonment
If any tower shall cease to be used for a period of one year, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the tower owner that the site will be subject to determination by the Zoning Administrator that the site has been abandoned. Upon issuance of written notice to show cause by the Zoning Administrator, the tower owner shall have 30 days to show preponderance of evidence that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period of apparent abandonment. In the event the tower owner fails to show that the tower has been in use or under repair during the relevant period, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a final determination of abandonment of the site and the tower owner shall have 75 days thereafter to dismantle and move the tower. In the event the tower is not dismantled and removed, the tower shall be declared a public nuisance by the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee and a written request shall be directed to the City Attorney to proceed to abate said public nuisance pursuant to authority of the Revised Nebraska State Statutes and City of Cozad codes, and charge the costs thereof against the real estate on which the tower is located or the owner of record of the said real estate.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
112 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
9.03.15 Approval Denial Procedures for Tower Development Permit
1. Any decision to deny an application to place, construct or modify a wireless facility must be “in writing” and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
2. The regulation of placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless services facilities by the City of Cozad shall not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services;
3. The regulation of the placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless service facilities by the City of Cozad shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services;
4. The City of Cozad shall not regulate the placement, construction, or modification of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such emissions comply with FCC regulations;
Section 9.04 Fences
9.04.01 No fence shall be constructed within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Cozad unless a permit is approved and issued by the zoning administrator and is constructed in conformance with the following requirements:
1. Unless otherwise provided, no fence shall be built on any lot or tract outside the surveyed lot lines, or adjacent to any municipal property, excluding public streets.
2. Unless otherwise provided, any fence built on residential property within required front or street side yards shall contain openings constituting no less than 50 percent of the surface area of the fence. Fences constructed of PVC resin are exempt from this requirement.
3. No solid fence permitted or required by this regulation shall be built within a triangle formed by the adjacent side lines of two intersecting streets and a line connecting points 40 feet on each leg from their point of intersection; or otherwise in any manner create a traffic hazard or obstruction to visibility.
4. The finished surfaces of any fence shall face toward adjacent properties and street frontage.
5. Fences constructed within residential districts or on land used for residential purposes are subject to the following provisions.
a. The maximum height of a fence within a required front yard or street side yard setback shall be 42 inches not exceeding 50 percent closed construction, or 48 inches not exceeding 25 percent closed construction.
b. The maximum height for any fence outside of a required front yard shall be six feet four inches.
c. On corner lots, a fence built parallel to the street side yard line but set back in conformance with the required street yard setback may have a maximum height of six feet four inches.
d. Fences shall be constructed of wood, chain-link, PVC/ resin, stone or masonry materials only. Wood fences shall utilize standard pre-treated building lumber only or be finished.
6. Security perimeter fencing around a plant or building located in an area zoned as an Industrial District may be constructed to a height of eight feet; higher fences may be approved by through a Conditional Use Permit.
7. Fences constructed along and parallel to a lot lines separating a residential lot from property located in a Commercial or Industrial District shall not exceed eight feet in height.
8. Fences constructed along and parallel to rear and side lot lines adjoining arterial streets, as designated by the Nebraska Department of Roads, shall not exceed eight feet in height.
9.04.02 No fence or vegetation shall be situated or constructed in such a way as to obstruct the vehicular traffic or otherwise create a traffic safety hazard.
9.04.03 The use of barbed wire in the construction of any fence is prohibited except:
1. Perimeter security fencing of buildings constructed in an Industrial District. The plans and specifications for any such fencing must be approved by the City before commencement of construction.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 113
2. Farm fencing constructed for agricultural purposes on parcels of land 10 acres or more in size, located in the TA-1 District.
9.04.04 All fences shall be maintained in good repair.
9.04.05 Electric Fences. No electric fence, except for underground invisible fence for animal control, shall be constructed or maintained within the City of Cozad or within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction except in TA-1 District as hereinafter provided. An owner or lessee of such property may, upon application to the City and approval by the Zoning Administrator, maintain electrified fencing provided same shall not be energized to the extent that it is capable of causing bodily harm to persons, be they children or adults, or to animals. Before the Zoning Administrator shall approve any electrified fencing, it shall be determined that non-electrified fencing will not adequately protect the owner’s property and the owner’s application for approval of electrified fencing shall set forth in detail the reasons why non-electrified fencing will not adequately protect his property.
Section 9.05 Performance Standards for Industrial Uses
9.05.01 Physical Appearance: All operations shall be carried on within an enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in operable condition may be stored in the open. Normal daily wastes of an inorganic nature may be stored in containers not in a building when such containers are not readily visible from a street. The provisions of this paragraph shall not be construed to prohibit the display of merchandise or vehicles for sale or the storage of vehicles, boats, farm machinery, trailers, mobile homes, or similar equipment when in operable condition.
9.05.02 Fire hazard: No operation shall involve the use of highly flammable gasses, acid, liquids, grinding processes, or other inherent fire hazards. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of normal heating fuels, motor fuels and welding gasses when handled in accordance with other regulations of the City of Cozad.
9.05.03 Noise: No operation shall be carried on which involves noise in excess of the normal traffic noise of the adjacent street at the time of the daily peak hour of traffic volume. Noise shall be measured at the property line and when the level of such noise cannot be determined by observation with the natural senses, a suitable instrument may be used and measurement may include breakdowns into a reasonable number of frequency ranges.
9.05.04 Sewage and Liquid Wastes: No operation shall be carried on which involves the discharge into a sewer, water course, or the ground, liquid waste of any radioactive or poisonous nature or chemical waste which are detrimental to normal sewage plant operation or corrosive and damaging to sewer pipes and installations.
9.05.05 Air Contaminants:
1. Air Contaminants and smoke shall be less dark than designated Number One on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a density designated as Number One shall be permitted for one four-minute period in each one-half hour. Light colored contaminants of such a capacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the aforesaid shall not be permitted.
2. Particulate matter of dust as measured at the point of emission by any generally accepted method shall not be emitted in excess of two tenths (0.2) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit, except for a period of four minutes in any one-half hour, at which time it may equal but not exceed six tenths (0.6) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit.
3. Due to the fact that the possibilities of air contamination cannot reasonably be comprehensively covered in this section, there shall be applied the general rule that there shall not be discharged from any sources whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other material in such quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of persons or to the public in general; or to endanger the comfort, repose, health, or safety of any such considerable number of persons or to the public in
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
114 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
general, or to cause, or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business, vegetation, or property.
4. Odor: The emission of odors that are generally agreed to be obnoxious to any considerable numbers of persons, shall be prohibited. Observations of odor shall be made at the property line of the establishment causing the odor. As a guide to classification of odor it shall be deemed that strong odors of putrefaction and fermentation tend to be obnoxious and that such odors as associated with baking or the roasting of nuts and coffee shall not normally be considered obnoxious within the meaning of this Regulations.
5. Gasses: The gasses sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide shall not exceed five parts per million (5ppm), carbon monoxide shall not exceed five parts per million (5ppm). All measurements shall be taken at the zoning lot line.
6. Vibration: All machines including punch presses and stamping machines shall be so mounted as to minimize vibration and in no case shall such vibration exceed a displacement of three thousandths of an inch (0.003”) measured at the zoning lot line. The use of steam or broad hammers shall not be permitted in this zone.
7. Glare and heat: All glare, such as welding arcs and open furnaces shall be shielded so that they shall not be visible from the zoning lot line. No heat from furnaces or processing equipment shall be sensed at the zoning lot line to the extent of raising the temperature of air or materials more than five degrees Fahrenheit.
9.05.06 Maximum Permitted Sound Levels Adjacent to Residential Zoning Districts
displays the maximum permitted sound levels that may be generated by uses in the F-1 or I-1 zoning districts where adjacent to residential zoning districts. All measurements shall be taken at or within the boundary between the originating district and the adjacent residential zoning district with a sound level meter meeting ANSI specifications for a Type II or better general purpose sound level meter. The A-weighted response shall be used.
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels at Residential Boundaries
Originating Zoning District Time Maximum One Hour Leq*
(dbA)
F-1 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 60
10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 55
I-1 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 65
10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 55
* Leq is the constant sound level that, in a given situation and time period, conveys the same sound energy as the actual time-varying A-weighted sound. It is the average sound level and accurately portrays the sound the human ear actually hears.
Section 9.06 Small Wind Energy Systems
9.06.01 Purpose
It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of small wind energy systems installed to reduce the on-site consumption of utility supplied electricity.
9.06.02 Definitions
The following are defined for the specific use of this section.
Small Wind Energy System shall mean a wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than 100 kW and which is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power.
Tower Height shall mean the height above grade of the first fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind turbine itself.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 115
9.06.03 Requirements
Small wind energy systems shall be permitted as an Accessory Use within any district where the use is listed and allowed. Certain requirements as set forth below shall be met:
1. Tower Height
A. For property sizes between ½ acre and one acre the tower height shall be limited to 80 feet.
B. For property sizes of one acre or more, there is no limitation on tower height, except as imposed by FAA regulations.
2. Setbacks
A. No part of the wind system structure, including guy-wire anchors, may extend closer than 10 feet to the property lines of the installation site.
3. Noise
A. Small wind energy systems shall not exceed 60 dBA, as measured at the closet neighboring inhabited dwelling unit.
B. The noise level may be exceeded during short term events such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms.
4. Approved Wind Turbines
A. Small wind turbines must have been approved under the Emerging Technologies program of the California Energy Commission or any other small wind certification program recognized by the American Wind Energy Association.
5. Compliance with Building and Zoning Codes
A. Applications for small wind energy systems shall be accomplished by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower base, and footings.
B. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with official building code of the governing body and/or the State of Nebraska and certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.
C. The manufacturer frequently supplies this analysis.
D. Wet stamps shall not be required.
6. Compliance with FAA Regulations
A. Small wind energy systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations close to airports.
7. Compliance with National Electrical Code
A. Permit applications for small wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electrical Code.
B. The manufacturer frequently supplies this analysis.
8. Utility Notification
A. No small wind energy system shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.
B. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
9. Setbacks
All towers shall adhere to the setbacks established in the following table:
Wind Turbine – Non Commercial WECS
Property Lines
One times the total height
Neighboring Dwelling Units
One times the total height
Road Rights-of-Way*
One times the tower height.
Other Rights-of-Way
One times the tower height.
Wildlife Management Areas and State Recreational Areas
NA
Wetlands, USFW Types III, IV, and V
NA
Other structures adjacent to the applicant’s sites
NA
Other existing WECS not owned by the applicant.
NA
River Bluffs
* The setback shall be measured from any future Rights-of-Way if a planned change or expanded right-of-Way is known.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
116 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 9.07 Commercial/Utility Grade Wind Energy Systems
9.07.01 Purpose
It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of commercial/utility grade wind energy systems within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Cozad.
9.07.02 Definitions
The following are defined for the specific use of this section.
Aggregate Project shall mean projects that are developed and operated in a coordinated fashion, but which have multiple entities separately owning one or more of the individual WECS within the larger project. Associated infrastructure such as power lines and transformers that service the facility may be owned by a separate entity but are also part of the aggregated project.
Commercial WECS shall mean a wind energy conversion system of equal to or greater than 100 kW in total name plate generating capacity.
Fall Zone shall mean the area, defined as the furthest distance from the tower base, in which a guyed tower will collapse in the event of a structural failure. This area is less than the total height of the structure.
Feeder Line shall mean any power line that carries electrical power from one or more wind turbines or individual transformers associated with individual wind turbines to the point of interconnection with the electric power grid, in the case of interconnection with the high voltage transmission systems the point of interconnection shall be the substation serving the wind energy conversion system.
Meteorological Tower shall mean, for purposes of this regulation, a tower which is erected primarily to measure wind speed and directions plus other data relevant to siting a Wind Energy Conversion System. Meteorological towers do not include towers and equipment used by airports, the Nebraska Department of Roads, or other applications to monitor weather conditions.
Micro-Wind Energy Conversion System shall mean a Wind Energy Conversion System of 1 kW nameplate generating capacity or less and utilizing supporting towers of 40 feet or less.
Public Conservation lands shall mean land owned in fee title by State or Federal agencies and managed specifically for conservation purposes, including but not limited to State Wildlife Management Areas, State Parks, federal Wildlife Refuges and Waterfowl Production Areas. For purposes of this regulation, public conservation lands will also include lands owned in fee title by non-profit conservation organizations, Public conservation lands will also include private lands upon which conservation easements have been sold to public agencies or non-profit conservation organizations.
Rotor Diameter shall mean the diameter of the circle described by the moving rotor blades.
Small Wind Energy System shall mean a wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than 100 kW and which is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power.
Substations shall mean any electrical facility to convert electricity produced by wind turbines to a voltage greater than 35,000 (35,000 KV) for interconnection with high voltage transmission lines.
Total Height shall mean the highest point, above ground level, reached by a rotor tip or any other part of the Wind Energy Conversion System.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 117
Tower shall mean the vertical structures that support the electrical, rotor blades, or meteorological equipment.
Tower Height shall mean the total height of the Wind Energy Conversion System exclusive of the rotor blades.
Transmission Line shall mean the electrical power lines that carry voltages of at least 69,000 volts (69 KV) and are primarily used to carry electric energy over medium to long distances rather than directly interconnecting and supplying electric energy to retail customers.
Wind Energy Conservation System shall mean an electrical generating facility comprised of one or more wind turbines and accessory facilities, including but not limited to: power lines, transformers, substations and meteorological towers that operate by converting the kinetic energy of wind into electrical energy. The energy may be used on-site or distributed into the electrical grid.
Wind Turbines shall mean any piece of electrical generating equipment that converts the kinetic energy of blowing wind into electrical energy using airfoils or similar devices to capture the wind.
9.07.03 Requirements
Commercial/Utility Grade wind energy systems shall be permitted as a Conditional Use within any district where the use is listed and allowed. The following requirements and information shall be met and supplied:
1. The name(s) of project applicant.
2. The name of the project owner.
3. The legal description and address of the project.
4. A description of the project of the project including: Number, type, name plate generating capacity, tower height, rotor diameter, and total height of all wind turbines and means of interconnecting with the electrical grid.
5. Site layout, including the location of property lines, wind turbines, electrical grid, and all related accessory structures. This site layout shall include distances and be drawn to scale.
6. Engineer’s certification.
7. Documentation of land ownership or legal control of the property.
8. The latitude and longitude of individual wind turbines.
9. A USGS topographical map, or map with similar data, of the property and surrounding area, including any other Wind Energy Conversion System, within 10 rotor distances of the proposed Wind Energy Conversion System.
10. Location of wetlands, scenic, and natural areas (including bluffs) within 1,320 feet of the proposed Wind Energy Conversion System.
11. An Acoustical Analysis
12. FAA permit
13. Location of all known Communication Towers within two miles of the proposed Wind Energy Conversion System.
14. Decommissioning Plan
15. Description of potential impacts on nearby Wind Energy Conversion Systems and wind resources on adjacent properties.
9.07.04 Aggregated Projects
1. Aggregated projects may jointly submit a single application and be reviewed under joint proceedings, including notices, public hearings, reviews and as appropriate approvals.
2. Permits may be issued and recorded separately.
3. Joint projects will be assessed fees as one project.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
118 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
9.07.05 Setbacks
All towers shall adhere to the setbacks established in the following table: Wind Turbine – Commercial/Utility WECS Meteorological Towers
Property Lines
1.5 times the total height.
The greater of:
The fall zone, as certified by a professional engineer, + 10 feet or 1.1 times the total height.
Neighboring Dwelling Units*
2,000 feet
The greater of:
The fall zone, as certified by a professional engineer, + 10 feet or 1.1 times the total height.
Road
Rights-of-Way**
1.5 times the height.
The greater of:
The fall zone, as certified by a professional engineer, + 10 feet or one times the total height.
Other Rights-of-Way
The greater of:
The fall zone, as certified by a professional engineer, + 10 feet or 1.5 times the total height.
The greater of:
The fall zone, as certified by a professional engineer, + 10 feet or one times the total height.
Public conservation lands
1,000 feet
600 feet
Wetlands, USFW Types III, IV, and V
600 feet
600 feet
Other structures
The greater of:
The fall zone, as certified by a professional engineer, + 10 feet or 1.5 times the total height.
The greater of:
The fall zone, as certified by a professional engineer, + 10 feet or one times the total height.
Other existing WECS
To be considered based on:
 Relative size of the existing and proposed WECS
 Alignment of the WECS relative to the predominant winds
 Topography
 Extent of wake interference impacts on existing WECS
 Property line setback of existing WECS
 Other setbacks required
Waived for internal setbacks in multiple turbine projects including aggregated projects
* The setback for dwelling units shall be reciprocal in that no dwelling unit shall be constructed within the same distance required for a commercial/utility Wind Energy Conversion System.
** The setback shall be measured from any future Rights-of-Way if a planned change or expanded right-of-Way is known.
9.07.06 Special Safety and Design Standards
All towers shall adhere to the following safety and design standards:
1. No WECS shall be allowed to be constructed within any Airport Approach Hazard or Turning Area.
2. Clearance of rotor blades or airfoils must maintain a minimum of 12 feet of clearance between their lowest point and the ground.
3. All Commercial/Utility WECS shall have a sign or signs posted on the tower, transformer and substation, warning of high voltage. Other signs shall be posted on the turbine with emergency contact information.
4. All wind turbines, which are a part of a commercial/utility WECS, shall be installed with a tubular, monopole type tower.
5. Consideration shall be given to painted aviation warnings on all towers less than 200 feet.
6. Color and finish:
All wind turbines and towers that are part of a commercial/utility WECS shall be white, grey, or another non-obtrusive color. Blades may be black in order to facilitate deicing. Finishes shall be matte or non-reflective.
7. Lighting:
Lighting, including lighting intensity and frequency of strobe, shall adhere to but not exceed requirements established by the FAA permits and regulations. Red strobe lights shall be used during nighttime illumination to reduce impacts on neighboring uses and migratory birds. Red pulsating incandescent lights should be avoided.
8. Other signage:
All other signage shall comply with the sign regulations found in these regulations.
9. Feeder Lines:
All communications and feeder lines, equal to or less than 34.5 kV in capacity, installed as part of a WECS shall be buried, where feasible. Feeder lines installed as part of a WECS shall not be considered an essential service.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 119
10. Waste Disposal:
Solid and Hazardous wastes, including but not limited to crates, packaging materials, damaged or worn parts, as well as used oils and lubricants, shall be removed from the site promptly and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
11. Discontinuation and Decommissioning:
A WECS shall be considered a discontinued use after one year without energy production, unless a plan is developed and submitted to the Zoning Administrator outlining the steps and schedule for returning the WECS to service. All WECS and accessory facilities shall be removed to ground level within 90 days of the discontinuation of use.
Each Commercial/Utility WECS shall have a Decommissioning plan outlining the anticipated means and cost of removing WECS at the end of their serviceable life or upon being discontinued use. The cost estimates shall be made by a competent party; such as a Professional Engineer, a contractor capable of decommissioning or a person with suitable expertise or experience with decommissioning. The plan shall also identify the financial resources that will be available to pay for decommissioning and removal of the WECS and accessory facilities.
12. Noise:
No Commercial/Utility WECS shall exceed 50 dBA at the nearest structure or use.
13. Interference:
The applicant shall minimize or mitigate interference with electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, microwaves, or television signals caused by any WECS. The applicant shall notify all communication tower operators within five miles of the proposed WECS location upon application to the city/county for permits.
14. Roads:
Applicants shall:
a. Identify all county, municipal or township roads to be used for the purpose of transporting WECS, substation parts, cement, and/or equipment for construction, operation or maintenance of the WECS and obtain applicable weight and size permits from the impacted jurisdictions prior to construction.
b. Conduct a pre-construction survey, in coordination with the appropriate jurisdictions to determine existing road conditions. The survey shall include photographs and a written agreement to document the condition of the public facility.
c. Be responsible for restoring or paying damages as agreed to by the applicable jurisdiction sufficient to restore the road(s) and bridges to preconstruction conditions.
15. Drainage System:
The applicant shall be responsible for immediate repair of damage to public drainage systems stemming from construction, operation or maintenance of the WECS.
Section 9.08 Junk Yards or Salvage Yards
Junk Yards and salvage of materials may be allowed in identified districts; provided the following minimum conditions are met (additional conditions may be required depending upon the operation and the proposed location:
1. Construction and operation shall comply with the Cozad Municipal Code and any other applicable codes or requirements.
2. Receiving areas for junk or salvage material shall be designed to avoid the depositing of junk or salvage material outside a building or outside screened (solid fence) storage areas.
3. Junk yards and salvage of materials shall contain a minimum of two acres and shall not be located within a designated 100-year floodplain area as identified by the Corps of Engineers.
4. Junk or salvage material kept outside a building or buildings shall not be located closer than 500 feet from any designated State or Federal highway. Or locally designated Expressway, Major Arterial, and Other Arterial as per the State of Nebraska Department of Roads or subsequent successor agency.
5. Junk material kept outside a building or buildings shall not be located in the required front yard.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
120 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
6. Junk or salvage material kept outside a building or buildings shall be at least 100 feet from the boundaries of the I-1 zoning district and shall be at least 500 feet from the any residential district or use.
7. All motor vehicles shall have all fluids drained prior to placement within the facility.
Section 9.09 Biofuels and Distillation Facilities
The following conditions shall be met when locating a biofuels facility within the zoning jurisdiction of Cozad. The standards are intended to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of Cozad and the surrounding region.
1. Access to the facility shall be paved and connect to a hard surfaced street/road classified as an arterial.
2. If access is onto a county road or City street, the applicant must provide evidence that the paving of such highway, road or street is sufficient to carry, without damage to the roadway, the weight and size of the loads of grain and liquid and any by-product entering or leaving the facility by truck.
3. If the road or street is not capable of carrying the weight and size of the loads, then the applicant shall be required to make any necessary upgrades to the paving in order for the pavement to handle the size and weight of the loads.
4. The applicant shall be required to construct and acquire right-of-way for all turning lanes and signals necessary to handle the increase in truck traffic.
5. The facility if located adjacent to a railroad line shall have sufficient area to provide for sidings for loading and unloading raw or finished product. The sidings shall be constructed at the applicant’s expense.
6. The facility shall not be located in an area where winds and other climatic events disperse odor, steam, smoke and other discharges into the corporate limits of the City of Cozad.
7. The facility shall not be located in an area where topography impairs the dispersal of steam, smoke, or other discharges from the facility.
8. Water supply wells for the facility shall not be located within the 20-year time of travel of any municipal well.
9. The facility shall be designed to recycle, in a manner compliant with all City and state rules and regulations, a minimum of 75 percent of the water used by the facility including water used for distillation.
10. All fuel storage tanks shall be located in a manner that will not allow for contamination of any groundwater or surface water.
11. Total equipment height limited to the requirements of the zoning district.
12. All fuel storage tanks shall be within an impermeable containment levy system.
13. Site plan review required.
14. Lighting must be compliant with all applicable regulations.
15. Noise produced by facility must comply with noise ordinance regulations.
Section 9.10 Solar Panels
No solar panel shall be constructed within the residential zoning jurisdiction of the City of Cozad unless a Zoning Certificate therefore is approved and issued by the Zoning Administrator and is constructed in conformance with the state building codes and the following requirements. For those devices that include electrical, plumbing and heating constructions, the applicable permits shall also be obtained. Solar panels shall meet the following requirements.
9.10.01 Lot and Height Requirements:
Solar panels shall conform to the required front, side and rear lot setback requirements except as provided herein:
1. A solar panel which is attached to an integral part of the principal building may project two feet into the front yard; two feet into the rear yard; and two feet into the side yard.
2. A solar panel which is freestanding may be located only in the required rear yard provided it does not exceed 16-feet in height and is located not less than five feet from the rear lot line and not closer than one foot to any existing easement as measured from the closest point of the structure including its foundation and anchorage’s.
3. No freestanding solar panel shall be located in the required side yard or front yard.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 121
9.10.02 Structural Requirements:
The physical structure and connections to existing structures shall conform to the applicable state building codes.
9.10.03 Plot Plan:
The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale showing property lines, existing structures on the lot, proposed solar panel location with respect to property lines, and dimensions of the proposed solar panel.
9.10.04 Preexisting Solar Panels:
Notwithstanding noncompliance with the requirements of this section, a solar panel erected prior to the adoption of these Regulations, pursuant to a valid building permit issued by the City, may continue to be utilized so long as it is maintained in operational condition.
Section 9.11 Self-Storage Units (Mini-Warehouses)
1. Minimum lot size of the Self-Storage facility shall be 5,000 square feet.
2. Activities within the facility shall be limited to the rental of storage cubicles and the administration and maintenance of the facility.
3. All driveways, parking, loading and vehicle circulation areas shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt, asphaltic concrete, crushed rock or other approved rock other than gravel. All driveways within the facility shall provide a hard surface with a minimum width of 25 feet.
4. All storage must be within enclosed buildings and shall not include the storage of hazardous materials.
5. No storage may open into the front yards.
6. The total area covered by buildings shall not exceed 50 percent of the site.
7. The storage of hazardous, toxic, or explosive substances, including, but not limited to, hazardous waste, industrial solid waste, medical waste, municipal solid waste, septage, or used oil.
8. Facilities must maintain landscape buffer yards of 50 feet adjacent to any public Right-of-Way and 20 feet adjacent to other property lines, unless greater setbacks are required, a total of 35 percent of all yards shall be landscaped.
9. Site development shall include provisions for stormwater management in accordance with the Regulations of the City of Cozad
10. Height limitations shall require a maximum height of 20 feet for any structure in the facility.
Section 9.12 Auto Repair, Equipment Repair, and Body Repair
1. Where permitted in commercial districts, all repair activities must take place within a completely enclosed building. Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to Auto Repair and Body Repair, provided that such storage is completely screened so as not to be visible from residential areas or public rights-of-ways.
2. Any spray painting must take place within structures designed for that purpose and approved by the zoning administrator.
Section 9.13 Automobile and Equipment Rental and Sales
1. All outdoor display areas for rental and sales facilities shall be hard surfaced.
2. Body repair services are permitted as an accessory use to automobile rental and sales facilities, provided that such repair services shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the building.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
122 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 9.14 Bed and Breakfasts
9.14.01 Bed and Breakfasts shall meet the following requirements:
1. Maintain a residential exterior appearance
2. Rooms may not be rented for more than seven consecutive days and no more than 14 days per person in any 30-day period.
3. Breakfast must be served on premises and included within the room charge for guest of the facility and shall be the only meal provided.
Section 9.15 Salvage Services
1. Screening:
A. The perimeter of each new facility shall be fully enclosed by opaque, freestanding fencing or screen walls. Minimum height of this enclosure shall be eight feet. Any such enclosure shall be constructed behind required landscaped bufferyards.
B. Each existing salvage services facility shall be screened from public right-of-way as provided above within one year of the effective date of this Ordinance.
2. Storage of materials within any salvage services facility may not be higher than the height of the surrounding screen fence or wall.
3. No Salvage Services use may be established within 500 feet of the nearest property line of a residential use or of any pre-established civic use, or within 1,000 feet of the nearest property line of an R-1, R-2, or R-M District.
Section 9.16 Outdoor Storage Containers
1. Outdoor Storage Containers are subject to the regulations outlined for Accessory Buildings in Article 4, except as provided below:
A. Outdoor storage containers within each district shall be limited to two containers per business.
B. Containers shall be located to the rear 50 percent of the site.
1) Containers shall not be located in any required setback or yard area, required landscape area, required drive aisle, driveway, or parking area.
2) Containers shall not encroach upon spaces necessary to satisfy the minimum parking requirement, nor shall they block, impede, or divert traffic in or access to emergency, snow removal, and circulation and fire lanes.
3) Containers shall not be stacked upon one another and shall be located an appropriate distance from all structures, in accordance with the Fire Code.
2. Storage containers should not be visible from an adjoining property or from a public or private street. Storage containers not so located may be placed on a site if the containers are adequately screened and buffered.
A. Screening shall be provided so that the outdoor storage container is not visible or is buffered from surrounding properties or public or private streets or the container shall be architecturally compatible with the primary buildings and the nature of the business.
B. Enhanced fencing, landscaping, buffering and/or architectural treatments shall be required for visible containers.
C. Buffering may include the use of decorative design features including painting, murals, etc.
3. The exterior of the storage containers shall be kept free of rust, holes, dents, or other corrosion and shall be painted or otherwise maintains such that they are consistent with the character of adjacent buildings, and secured at all times.
4. At no time, shall an outdoor storage container be used as a place of business or residence, nor shall a container house, store, or contain goods, products, or materials other than those that are accessory and essential to daily on-site use and operation of the principal building or business requesting the special use permit.
5. Conditional use permits for storage containers shall be allowed for one year.
A. Renewals are subject to Planning Commission and Council approval.
B. Storage containers must be removed no later than five working days after the expiration of the permit.
6. Exemptions The temporary use of construction trailers or containers at a building site is exempt from this requirement.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 123
Section 9.17 Sand and Gravel, Mineral, Stone, Rock, and Soil Extraction and Quarries
It shall be unlawful for any owner or owners or property to extract, mine, quarry, or remove soil for commercial purposes without the proper permits except soil donated for use by a municipality, county, or state for public roadway purposes.
1. When soil is sold, removed, and transported to be used for public roadway purposes, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to meet the following conditions:
A. The application shall include a grading map showing contours, proposed extraction contours, and proposed final grade contours;
B. The applicant shall identify the effect of the extraction on the groundwater table of the adjoining properties;
C. Erosion controls, including retention and sediment basins shall be provided during extraction to prevent a change in the character of runoff onto adjacent land;
D. The application shall identify proposed vehicle and equipment storage areas;
E. The surface shall be maintained in such a manner that surface waters do not collect or pond, unless specifically approved. Underground drainage may be supplied if it connects to an existing facility;
F. Topsoil shall be collected and stored for redistribution on the site at termination of the operation;
G. Excavation shall be conducted in such a way as not to constitute a hazard to any persons, nor to the adjoining property. All cuts shall be returned to a slope of less than 3:1 as soon as possible. Safety screening shall be required at the outer boundary of the site; visual screening will also be required where said boundary is adjacent to residential or recreational land;
H. Within one year after completion of the excavation on any portion of the site, the topography and soils shall be stabilized, and the land shall be graded, seeded, and sodded so as to prevent erosion and siltation, and to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public;
I. The owner of the property shall obtain adequate insurance to cover any of the damages, which may occur as a result of this operation and shall assume all liability for any damages. A copy of such insurance or other proof of such insurance shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator’s office prior to issuing a Conditional Use Permit;
J. To assure that all of these conditions are met by the owner, a bond contingent on the size of the operation, removal, or extraction may be required to be posted with the City and County.
2. Exceptions
A. Sections 9.17 (1) (A-J) do not apply to removals, extractions, and operations that remove less than 100 cubic yards from a given location.
B. Sections 9.17 (1) (A-J) do not apply to owners who donate soil to a municipality, county, or state. Further, this section does not apply to sand and gravel quarries, or the commercial removal of soil not used for road purposes.
Section 9.18 Mobile Food Units
Mobile Food Units are allowed in specific zoning districts; however, these uses shall be required to abide by the following requirements:
1. All units shall be located on vacant lots or on a business lot except in the C-1 Downtown Commercial District where on-street parking may be permitted. On-street parking shall only be allowed during times of operation.
2. All units shall only operate during hours identified on the temporary permit. In no case shall a unit be open for more than one hour after the legal closing time of local bars.
3. All refuse shall be transported off-site unless an agreement with the property owner is submitted to the City identifying an alternate.
4. All units shall not be allowed to use intense lights in order to attract customers.
5. During non-operation hours, these units shall be stored on a vacant lot or in an enclosed structure.
ARTICLE 9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
124 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Section 9.19 Amateur Radio Towers and FCC Pronouncements
1. Radio towers, antennas and other appurtenances operated by licensed amateur radio operators, where permitted and when, may not exceed 75 feet in height. This height has been determined by the City to reasonably accommodate amateur service communications, and further represents the minimum practicable regulation to accomplish legitimate municipal land use regulation purpose, as recognized under published guidelines of the Federal Communications Commission.
2. Special instances may require that amateur radio tower heights exceed 75 feet to achieve effective and reliable communications. In such cases, the City Council may grant a Conditional Use Permit to a licensed amateur radio operator for a specific tower height that exceeds 75 feet. In determining whether to grant such permission, the City Council shall consider the federal guidelines contained in PRB-1 (Amateur Radio Preemption, 101 FCC 2d (1985); codified at C.F.R. Section 97.15(e).
3. Such radio towers shall not be located within any front yard of the primary use.
Section 9.20 Roadside Stands
1. A roadside stand is a facility used on a temporary or seasonal basis for the retail sale of produce grown largely on adjacent or surrounding agricultural lands.
2. A roadside stand may be located within a required front yard but no closer than 40 feet to the edge of a traveled roadway.
3. A roadside stand may operate for a maximum of 180 days in any one year.
Section 9.21 Adult Entertainment Establishments
Please see the City for specific regulations in this Section.
ARTICLE 10: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 125
Article 10: Board of Adjustment
Section 10.01 Members, Terms and Meetings
Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-908 (R.R.S. 1997): The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five regular members, plus one additional member designated as an alternate who shall attend and serve only when one of the regular members is unable to attend for any reason, each to be appointed for a term of three years and removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. One member only of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed from the membership of the Planning Commission, and the loss of membership on the Planning Commission by such member shall also result in his or her immediate loss of membership on the Board of Adjustment and the appointment of another Planning Commissioner to the Board of Adjustment. The first vacancy occurring on the Board of Adjustment shall be filled by the appointment of a person who resides in the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the City at such time as more than two hundred persons reside within such area. Thereafter, at all times, at least one member of the Board of Adjustment shall reside outside of the corporate boundaries of the City but within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance adopted pursuant to sections 19-901 to 19-914. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairperson, or in his or her absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
Section 10.02 Appeals to Board, Record of Appeal, Hearings and Stays
As provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-909 (R.R.S. 1997): Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the officer from whom appeal is taken and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record in application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties, in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
Section 10.03 Powers and Jurisdiction on Appeal
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures; and
2. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, requests for interpretation of any map, or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the Board is authorized by this Ordinance to pass; and
3. To grant variances, where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of this Ordinance, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the strict application of any regulation under this Ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardships upon the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal relating to the property, a variance from such strict
ARTICLE 10: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
126 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
No such variance shall be authorized by the Board unless it finds that:
1. The strict application of the Ordinance would produce undue hardship; and
2. Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity; and
3. The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance; and
4. The granting of such variance is based upon reasons of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of convenience, profit or caprice. No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that the condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to this Ordinance.
In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance or to effect any variation in this Ordinance.
Section 10.04 Appeals to District Court
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may appeal as provided by Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-912, (R.R.S.1997).
ARTICLE 11: AMENDMENTS AND APPLICATION PROCESS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 127
Article 11: Amendments and Application Process
Section 11.01 Purpose
The Amendment Article describes the methods by which changes may be made in the text of the Zoning Ordinance (text amendment) and/ or the official boundaries of zoning districts (rezoning).
Section 11.02 Initiation of Amendments
1. Text Amendments
Text amendments may be initiated by an applicant, the Planning Commission, or the City Council.
2. Map amendments
Map amendments nay be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent, the Planning Commission, or the City Council
Section 11.03 Amendment Application Requirements
An application for a Rezoning may be filed by the owner(s) of a property or the owners' authorized agent with the Planning Commission. The application must be filed, and all plans must be submitted, at least 14 days prior to the scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission at which the application is to be heard. The application shall include the following information:
1. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Owner, address and legal description of the property.
3. A description of the reason for the rezoning application and the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use.
4. Any graphic information, including site plans, elevations, other drawings, or other materials determined by the Planning Commission to be necessary to describe the proposed use to approving agencies. The site plan, should be drawn to scale sufficient to permit adequate review and dimensioned as necessary, showing at least the following information:
A. The date, scale, north point, title, name of owner, and name of person preparing the site plan.
B. The location and dimensions of boundary lines, easements, and required yards and setbacks of existing and proposed buildings and site improvements.
C. The location, size, and use of proposed and existing structures on the site.
D. The location of all proposed site improvements, including parking and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular access, sewers, sidewalks, utilities, service areas, fencing, screening, landscaping, and lighting.
E. Location of any major site feature, including drainage and contours at no greater than five-foot intervals.
Section 11.04 Amendment Procedures
Regulations, restrictions, and boundaries authorized to be created pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-901 to 19-915 may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed.
1. Public Hearing.
The Planning Commission and City Council shall each hold a public hearing on any proposed amendment. The Public Hearings shall be held at a reasonable hour and place for such public hearing, and they shall hold said hearings at the next regular meeting after proper notification of adjacent property owners.
2. Planning Commission Review
No amendment, supplement, change or modification of this Ordinance, including the boundaries of any zoning district, shall be made by the City Council without first the consideration by the City Planning Commission, the Commission shall submit in writing its recommendations on each amendment, supplement, change or modification to the City Council. Said recommendations shall include approval, disapproval, or other suggestions and the reasons thereof, and a discussion of the effect of each amendment, supplement, change or modification on the Comprehensive Plan. Said recommendations shall be of an advisory nature only.
ARTICLE 11: AMENDMENTS AND APPLICATION PROCESS
128 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
3. Notice of Hearings.
Public notice of hearing on a proposed amendment shall be published once in the official City newspaper and at least ten days shall elapse between the date of publication and the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and shall contain a statement regarding the proposed change in regulations or restrictions or the zoning classification or zoning district boundaries of the property.
The provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-904 relative to public hearings and official notice shall apply equally to all changes or amendments. In addition to the publication of the notice therein prescribed, a notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property on which action is pending. Such notice shall not be less than 18 inches in height and 24 inches in width with a white or yellow background and black letters not less than one and one-half inches (1-1/2) in height. Such posted notice shall be so placed upon such premises that it is easily visible from the street nearest the same and shall be so posted at least 10 days prior to the date of such hearing. It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove, mutilate, destroy, or change such posted notice prior to such hearing. Any person so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
If the record title owners of any lots included in such proposed change be nonresidents of the municipality, then a written notice of such hearing shall be mailed by certified mail to them addressed to their last-known addresses at least ten days prior to such hearing.
At the option of the legislative body of the municipality, in place of the posted notice provided above, the owners or occupants of the real estate to be zoned or rezoned and all real estate located within 300 feet of the real estate to be zoned or rezoned may be personally served with a written notice thereof at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing, if they can be served with such notice within the county where such real estate is located. Where such notice cannot be served personally upon such owners or occupants in the county where such real estate is located, a written notice of such hearing shall be mailed to such owners or occupants addressed to their last-known addresses at least 10 days prior to such hearing.
4. Protests.
In case of a protest against such change, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent on the sides and in the rear thereof extending 300 feet there from, and of those directly opposite thereto extending 300 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the legislative body of such municipality.
The provisions of this section in reference to notice shall not apply (1) in the event of a proposed change in such regulations, restrictions, or boundaries throughout the entire area of an existing zoning district or of such municipality, or (2) in the event additional or different types of zoning districts are proposed, whether or not such additional or different districts are made applicable to areas, or parts of areas, already within a zoning district of the municipality, but only the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-904 shall be applicable.
Section 11.05 Zoning Administrator
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by a Zoning Administrator as appointed by the City Council, who shall have the power to make inspection of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his or her duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
Section 11.06 Zoning Permits
The following shall apply to all new construction and all applicable renovations and remodels within Cozad’s Zoning Jurisdiction:
1. It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for the construction of any building, or any accessory buildings, or to commence the moving or alteration of any buildings, including accessory buildings, until the Zoning Administrator has issued a zoning permit for such work.
ARTICLE 11: AMENDMENTS AND APPLICATION PROCESS
COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016 129
2. Issuance of a zoning permit. In applying to the Zoning Administrator for a zoning permit, the applicant shall submit a dimensioned sketch or a scale plan indicating the shape, size and height and location of all buildings to be erected, altered or moved and of any building already on the lot. He shall also state the existing and intended use of all such buildings, and supply such other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator for determining whether the provisions of this Ordinance are being observed. If the proposed excavation or construction as set forth in the application is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, and other Ordinances of the City then in force, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a zoning permit for such excavation or construction. If a zoning permit is refused, the Zoning Administrator shall state such refusal in writing, with the cause, and shall immediately thereupon mail notice of such refusal to the applicant at the address indicated upon the application. The Zoning Administrator shall grant or deny the permit within a reasonable time from the date the application is submitted. The issuance of a permit shall, in no case, be construed as waiving any provisions of this Ordinance. A zoning permit shall become void 12 months from the date of issuance unless substantial progress has been made by that date on the project described therein.
Section 11.07 Certificate of Zoning Compliance
No land or building or part thereof hereafter erected or altered in its use or structure shall be used until the Zoning Administrator shall have issued a certificate of zoning compliance stating that such land, building or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, are found to be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. Within three days after notification that a building or premises is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to make a final inspection thereof and to issue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance if the land, building, or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are found to conform with the provisions of this Ordinance, or, if such certification is refused, to state refusal in writing, with the cause, and immediately thereupon mail notice of such refusal to the applicant at the address indicated upon the application.
Section 11.08 Penalties
Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-913, the owner or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a violation of any provisions of this Ordinance has been committed or shall exist or lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises in or upon which violation has been committed or shall exist, or the agent, architect, building contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any violation or who maintains any building or premises in or upon which such violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed 100 dollars for any one offense. Each day of non-compliance with the terms of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 11.09 Remedies
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§19-901 to 19-914, or this Ordinance, or any regulation made pursuant to said sections, the appropriate authorities of the City may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
ARTICLE 13: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
130 COZAD, NEBRASKA ■ ZONING ORDINANCE ■ 2016
Article 12: Legal Status Provisions
Section 12.01 Severability
Should any article, section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Section 12.02 Purpose of Catch Heads
The catch heads appearing in connection with the foregoing sections are inserted simply for convenience, to serve the purpose of any index and they shall be wholly disregarded by any person, officer, court or other tribunal in construing the terms and provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 12.03 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance, or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.
Section 12.04 Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication according to law.
ADOPTED AND APPROVED by the Governing Body of Cozad, Nebraska,
This _______________________day of ________________________, 2016.
(Seal)
ATTEST: __________________________________ _________________________________
City Clerk Mayor

CITY OF COZAD
DAWSON COUNTY, NEBRASKA
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
ADOPTED BY THE CITY OF COZAD, NEBRASKA
Prepared By
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2014 i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1: TITLE, PURPOSE, AND DEFINITIONS ..................................................................................... 1
SECTION 1.01 NAME AND CITATION OF TITLES ............................................................................................... 1
SECTION 1.02 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................... 1
SECTION 1.03 RULES .................................................................................................................................... 1
SECTION 1.04 DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................................... 2
ARTICLE 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS ....................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 2.01 JURISDICTION ........................................................................................................................ 6
SECTION 2.02 POWERS ................................................................................................................................ 6
SECTION 2.03 APPLICABILITY ........................................................................................................................ 6
SECTION 2.04 EXEMPTIONS .......................................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 2.05 INTERPRETATION ..................................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 2.06 CONFLICT ............................................................................................................................. 6
SECTION 2.07 ZONING PERMITS ................................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 2.08 AMENDMENTS ....................................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 2.09 MODIFICATIONS .................................................................................................................... 7
SECTION 2.10 FEES ...................................................................................................................................... 7
SECTION 2.11 APPLICABLE TO ALL SUBDIVISION REQUESTS ............................................................................. 7
ARTICLE 3: PROCEDURES ..................................................................................................................... 9
SECTION 3.01 PROCEDURE FOR FILING PRE-APPLICATION PLANS AND DATA .................................................. 9
SECTION 3.02 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT ................................................................. 9
SECTION 3.03 PRELIMINARY PLAT SPECIFICATIONS ....................................................................................... 10
SECTION 3.04 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT .......................................................................... 11
SECTION 3.05 FINAL PLAT SPECIFICATIONS .................................................................................................. 11
SECTION 3.06 VACATION OF PLAT ............................................................................................................. 12
SECTION 3.07 REPLATS .............................................................................................................................. 12
SECTION 3.08 ADMINISTRATIVE PLATS ......................................................................................................... 13
ARTICLE 4: “GHOST” PLATTING AND BUILD-THROUGH ACREAGE REQUIREMENTS ........................... 14
SECTION 4.01 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS. ....................................................... ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
SECTION 4.02 PURPOSE. ............................................................................. ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
SECTION 4.03 APPLICABILITY ........................................................................ ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
ARTICLE 5: DESIGN STANDARDS ........................................................................................................ 15
SECTION 5.01 GENERAL ............................................................................................................................ 15
SECTION 5.02 STREETS ............................................................................................................................... 15
SECTION 5.03 DEDICATION OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR NEW STREETS .............................................................. 15
SECTION 5.04 DEDICATION OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR EXISTING STREETS ......................................................... 15
SECTION 5.05 FRONTAGE ROADS .............................................................................................................. 15
SECTION 5.06 INTERSECTIONS ..................................................................................................................... 16
SECTION 5.07 CURVES IN STREETS; HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL ................................................................... 16
SECTION 5.08 STREET GRADES AND ELEVATIONS ......................................................................................... 16
SECTION 5.09 ACCESS CONTROL .............................................................................................................. 16
SECTION 5.10 STREET JOGS........................................................................................................................ 16
SECTION 5.11 CUL-DE-SAC STREETS............................................................................................................ 16
SECTION 5.12 STREET NAMES ..................................................................................................................... 16
SECTION 5.13 PRIVATE STREETS AND RESERVE STRIPS .................................................................................... 17
SECTION 5.14 ALLEYS ................................................................................................................................ 17
SECTION 5.15 WATER LINES AND HYDRANTS ............................................................................................... 17
SECTION 5.16 WATER MAINS AND SEWER MAINS ........................................................................................ 17
SECTION 5.17 SIDEWALKS .......................................................................................................................... 17
SECTION 5.18 BLOCKS............................................................................................................................... 17
SECTION 5.19 LOTS ................................................................................................................................... 17
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2014 ii
SECTION 5.20 THROUGH LOTS .................................................................................................................... 17
SECTION 5.21 EASEMENTS .......................................................................................................................... 17
SECTION 5.22 STORM SEWER SYSTEM .......................................................................................................... 18
SECTION 5.23 FLOOD HAZARDS ................................................................................................................. 18
SECTION 5.24 CONFORMANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS ......................................................................... 18
SECTION 5.25 SCHEDULE A: MINIMUM STREET STANDARDS .......................................................................... 18
ARTICLE 6: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS .............................................................................................. 19
SECTION 6.01 GENERAL ............................................................................................................................ 19
SECTION 6.02 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS ................................................................................................ 19
SECTION 6.03 STREET GRADING, CONSTRUCTION AND SURFACE TYPE.......................................................... 19
SECTION 6.04 STREET SIGNS, LIGHTING AND ELECTRICAL POWER ................................................................. 20
SECTION 6.05 LANDSCAPE SCREENS .......................................................................................................... 20
SECTION 6.06 DRAINAGE .......................................................................................................................... 20
SECTION 6.07 SANITARY SEWERS. ............................................................................................................... 21
SECTION 6.08 WATER MAINS. .................................................................................................................... 22
SECTION 6.09 COST OF OVER-SIZE IMPROVEMENTS. .................................................................................... 22
SECTION 6.10 EXTENSION TO BOUNDARIES. ................................................................................................. 22
SECTION 6.11 OFF-SITE EXTENSIONS. .......................................................................................................... 23
SECTION 6.12 LAND PREPARATION............................................................................................................. 23
ARTICLE 7: DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS ON PUBLIC LAND .................................................... 24
SECTION 7.01 DEDICATION ........................................................................................................................ 24
ARTICLE 8: WAIVERS AND ANNEXATIONS ......................................................................................... 25
SECTION 8.01 GRANTING OF WAIVERS (EXCEPTIONS) AND CONDITIONS ..................................................... 25
SECTION 8.02 SUBDIVISION; ANNEXATION OF ADJOINING OR CONTIGUOUS PROPERTIES .............................. 25
SECTION 8.03 AMENDMENTS ..................................................................................................................... 25
ARTICLE 9: ADMINSTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ............................................................................ 26
SECTION 9.01 GENERAL ............................................................................................................................ 26
SECTION 9.02 AMENDMENTS ..................................................................................................................... 26
SECTION 9.03 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES ................................................................................................... 26
ARTICLE10: CERTIFICATION AND DEDICATION STATEMENTS ............................................................ 27
SECTION 10.01 NOTARY PUBLIC ACKNOWLEDGMENT ................................................................................... 27
SECTION 10.02 SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATION ................................................................................................. 27
SECTION 10.03 APPROVAL OF COZAD PLANNING COMMISSION .................................................................. 27
SECTION 10.04 ACCEPTANCE BY COZAD CITY COUNCIL .............................................................................. 28
SECTION 10.05 ACCEPTANCE BY DAWSON COUNTY REGISTER OF DEEDS ...................................................... 28
SECTION 10.06 REVIEW OF DAWSON COUNTY SURVEYOR ............................................................................. 28
SECTION 10.07 DAWSON COUNTY TREASURER’S CERTIFICATIONS .................................................................. 28
SECTION 10.08 ADMINISTRATIVE PLAT APPROVAL ......................................................................................... 29
SECTION 10.09 OWNERS CERTIFICATION ...................................................................................................... 29
ARTICLE 11: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS ............................................................................................ 30
SECTION 11.01 SEPARABILITY ....................................................................................................................... 30
SECTION 11.02 PURPOSE OF CATCH HEADS ................................................................................................. 30
SECTION 11.03 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES ................................................................................ 30
SECTION 11.04 EFFECTIVE DATE ................................................................................................................... 30
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 1
ARTICLE 1: TITLE, PURPOSE, AND DEFINITIONS
Section 1.01 Name and Citation of Titles
These regulations shall be known, referred to and cited as "The Subdivision Regulations of Cozad, Nebraska.”
Section 1.02 Purpose
The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the orderly development of Cozad and its jurisdiction. This will be done through prescribed rules and standards establishing functional arrangements of street layouts; open spaces; and adequate community facilities and utilities. These Subdivision Regulations will coordinate development with the City's transportation, land use and capital facilities plans, and will provide conditions favorable for the health, safety and convenience of the community, in accordance with applicable State Statutes.
Section 1.03 Rules
For the purpose of this ordinance the following rules shall apply:
Words and numbers used singularly shall include the plural. Words and numbers used in the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
The word “persons” includes a corporation, members of a partnership or other business organization, a committee, Board, commission, trustee, receiver, agent or other representative.
The word “shall” is mandatory, the word “may” is permissive.
The words “use,” “used,” “occupy,” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words “intended,” “arranged,” or “designed” to be used or occupied.
The word “Commission” shall refer to the Planning Commission of the City of Cozad, Nebraska.
Undefined words or terms not herein defined shall have their ordinary meaning in relation to the context.
Each gender shall include the other.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 2
Section 1.04 Definitions
For the purpose of these regulations, certain words used herein are defined as follows:
ALLEY shall mean a public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon.
APPLICANT shall mean the owner or duly designated representative of land proposed to be subdivided, or for which a special use permit, conditional use permit, temporary use permit, zoning amendment, variance, appeal, building permit, or certificate of occupancy and other similar administrative permits has been requested. Consent shall be required from the legal owner or his legal representative in writing except for building permits.
BLOCK shall mean a parcel of land platted into lots and bounded by public streets or by waterways, right-of-ways, non-platted land, City or County boundaries, or adjoining property lines.
BOND shall mean any form of security including a cash deposit, security bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the City Council which meets the intent of such security required by this Ordinance.
BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT shall mean the transfer of property by deed to a respective owner or owners of contiguous property for the purpose of adjusting a boundary line and not for the purpose of creating an additional lot or parcel.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE shall mean the required zoning distance between a building and the lot line.
CITY mean the City of Cozad, Nebraska. Also, “City Council” or “Governing Body.”
CITY COUNCIL shall mean the Cozad City Council.
CITY ENGINEER shall mean the City Engineer as hired or appointed by the Mayor and City Council or his/her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
CLERK shall mean the City Clerk of the City of Cozad, Nebraska.
COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN shall mean the Comprehensive Development Plan of Cozad, Nebraska as adopted by the City Council, setting forth policies for the present and foreseeable future community welfare as a whole and meeting the purposes and requirements set forth in the Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-903 (R.R.S.1997).
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL shall mean approval of a subdivision which requires the subdivider to take certain specified action in order to secure approval of the subdivision. The Resolution approving a subdivision shall specify the condition to be met and the time by which the condition is to be met.
CUL-DE-SAC shall mean a short public way with one end open to traffic and the other end terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
DEAD END STREET shall mean a public way which has only one outlet for vehicular traffic and does not terminate in a vehicular turn-around.
DEDICATION shall mean the intentional appropriation of land by the owner to some public use.
DESIGN shall mean the location of streets, alignment of streets, grades and widths of streets, alignment of easements, grades and widths of easements, alignment and rights-of-way for drainage and sanitary sewers, topographical changes and the designation of minimum lot area, width and length.
DEVELOPER See "Subdivider".
EASEMENT shall mean a grant, made by a property owner, to the use of his or her land by the public, a corporation, or persons, for specific purposes, such as access to another property or the construction of utilities, drainage ways or roadways.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 3
FLOOD shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters, or (2) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any sources.
FLOOD PLAIN shall mean any land designated by the Nebraska Natural Resources Commission, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency that is susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
FLOODWAY shall mean the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
FRONTAGE ROAD shall mean minor streets parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways, which reduce the number of access points to the arterial street or highway for the purpose of increased traffic safety.
IMPROVEMENTS shall mean street grading, street surfacing and paving, curbs and gutters, street lights, street signs, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, water meters, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm drainage facilities, culverts, bridges, public utilities, or other such installation as designated by the City Council or its specific approving authority.
LOT shall mean a parcel or tract of land which is or may be occupied by a use herein permitted, together with yards, and other open spaces herein required, that has frontage upon an improved street, and is a part of a recorded subdivision plat or has been recorded prior to the adoption of the Regulation, or a parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey, lot-split or sub-parceling map as filed in the office of the Dawson County Register of Deeds and abutting at least one improved public street or right-of-way, two thoroughfare easements, or one improved private road.
LOT, CORNER shall mean a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the angle is greater than 135 degrees, the lot shall be considered an "Interior Lot". The setbacks for a front yard shall be met on all abutting streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE, or THROUGH shall mean a lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, FLAG shall mean an interior lot, the majority of which has frontage and access provided by means of a narrow corridor.
LOT, INTERIOR shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 4
LOT CONSOLIDATION shall mean a method for approval of lot boundary adjustments which reduces the number of lots to not greater than two.
LOT DEPTH shall mean the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE shall mean the side of a lot abutting on a legally accessible street right-of-way other than an alley or an improved county road. For the purposes of this definition, on corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets or roads shall be considered frontage.
LOT LINE shall mean the property line bounding a lot.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA shall mean the minimum square footage of land area occupied, or to be occupied by a single principal building and accessory buildings as applicable to designated zoning districts.
LOT, NONCONFORMING shall mean a lot having less area or dimension than that required in the district in which it is located and which was lawfully created prior to the zoning thereof whereby the larger area or dimension requirements were established, or any lot, other than one shown on a plat recorded in the office of the Dawson County Register of Deeds, which does not abut a public road or public road right-of-way and which was lawfully created prior to the effective date of this Regulation.
LOT, PLATTED shall mean a lot which is part of a subdivision of the plat of which, or the appropriate permit for which, has been legally approved by the City and recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Dawson County.
LOT COMBINATION shall mean a method for approval of lot boundary adjustments or lot reductions, which reduces the number of lots to not greater than two.
LOT OF RECORD shall mean the average horizontal distance between the side lot line, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT SPLIT shall mean a subdivision of land involving the division of one lot into two lots.
LOT WIDTH shall mean the minimum street frontage measured along the front street property line except when a lot fronts on the inside or concave side of a horizontal curvilinear alignment of a street or on a corner lot; in which case, the minimum lot width shall be measured along the front building line of the principal use structure extended to both lot property lines.
MONUMENT shall mean an identification marker established by certified land survey and set by a registered land surveyor at each section corner, angle point, block corner, street centerline, or other point.
OPEN SPACE shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, primarily set aside for recreational use and enjoyment, exclusive of land areas used for streets, alleys, roads, driveways, parking areas, structures, and buildings.
PEDESTRIAN WAY shall mean a right-of-way or easement dedicated to public use, which cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties.
PLANNING COMMISSION shall mean the Planning Commission of Cozad, Nebraska.
PLAT shall mean a map showing the location, boundaries, and legal description of individual properties.
PLAT, FINAL shall mean the Final Plat of the plat, subdivision or dedication of land prepared for filing or recording in conformance with these regulations.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY shall mean the preliminary plan of the plat, subdivision or dedication prepared in accordance with the requirements of these regulations.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 5
PLAT OF RECORD shall mean a map prepared in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and any other applicable local regulations to be placed on record in the office of the Register of Deeds of Dawson County.
REPLAT shall mean the further subdivision of a lot or parcel of land previously subdivided, whether the re-subdivision results in more lots or fewer lots.
STREET shall mean a public thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded, or condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except as excluded in this Regulation.
STREET, ARTERIAL shall mean a street designed with the primary function of efficient movement of through traffic between and around areas of a City or county with controlled access to abutting property.
STREET, COLLECTOR shall mean a street or highway, which is intended to carry traffic from minor streets to major streets. Collector streets are usually the principal entrance streets to residential developments and the streets for circulation within the development.\
STREET, CURVILINEAR shall mean local streets that deviate from straight alignment and change direction without sharp corners or bends.
STREET, LOCAL shall mean a street designed for local traffic that provides direct access to abutting residential, commercial, or industrial properties.
STREET, LOOPED shall mean a continuous local street without intersecting streets and having its two outlets connected to the same street.
STREET, MAJOR shall mean a street or highway used primarily for fast or high volume traffic, including expressways, freeways, boulevards, and arterial streets.
STREET, PRIVATE shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a street or alley dedicated to the public, but permanently established as the principal means of vehicular access to abutting properties. The term "private street" includes the term "place".
SUBDIVIDER shall mean any person, group, corporation, partnership, or other entity, or any agency thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision.
SUBDIVISION shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, of transfer of ownership or building development, whether immediate or future, provided that the smallest lot created by the division is 10 acres or less in size.
SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT shall mean an agreement between a subdivider and the City that clearly establishes the subdivider’s responsibility regarding project phasing, the provision of public and private facilities and improvements, and any other mutually agreed to terms and requirements.
TURNAROUND shall mean a space on private property that permits the turning around of any passenger vehicle without the necessity of using any public right-of-way to turn around.
WAIVER shall mean permission to depart from the requirements of an ordinance with respect to the submission of required documents.
ZONING DISTRICT shall mean an area delineated on a zoning map for which uniform use regulations are specified.
ZONING ORDINANCE shall mean the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cozad, as amended from time to time.
ZONING PERMIT shall mean any permit required by the City and issued by the Zoning Administrator, to be obtained by any person engaged in any activity governed by the regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 6
ARTICLE 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 2.01 Jurisdiction
The provisions of these regulations shall apply to all land located within the legal boundaries of the City of Cozad, as the same may be amended by subsequent annexation, and shall also include all land lying within one mile of the corporate limits of the City, and not located in any other municipality.
Section 2.02 Powers
No plat of a subdivision of land lying within the jurisdiction of the City shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been submitted to and a report and recommendation thereon made by the Planning Commission to the City Council and the City Council has approved the Final Plat.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, or person having control of any land within the corporate limits of the City, or within the area shown on the Official Zoning Map, to subdivide land except in accordance with Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-916 (R.R.S.1997) and the provisions of that title; provided, however, that any subdivision of land caused by the acquisition of land by the federal government, the state of Nebraska, any County, the City, or any Village incorporated or unincorporated, within the jurisdiction of the City, shall be deemed to have received approval pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-916 (R.R.S.1997).
Section 2.03 Applicability
Any plat, hereafter made, for each subdivision or each part thereof lying within the jurisdiction of this ordinance, shall be prepared, presented for approval, and recorded as herein prescribed. The regulations contained herein shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, or other division of land for the purpose of sale or development, whether immediate or future, including the subdivision or replatting of land or lots, except that the division of land when the smallest parcel created is more than 10 acres in area shall be exempt from these regulations. Further, the regulations set forth by this ordinance shall be minimum regulations, which shall apply uniformly throughout the jurisdiction of this ordinance except as hereinafter provided.
Section 2.04 Exemptions
These regulations shall not apply in the following instances: 1) The division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels or tracts of more than ten acres, 2) A change in the boundary between adjoining lands which does not create an additional or substandard lot but only after review and approval by the governing body, 3) Land used for street or railroad right-of-way, a drainage easement or other public utilities subject to local, state or federal regulations, where no new street or easement of access is involved, and 4) Any transfer by operation of law.
Section 2.05 Interpretation
In interpreting and applying these regulations, they shall be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare.
Section 2.06 Conflict
No Final Plat of land shall be approved unless it conforms to the Subdivision Regulations contained herein. Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in the Zoning Regulations, Building Regulations, or other official regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive shall apply.
Section 2.07 Zoning Permits
Unless a tract shall have been platted in accordance with the provisions of this Article, no zoning permit shall be issued.
Section 2.08 Amendments
Any provisions of these regulations may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed by the governing body; provided, however, that such amendments shall not become effective until after a study by the Planning Commission; and a public hearing in relation thereto has been held, public notice of which shall have been published in a newspaper of general circulation at least one time, 10 days prior to such hearing.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 7
Section 2.09 Modifications
Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this regulation would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography, or other such non-self-inflicted conditions, or that these conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of these regulations, the City Council, after report from the Planning Commission, may vary, modify, or waive the requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, however, that: such, modifications or waiver will not adversely affect the development, the character of which shall be in conformance with recommended platting and development practices in the general area of the proposed subdivision; will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the regulations; and, will not interfere with carrying out the Comprehensive Development Plan of the Planning Area of the City. The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified by the Governing Body after report by the Planning Commission in the case of a planned development or a redevelopment project involving the re-subdividing and rebuilding of blighted or slum areas; provided, however, that the placement of structures within the area is shown on the development plan and becomes a part of the recorded plat.
Section 2.10 Fees
All fees regarding the subdivision procedure shall be set by a separate ordinance or resolution. The developer shall be responsible for all review and inspection fees regarding a subdivision.
Section 2.11 Applicable to all Subdivision Requests
2.11.01 General. The provision of this Article shall apply to all subdivision requests regardless of the procedure used to secure approval, unless otherwise specifically noted.
2.11.02 Zoning and Occupancy Permits. No official of the City shall issue either a zoning permit or occupancy permit on any property which does not comply with the zoning and subdivision regulations of the City of Cozad. The issuance of any zoning permit or occupancy permit does not relieve the owner thereof from compliance with all of the terms and conditions of the Subdivision Regulations, including improvements and subdivision design. It is the duty and obligation of the owner of the property to ensure compliance with the Ordinances of the City.
2.11.03 Improvements Warranty and Guarantee. Upon approval of the subdivision, and prior to filing the subdivision with the Register of Deeds, the subdivider shall provide a warranty to the City for all workmanship and materials used for one year from the date of acceptance, and a guarantee for the construction for all improvements required by this Ordinance.
2.11.04 Performance bond. Upon approval of the subdivision, and prior to filing the subdivision with the Register of Deeds, the subdivider shall surrender to the City possession of a performance bond. Said bond shall be in an amount adequate to cover 110 percent of the cost of the design, construction, and installation of all improvements shown on the Final Plat, as established by the subdivider and accepted by the City Council upon recommendation of the City Engineer. No officer of the City is authorized to sign any document indicating approval of any subdivision application until the filing and acceptance of a satisfactory performance bond. Said performance bond shall be either issued by a reputable insurance company licensed to issue such bonds in the State of Nebraska, or a cash bond. Where a cash bond is used, the subdivider or owner may present a Certificate of Deposit issued in the subdivider’s or owner’s name and federal identification number for a term not to exceed six months, which shall be endorsed payable to the City of Cozad, Nebraska and which shall be attached to a bond form.
2.11.05 Time for Construction of Improvements. Regardless of the subdivision procedure utilized, unless otherwise specified in the document approving the subdivision, required improvements will be constructed as follows:
1. Prior to the issuance of any zoning permit for any land within the subdivision, all streets, sanitary sewer mains, water supply mains, natural gas mains, electricity and telephone trunk lines and cable television trunk lines, street signs, permanent survey monuments, bench marks, and street lights shall be installed and completed by the subdivider, operating and approved as provided in the Subdivision Regulations.
2. Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any structure within the subdivision, all sidewalks, street trees, and storm drainage shall be installed and completed by the subdivider, operating and approved as provided in the Subdivision Regulations, provided that if storm drainage on other
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 8
property is required in order to provide proper functioning of storm drainage on the property in question, such additional storm drainage shall also be completed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
2.11.06 Title and Taxes. At the time of the filing of the application for a subdivision, the subdivider shall provide evidence of title and evidence that all taxes and special assessments have been paid on the land which is the subject of the subdivision application.
2.11.07 Approval Resolution. Passage of the Resolution approving any subdivision request requires a majority of the City Council. The resolution of approval shall contain a statement of all improvements required and the schedule by which improvements are to be completed if different in any way from the schedule set forth in the Subdivision Regulations. The type of bond posted to secure design and construction of required improvements shall also be identified.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 9
ARTICLE 3: PROCEDURES
Section 3.01 Procedure for Filing Pre-application Plans and Data
3.01.01 Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a Preliminary Plat the subdivider shall submit to the Planning Commission plans and data in sketch form showing ideas for the proposed subdivision of land. The sketch plan shall include:
1 The proposed tentative layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing streets, utilities, topography and other conditions.
2 A general location map showing the proposed subdivision and its relationship to existing abutting subdivisions and community facilities in the area, such as streets, alleys, schools, parks, commercial areas and other data supplementing the plans which outline or describe all of the proposed development as it relates to existing conditions.
3.01.02 These pre-application plans and data shall not require a formal application fee. After discussion with the subdivider and review of the data, the Planning Commission will inform the subdivider whether such plans and data submitted meet the objectives of these regulations and shall describe any inconsistencies with the requirements of this Ordinance. With the concurrence of the developer, a Public Hearing date will be set for the consideration of the Preliminary Plat.
Section 3.02 Procedure for Approval of Preliminary Plat
Before any subdivider or agent contracts for the sale or offers to sell any subdivision of land or any part thereof, which is wholly or partly within the City of Cozad or which is within a one-mile limit of the City of Cozad or which is proposed to be annexed, the subdivider or his agent shall file a Preliminary Plat of said subdivision with the Cozad Planning Commission. The Preliminary Plat shall be prepared in accordance with the regulations set forth herein, and shall be submitted to the Planning Commission prior to the completion of final surveys of streets and lots and before the start of grading or construction work upon the proposed streets and lots and before any map of said subdivision is made in a form suitable for recording. The Planning Commission shall determine whether the plat is in proper form and shall not receive and consider such plat as filed until it is submitted in accordance with the requirements hereof. The street layout shall be in conformity with a plan for the most advantageous development of the entire neighboring area and in conformity with the Comprehensive Development Plan.
All plats, preliminary and final, shall be prepared in conformance with the provisions of these regulations and in conformance with the Comprehensive Development Plan and Zoning Ordinance. The subdivider shall be responsible for such conformance.
A total of 20 Copies of the Preliminary Plat and required supplementary material as specified in Section 3.03 of these regulations shall be submitted to the City Clerk at least 31 days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. The Clerk shall distribute one copy of the Preliminary Plat with a request for comments to each of the following: City Engineer, School Board, Fire District, Law Enforcement, Dawson County if the subdivision is located outside the corporate limits, and to whomever else deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission will consider the Preliminary Plat at a public hearing, after proper notice, and will (1) review the Preliminary Plat and other material submitted for conformity to these regulations and (2) review any recommendations of the City Engineer, School Board, Fire Department, Police Department, Dawson County and other Agencies and (3) recommend to the subdivider changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by subdivider. The Planning Commission shall act on the plat as submitted. The Planning Commission may (1) approve with no conditions and forward to the City Council, (2) conditionally approve and state the conditions of such approval, or (3) disapprove and state the reasons for such disapproval.
The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on or attached to two copies of the Preliminary Plat. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the Planning Commission.
Upon a Planning Commission recommendation of approval or disapproval, the clerk shall set a date and time for a public hearing before the City Council along with proper notice thereof. The notice must be published at least 10 days prior to the hearing in a paper of general circulation in the City of Cozad. The City Council shall act on the Preliminary Plat as submitted, and may (1) concur with the Planning Commission's recommendation; (2) reverse the Planning Commission's recommendation; or (3) refer the Preliminary Plat back to the Planning Commission for reconsideration with specific instructions.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 10
Procedure for approval of Preliminary Plats of land within one mile of the corporate limits shall be the same, except that one copy of the Preliminary Plat shall be referred to Dawson County with a request for their recommendations to be submitted to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall not take final action on the Plat prior to receiving recommendations from Dawson County. If no recommendation is received within 30 days, the Preliminary Plat shall be deemed approved by Dawson County.
Conditional approval of a Preliminary Plat shall not constitute an acceptance of the plat, but shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the Preliminary Plat, as modified by any required conditions. Approval of a Preliminary Plat shall not constitute approval of the Final Plat. Rather, the Preliminary Plat shall be deemed an expression of approval of the general design concept and serves as an acceptable guide for the preparation of the Final Plat. Approval of the Preliminary Plat shall become void after 12 months from the date of such approval.
Section 3.03 Preliminary Plat Specifications
The Preliminary Plat shall be drawn to a scale of one inch to 100 feet; shall be plainly marked “Preliminary Plat” and shall include, show, or be accompanied by the following information:
1. A location map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding developments with a north arrow, scale and legend.
2. The proposed name of the subdivision, designated as “__________ Addition to the City of Cozad, Nebraska”, which must not be as similar to an existing subdivision as to cause confusion.
3. The names and addresses of the owner and subdivider, and any engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect responsible for the Preliminary Plat.
4. The legal description of the area being platted, boundary lines and dimensions, the location of monuments found or set, section lines, and the approximate acreage of the proposed development.
5. The width and location of platted streets and alleys within or adjacent to the property.
6. The physical features of the property, including location of water courses, ravines, bridges, culverts, present structures and other features affecting the subdivision; contours with intervals of five feet or less; the location of all existing utilities with their sizes indicated, as well as flow lines; elevations of existing sanitary and storm sewer, the outline of wooded areas (the location of important individual trees may be required), and any floodway, floodplain, and flood fringe areas.
7. The proposed lot layout, lot and block numbers, and approximate lot dimensions and square footage and grounds proposed to be dedicated for public use.
8. The location and width of proposed streets, easements, building setback lines, rights-of-way, pavement widths and type, sidewalks, alleys, location of all proposed improvements including: sanitary sewers (including proposed flow lines), water mains, storm water drainage and other features and improvements required by these regulations.
9. The existing and proposed zoning classification and proposed uses of land within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
10. The subdivider shall submit a complete list of the names and mailing addresses of all owners of record of all land within 300 feet of the perimeter of the property being proposed for subdivision.
11. Names of adjacent subdivisions together with arrangement of streets and lots.
12. One draft copy of the Subdivision Agreement including any requests for waivers from the requirements of this Ordinance.
13. The subdivider or subdivider’s representative shall be in attendance at the Planning Commission meeting when Preliminary Plat is discussed.
14. Two copies of the following, prepared by a registered professional engineer, to be delivered to the City Engineer for review:
a) A sanitary sewer plan.
b) A drainage plan, pursuant to Section 6.06.
c) A street profile plan with a statement of proposed street improvements.
d) A water distribution plan.
e) A traffic impact analysis.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 11
Section 3.04 Procedure for Approval of Final Plat
The Final Plat shall conform to the Preliminary Plat as approved and may be comprised of only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the subdivider proposed to record and develop at the time. The Final Plat shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval at least 31 days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. One original and 20 copies of the original shall be prepared as specified in these regulations.
The Final Plat shall be submitted to the City Council for approval and adoption prior to the start of construction. The City Council shall consider the Final Plat at their regular meeting, in a public hearing advertised by published notice at least 10 days prior to the hearing in a paper of general circulation in the City of Cozad. Final approval by the City Council shall be by Ordinance only after receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission together with a letter stating that the subdivider has complied with the requirements of this Ordinance. Upon approval of the Final Plat, a certification of approval by the City Council shall be endorsed thereon by the City Clerk, and the original shall be filed with the Dawson County Clerk, one copy shall be filed with the City Clerk.
Section 3.05 Final Plat Specifications
After approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall prepare and submit to the Planning Commission a Final Plat prepared by a registered land surveyor. The Final Plat, in conformance with the approved Preliminary Plat, shall include:
1. The name of subdivision.
2. The date and a north arrow and graphic scale.
3. An accurate boundary survey of the property, with bearings and distances, referenced to section lines and/or adjacent subdivisions. The boundary survey shall meet or exceed the "Minimum Standards For Surveys", as established by the Professional Surveyors Association of Nebraska.
4. A legal description of the perimeter of the subdivision.
5. The location and names of adjacent subdivisions, streets, alleys and any easements.
6. Location and names or numbers of lots, streets, easements, public highways, alleys and other features, with accurate bearings and distances. At a minimum all curves shall be identified with the following data; radius, arc distance, chord distance and chord bearing. It is intended that enough information be shown, so the subdivision can be reestablished on the ground.
7. Location and description of all permanent monuments set. At a minimum all monuments shall be made of iron pipe or iron rod, or some other material capable of being detected by commonly used magnetic locators. Monuments shall have a minimum diameter of five-eighths (5/8) inch and minimum length of 24 inches.
8. A notarized owner’s certification statement signed and acknowledged by all parties having any titled interest in, or lien upon the land to be subdivided, consenting to the Final Plat, including the dedication of parts of the land for streets, easements, and other purposes, pursuant to Article 5 of this document.
9. A notarized surveyor’s statement signed and acknowledged by a registered land surveyor, pursuant to Sections 6.02 and 10.02.
10. A signature block for the Dawson County Treasurer stating there are no regular or special taxes due or delinquent against the platted land, pursuant to Section 10.07.
11. A signature block for the approval of the Planning Commission, pursuant to Section 10.03.
12. A signature block for the approval of the City Council, to be signed by the Mayor and attested to by the City Clerk, pursuant to Section 10.04.
13. A signature block for the Dawson County Register of Deeds, pursuant to Section 10.05.
14. A signature block for the Dawson County Surveyor, pursuant to Section 10.02.
15. A performance bond pursuant to Section 2.11.
16. One copy of any private restrictions or covenants affecting the subdivision or any part thereof, if applicable.
17. One copy of any construction plans and specifications.
18. Three original copies of the Subdivision Agreement with a signature block for the Mayor and attestation of the City Clerk.
19. One electronic copy for incorporation into the official maps of the City of Cozad.
20. Two copies of the following, prepared by a registered professional engineer, to be delivered to the City Engineer for review:
a) A sanitary sewer plan.
b) A drainage plan, pursuant to Section 6.06.
c) A street profile plan with a statement of proposed street improvements.
d) A water distribution plan.
e) A traffic impact analysis.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 12
Section 3.06 Vacation of Plat
3.06.01 Applicability: An owner or owners of a plat may make application to the Planning Commission to vacate any plat under the following conditions:
1. The Plat to be vacated is a duly recorded Final Plat or Replat.
2. The vacation of the subdivision will not interfere with development of, nor deny access via public thoroughfare to, adjoining properties or utility services or other improvements.
3.06.02 Procedures: The owner or owners shall present a proposal to the Planning Commission, containing the legal description of the subdivision and calling for vacation thereof. The Planning Commission shall study the proposal and shall send recommendations to the City Council. The City Council shall approve or deny the proposal. If the proposal is approved (approved by ordinance), it shall then be recorded in the office of the Dawson County Register of Deeds. The subdivider shall pay all fees for the recording of such vacation. If the proposal is disapproved, the City Council shall state which of the reasons stated in Section 3.06.01 require such disapproval. The applicant shall be allowed to submit a new application upon a showing that the reason or reasons for disapproval have been corrected.
Section 3.07 Replats
3.07.01 Whenever a Replat of an existing subdivision results in 10 or fewer lots, the Planning Commission may waive the separate submission requirements for the Preliminary and Final Plats to expedite the subdivision review process if, in the judgment of the Planning Commission, separate submission will not serve the public interest and will not conflict with the intent of these regulations. Concurrent Plats shall:
1. Be discussed with the Planning Commission at a scheduled pre-application Conference pursuant to Section 3.01.
2. Be submitted to the City Clerk at least 31 days prior to the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission at which request is to be heard.
3. Be accompanied by the applications fees and completed application forms as required.
4. Follow the procedure set forth for herein and contain the required Preliminary and Final Plat information.
5. Include a drainage plan showing how run-off generated by the proposed development impacts drainage on downstream drainage systems.
3.07.02 Disapproval of Replats shall be based on the following guidelines:
1. A new street or alley is needed or proposed.
2. Vacations of streets, alleys, setback lines, access control or easements are required or proposed.
3. Such action will result in significant increases in service requirements, e.g., utilities, schools, traffic control, streets, etc.: or will interfere with maintaining existing service levels, e.g., additional curb cuts, repaving, etc.
4. There is less street right-of-way than required by this Ordinance or the Comprehensive Development Plan unless such dedication can be made by separate instrument.
5. All easement requirements have not been satisfied.
6. Such action taken during a replat will result in a tract without direct access to a street.
7. A substandard-sized lot or parcel will be created.
3.07.03 Changes required by the Planning Commission, during the Planning Commission’s public hearing, shall be made prior to submission to the City Council. Replats shall be submitted to the City Clerk prior to the start of construction and at least 15 days prior to the next regular meeting of the City Council. The City Council shall review and act on the Replat at a public hearing. Notice for such hearing shall be posted at least 10 days prior to the hearing in a paper of general circulation in the City of Cozad. The City Council shall, in writing, either approve the Replat with or without conditions, or disapprove the Replat and state the reasons thereof.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 13
Section 3.08 Administrative Plats
3.08.01 The intent of this section is to provide for lots splits, lot combinations, and boundary adjustments which result in lots divided or combined into not more than two tracts without having to re-plat said lot, provided that the resulting lots shall not again be divided without re-platting. The Zoning Administrator shall review the administrative plat application and make a final determination. The Zoning Administrator may approve or disapprove administrative plats in accordance with the following regulations.
3.08.02 Requests for an Administrative Plat approval shall be made by the owner or a designated representative of the land to the Zoning Administrator. Two copies on paper of the Administrative Plat shall include the following:
1. A survey of the lot(s).
2. Location and precise nature of any structures located thereon, if any.
3. Location and dimensions of the proposed administrative plat.
4. A notarized surveyor’s statement signed and acknowledged by a registered land surveyor, pursuant to Sections 6.02 and 10.02.
5. A signature block for the Dawson County Register of Deeds, pursuant to Section 10.05.
6. A signature block for the Dawson County Surveyor, pursuant to Section 10.02.
7. A signature block for the Dawson County Treasurer stating there are no regular or special taxes due or delinquent against the platted land, pursuant to Section 10.07.
8. A signature block for the approval and signature of the Zoning Administrator and the Mayor and attested to by the City Clerk, pursuant to Section 10.08.
3.08.03 Disapproval of administrative plats shall be based on the following guidelines:
1. A new street or alley is needed or proposed.
2. Vacations of streets, alleys, setback lines, access control or easements are required or proposed.
3. Such action will result in significant increases in service requirements, e.g., utilities, schools, traffic control, streets, etc.: or will interfere with maintaining existing service levels, e.g., additional curb cuts, repaving, etc.
4. There is less street right-of-way than required by this Ordinance or the Comprehensive Development Plan unless such dedication can be made by separate instrument.
5. All easement requirements have not been satisfied.
6. Such action taken during an administrative plat will result in a tract without direct access to a street.
7. A substandard-sized lot or parcel will be created.
8. The lot has been previously split in accordance with this Ordinance.
3.08.04 No Administrative Plats shall be approved unless all required public improvements have been installed, no new dedication of public right-of-way or easements is involved, and such subdivision complies with the ordinance requirements concerning minimum areas and dimensions of such lots.
3.08.05 Prior to the approval of the administrative plat, the subdivider shall provide a statement from the County Treasurer's office showing there are no tax liens against said land within the proposed subdivision or any part thereof. The subdivider shall also provide a statement from the City Treasurer's office showing that all special assessment installment payments are current as applied to said proposed subdivision or any part thereof. All taxes shall be paid in full on all real property dedicated to a public use.
3.08.06 The Zoning Administrator shall, in writing, either approve the Administrative Plat with or without conditions, or disapprove the Administrative Plat and state the reasons thereof, within a reasonable time of application.
3.08.07 The filing fee for Administrative Plats shall be set in accordance with Section 2.10.
3.08.08 After approval from the Zoning Administrator all copies must be certified by all applicable parties and two copies filed with the City prior to the issuance of a zoning permit.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 14
ARTICLE 4: RESERVED
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 15
ARTICLE 5: DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 5.01 General
No subdivision shall be approved unless it is in conformance with the requirements of these regulations and the Comprehensive Development Plan.
In subdividing property, consideration shall be given to suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other common areas for public use so as to best conform to any recommendations of the Comprehensive Development Plan. Any provisions for schools, parks, and playgrounds should be indicated on the Preliminary Plat in order that it may be determined when and in what manner such areas will be provided or acquired by an appropriate agency.
Land which the Planning Commission has found to be unsuitable for subdividing, due to flooding, poor drainage, steep slopes, rock formation, or other features likely to be harmful to the safety, welfare or health of the future residents, shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods for subdivision are formulated by the developer and approved by the Planning Commission that would eliminate or substantially reduce such hazards.
The Planning Commission may require all contiguous land under common ownership to be submitted with the Preliminary Plan in order to evaluate overall development patterns and conformity with the Comprehensive Development Plan and issue proper extension of future roads and services.
Section 5.02 Streets
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the Comprehensive Development Plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be serviced by such streets. All streets shall meet applicable AASHTO standards and shall conform to the minimum design standards set by the Nebraska Board of Public Roads Classification and Standards. See Schedule A for Minimum Street Standards.
The street layout of the proposed subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of streets and alleys already existing in areas adjacent to the area being subdivided. Where, at the determination of the Planning Commission, it is desirable to provide street access to adjoining properties, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundaries of the subdivision. Where the Planning Commission deems it necessary, such dead-end streets shall be provided with a temporary turnaround having a right-of-way radius of at least 50 feet and a paved radius of 30 feet, or other approved design.
Section 5.03 Dedication of Rights-of-Way for New Streets
The dedications of rights-of-way for new streets measured from lot line to lot line shall be shown on the plat and shall meet the right-of-way requirements as stated in Schedule A of this Ordinance. The City shall approve access to lots located on arterials.
Where a subdivision fronts on an arterial street, the Planning Commission shall, where possible, require frontage roads. Where lots back up to an arterial street and such lots have access by means other than the arterial street, a frontage road may not be required.
Section 5.04 Dedication of Rights-of-Way for Existing Streets
Subdivisions platted along existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way or easements if necessary to meet the minimum street width requirements set forth in this Ordinance. The entire minimum right-of-way width shall be dedicated where the subdivision is on both sides of an existing street. When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one half of the required right-of-way width, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway, shall be dedicated along with any proposed easements.
Section 5.05 Frontage Roads
Where a front or side yard abuts railroad, limited access freeway, or principal highway or arterial street rights-of-way, a marginal access street or frontage road may be required parallel and adjacent to the boundary of such rights-of-way when necessary for adequate protection of properties from the arterial street and to protect and preserve the safety and traffic handling capabilities of the arterial street. The distance from said rights-of-way shall be determined, with due consideration to minimum distance required for approach connections to future
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 16
grade-separated intersections. In the case of lots where the rear yard is adjacent to an arterial street and such lots have access other than of off the arterial street frontage, a frontage road may not be required.
Section 5.06 Intersections
Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at an angle of 90 degrees, and no intersection shall be constructed at an angle of less than 60 degrees. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of at least 20 feet. Larger intersection radii may be required in industrial or commercial area or when directed by the City Engineer. When the smallest angle of street intersection is less than 75 degrees, the Planning Commission may require curb radii of greater length.
Access onto any street intersecting an arterial street shall be located no closer to the right-of-way of such arterial street than 75 feet, or more at the discretion of the City Engineer.
Consideration shall be given to street and right-of-way widths such that minimum sidewalk requirements are maintained.
Section 5.07 Curves in Streets; Horizontal and Vertical
A tangent of at least 100 feet in length shall be introduced between reversed curves on arterial and collector streets.
Where there is a deflection angle of more than 10 degrees in the horizontal alignment of a street, a curve shall be installed with a radius adequate to ensure safe sight distances. Maximum requirements shall conform to the standards in Schedule A of this Ordinance.
Minimum sight distances shall meet applicable AASHTO standards and shall conform to the minimum design standards set by the Nebraska Board of Public Roads Classifications and Standards.
Section 5.08 Street Grades and Elevations
All streets shall be designed so as to provide for the discharge of surface water from the pavement and from the right-of-way by grading and drainage. The minimum street grade shall not be less than four tenths of one percent (0.4%). Minimum grades for gutters and ditches shall be four tenths and five tenths of one percent (0.4% and 0.5%), respectively. The City may allow lesser slopes if approved by the City Engineer. Fill may be used in areas subject to flooding in order to elevate streets and building pads provided such fill will not increase flood elevations more than one foot. Street grades shall conform to the maximum requirements provided in Schedule A of this Ordinance.
Section 5.09 Access Control
In the interest of public safety and for the preservation of the traffic-carrying capacity of the street system, the Planning Commission and City Council shall have the right to restrict and regulate points of access to all property from the public street system. Such restrictions shall be indicated on the Final Plat.
Section 5.10 Street Jogs
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet at intersections shall be prohibited.
Section 5.11 Cul-de-sac Streets
Cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than 500 feet and shall provide a turnaround having a radius at the outside of the pavement of at least 50 feet and a radius at the right-of-way of at least 110 feet. Alternative designs for temporary turnarounds may be approved by the City. Streets dead-ending or terminating in a temporary turnaround shall not have a length greater than 500 feet or a radius at the right-of-way less than 60 feet. Cul-de-sac and temporary turnarounds shall be measured from the center of the cul-de-sac or temporary turnaround to the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
Section 5.12 Street Names
Proposed streets, which are in alignment with other existing streets, shall bear the name of such other existing streets. The name of a proposed street which is not in alignment with an existing street shall not be named so similarly to the name of any existing street as to cause confusion. To avoid duplication and confusion, the proposed names of all streets shall be approved by the City Council prior to such names being assigned or used.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 17
Section 5.13 Private Streets and Reserve Strips
New private streets may be created as part of a planned development district provided such streets are specifically authorized by the Planning Commission and City Council as an exception to the terms of the Ordinance. There shall be no reserve strips in a subdivision except where their control is definitely vested in the municipality under conditions of approval by the Planning Commission as authorized in these regulations.
Section 5.14 Alleys
Alleys may be required in commercial, industrial, and residential areas. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided, however, where a dead-end alley cannot be avoided, a dead-end alley shall be provided with adequate turnaround capacity at the dead-end. Alleys should be avoided in residential areas except where an existing alley of an adjoining subdivision would dead-end at the boundary of the proposed subdivision.
Section 5.15 Water Lines and Hydrants
All water mains within a subdivision shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter. All water mains and/or shall be looped, unless a dead-end is approved by the City Engineer. Hydrant spacing shall not exceed 300 feet unless approved by the City Engineer and Fire Chief.
Section 5.16 Water Mains and Sewer Mains
Except for good cause, all water mains and sewer mains shall be located within the street right-of-way, but not under the pavement located thereon. Further, all manholes shall not be placed in the proposed driveways of residential subdivisions.
Section 5.17 Sidewalks
All sidewalks within a subdivision shall have a minimum pavement width of four feet and shall be located one foot into the street right-of-way adjacent to the residential lot line.
Section 5.18 Blocks
In determining the lengths, widths and shapes of blocks, consideration shall be given to the provision of adequate access and circulation, the suitability of building sites to the needs of the use contemplated, and the zoning requirements regarding minimum lot sizes, widths and frontages of the anticipated zoning district. Except in unusual circumstances approved by the City, block lengths shall not exceed 600 feet. Pedestrian easements 10 feet wide shall be provided through or near the center of blocks more than 600 feet long in order to provide for adequate pedestrian circulation.
Section 5.19 Lots
The size, width, depth, shape and orientation of lots shall conform to the regulations of the applicable zoning district for the type of development and use contemplated. All lots shall be developed such that surface drainage is diverted to lot lines and not across adjacent properties. Corner lots for residential uses shall be designed with adequate width to permit appropriate building setback distances and orientation to both streets. The subdividing of land shall be such as to provide each lot with satisfactory vehicular access from a public street or an approved private street. Side lot lines shall be designed as close as possible to be perpendicular to street right-of-way lines or radial to cul-de-sac center points.
Section 5.20 Through Lots
Through lots shall be avoided, except where essential to provide separation of residential development from arterial streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography. Where such lots are used in relation to an arterial street, a landscape screen easement of at least 10 feet in width shall be provided along the property line of such lots abutting such arterial street. Within this easement, the subdivider shall install trees, shrubbery or fences or a combination thereof to screen the residential development form the arterial street and dampen the noise generated by traffic on the arterial street.
Section 5.21 Easements
Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 16 feet in width. When located on a lot line, said easement shall be centered so that there is eight feet of easement on each side of lot line. In those zoning districts that require five feet side yard setbacks, the required easement shall be at least 10 feet in width, centered upon the lot line so that there is five feet of easement on each side of the side property line.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 18
Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, there shall be provided a storm water drainage easement
substantially following the width of such water course. The width of the easement shall be adequate for
maintenance purposes, and shall be determined by the City Engineer as part of the Preliminary Plat.
Section 5.22 Storm Sewer System
Provisions shall be made to limit the peak rate of storm water discharge from the subdivision. Post development
runoff shall not exceed pre-development runoff by more than five percent, based upon a 10-year storm event
or as determined by the City engineer. Pre-development shall be the condition prior to improvements being
completed. In determining the size or type of the storm sewer system to be used, the design shall be sufficient to
handle all computed runoff from the proposed development. For large drainage areas, natural drainage ways
shall be maintained, and the City may require cross drainage structures such as culverts, bridges, etc.
Section 5.23 Flood Hazards
Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable for residential or other development
shall not be platted for such purposes. Such land may be set aside on the plat for such uses compatible with the
hazards associated with flooding or erosion. All development shall conform to the flood hazard zoning provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance.
Section 5.24 Conformance with Other Regulations
No Final Plat of land within the City or its jurisdictional area shall be approved unless it conforms with existing
zoning regulations. Whenever there is a conflict between the standards set forth in these regulations and those
contained in other regulations the highest standard shall govern.
Section 5.25 Schedule A: Minimum Street Standards
Street Classifications
Minimum Right-of-
Way (ft.)
Minimum Pavement
Width (ft.) (5)
Minimum Number of
Traffic Lanes
Maximum Grade (%)
Minimum Centerline
Radius (ft.)
Major Arterial (1) 100 45 4 6 510
Other Arterial (2) 100 45 4 6 510
Collector (3) 80 39 2 8 200
Local (4) 60 25 2 10 100
Frontage 50 25 2 10 100
Cul-de-sac or Turnaround 110(6) 50 (6) 2 10 200
Alleys 20 20 2 - -
(1) Major Arterial streets shall generally consist of extensions of the rural major arterials which provide continuous service through
municipalities for long-distance rural travel. They are the arterial streets used to transport products into and out of municipalities.
(2) Other Arterial streets shall consist of two categories: Municipal Extensions of Rural Other Arterials, and Arterial Movements Peculiar to a
Municipality's Own Complex, that is streets which interconnect major areas of activity within a municipality, such as shopping centers,
the central business district, manufacturing centers, and industrial parks.
(3) Collector streets shall consist of a group of streets which collect traffic from residential streets and move it to smaller commercial
centers or to higher arterial systems.
(4) Local streets shall consist of the balance of streets in each municipality, principally residential access service streets and local business
streets. They are characterized by very short trip lengths, mostly limited to vehicles desiring to go to or from an adjacent property.
(5) Pavement width measured from back of curb to back of curb.
(6) Minimum right-of-way radius for the cul-de-sac turnaround shall be 110 feet; the minimum pavement radius for the cul-de-sac
turnaround shall be 50 feet.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 19
ARTICLE 6: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Section 6.01 General
The subdivider shall design and construct improvements using standards not less than the standards outlined in this Ordinance. The Planning Commission and City Council upon recommendation of the City Engineer shall approve all such plans.
The work shall be done under the supervision and inspection of the City and shall be completed within the time limitations established herein. The minimum requirements for materials shall be in accordance with specifications approved by the City. Standards applicable to health and sanitation as required by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services shall be the minimum standards required thereof.
All inspection costs and costs for required tests shall be paid by the subdivider.
Section 6.02 Monuments and Markers
6.02.01 Monuments and markers placement shall be located at all quarter section points or other reference points tied to the federal land survey on the boundaries of or within the area being platted.
6.02.02 Monument Construction. Monument construction shall meet or exceed the "Minimum Standards for Surveys," as the same may be amended from time to time, as adopted by the Professional Surveyors Association of Nebraska in February 1989. These standards are as follows:
The surveyor shall establish or confirm the prior establishment of permanent monuments at each corner on the boundary lines of the parcel being surveyed. Monuments shall be solid and substantially free from movement. In such cases where the placement of a permanent monument at the true corner is impractical because of instability or is likely to be destroyed, the surveyor shall set a corner accessory monument and show its relationship by dimension to the true corner.
The monuments set shall be constructed of material capable of being detected by commonly used magnetic locators. These monuments shall consist of an iron pipe or steel rod with a minimal diameter of five-eighths (5/8) inch and minimal length of 24 inches. When extenuating circumstances dictate, the surveyor may use monuments (i.e., nail and washer) that have a probability of permanence. Where a corner or a line falls on or within a wall, column line or other physical feature and the placement of a monument is not feasible, the wall, column line or physical feature shall become the monument by reference thereto.
In addition, monuments shall be set at all block corners, lot corners, deflection points and points of curvature, except in cases where it is deemed clearly unreasonable or infeasible by the City Council.
Section 6.03 Street Grading, Construction and Surface Type
6.03.01 All streets shall be graded to a minimum distance 15 feet from the back of the curb or edge of pavement and to within six inches of the street grade established in the approved Final Plat construction plans and specifications.
Design standards for the excavation and preparation of the road bed shall be approved by the City Engineer. Where unusual soil conditions, extra-ordinary traffic volumes, or other abnormal characteristics exist, the City Engineer may approve alternate design standards to address such condition, if possible.
6.03.02 Concrete curbs and gutters shall be required for all streets within the boundaries of the subdivision unless accepted by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance.
6.03.03 All streets shall be poured-in-place using Portland cement concrete. Concrete shall be Class “47B-3,625,” and shall conform to Division 600 of the Nebraska State Standard Specifications. Minimum compressive strength shall be 3,625 psi in 28 days. To verify compressive strength of the concrete, a set of three all concrete test cylinders shall be made according to ASTM C-31 and C-39. One set of
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 20
concrete cylinders shall be required for each day’s concrete placement or for each 100 cubic yards of concrete placed if, more than 100 cubic yards are placed in one day. The concrete cylinders shall be tested by an approved testing laboratory and results of the testing furnished to the City Engineer. Testing shall be conducted at seven days and 28 days from the date of cylinder casting.
6.03.04 All materials used shall conform to Nebraska State Standard Specifications for Highway Construction, Division 1000, and Material Details. Curing shall be accomplished with a continuous coating of white pigmented curing compound conforming to the requirements of Section 1012 of the Nebraska State Standard Specifications.
Section 6.04 Street Signs, Lighting and Electrical Power
6.04.01 At least one street sign shall be installed at each street intersection within or on the perimeter of the subdivision and shall be located in the northeast corner thereof, whenever possible, and within the area between the street and sidewalk at a point approximately six inches from said sidewalk or its intended location.
6.04.02 The developer shall provide and install street lights at each entrance (street or sidewalk) into a subdivision and at each street intersection within the subdivision and at such intermediate points as necessary, as specified by the Public Power District and/or the City Engineer.
6.04.03 New subdivision lighting and electrical power shall be installed underground. The location of easements for such wiring shall be indicated on the Preliminary and Final Plats. All underground wiring shall conform to installation specifications required by the Nebraska State Electrical Code.
Section 6.05 Landscape Screens
Landscape screens as required by the City shall be installed at the subdivider's expense as a buffer for the protection of residential properties along arterial and collector streets, state and federal highways, county roads, railroad rights-of-way, and land uses which are substantially different from that proposed in the subdivision.
Section 6.06 Drainage
6.06.01 A drainage management system shall be designed and constructed by the subdivider to provide for the proper drainage of surface water within the subdivision.
1. Preliminary Plat Report shall include:
a). Preliminary estimates of the quantity of storm water entering the subdivision both naturally and once there has been full development of lots within the subdivision.
b). An analysis of existing conditions of the watershed that may affect the proposed subdivision, such as soil type, drainage channels, and obstructions to water flow.
c). A preliminary grading plan illustrating the proposed drainage management system.
2. Final Plat Drainage Report shall contain:
a). Calculations of the quantity of storm water entering the subdivision naturally and estimates of the quantity of storm water entering the subdivision once there has been full development of the lots within the subdivision based on the proposed zoning.
b). Quantities of flow at each pick-up point.
c). Estimates and type of temporary erosion control measures necessary to control erosion during construction.
d). A description of an adequate drainage management system within the subdivision and its design capacities based on a 10-year storm.
e). An evaluation of the ability of the proposed water courses, drainage tiles, storm sewers, culverts and other improvements pertaining to drainage or flood control within the subdivision to handle the run-off which would be generated by the development of the land within and above the subdivision and the impacts of such drainage on downstream drainage systems.
6.06.02 Drainage Requirements. The drainage management system designed by the subdivider shall include culverts and storm sewers whenever necessary or required by the City Engineer. Where storm sewers are not required, all open ditches shall be graded and all pipes, culverts, intersection drains, drop inlets, bridges, headwalls, gutters and similar or related installations necessary to provide adequate surface
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 21
water drainage shall be constructed and installed in accordance with plans approved by the City Engineer.
6.06.03 Drainage System Standards.
1. All streets shall be provided with an adequate storm drainage system of curbs, gutters and storm sewers or open ditches.
2. Curb drainage inlets shall be provided at appropriate intervals along streets having curbs and gutters. Where inlets connect to storm sewers, a drain inlet structure and a protective grating shall be installed.
3. Where storm water flows across the intersections of streets having curbs and gutters, concrete cross gutters shall be installed at such intersections.
4. All off-street drainage swales and ditches shall be protected by drainage easements noted on the Preliminary and Final Plats. Where water courses would cross lots diagonally, the subdivider shall straighten such course and shall substantially follow lot lines.
6.06.04 Storm Drain Responsibility. The City of Cozad will review all storm drain design criteria. In addition, the City of Cozad may participate in the costs associated with providing adequate storm drainage.
Section 6.07 Sanitary Sewers.
A sanitary sewer system shall be designed and constructed by the subdivider for all lots in the proposed subdivision. The following requirements shall apply:
6.07.01 Within the corporate limits, a sanitary sewer collection system including all pipes and manholes shall be provided and said collection system shall be connected to the public sewage system in accordance with plans acceptable to the Planning Commission and City Council.
6.07.02 Within the jurisdictional areas of the City but outside the corporate limits, if a proposed subdivision is so located with regard to adequate public sewer, either existing or to be existing within one year from the date of application for final plat approval, or that said sewer is located within 500 feet of the proposed subdivision or can be reached if the cost of installing lateral and connecting sewers from all lots shown upon said plat, exclusive of connections from individual structures; is equal to or less than 150 percent of the cost of installing a private sewage collection and disposal system for all lots, then adequate lateral and connecting sewers to said public sewer system shall be constructed.
6.07.03 If the subdivision is not located relative to a public sewer system, a private collection and treatment system acceptable to the City Council and appropriate to the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services and the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (or successor agencies) may be used. However, the City may require the developer to provide a plan for future expansion of utilities including permanent easements. If on-site disposal is proposed, the subdivider shall document acceptable percolation rates on each lot and such lots shall be adequately sized to allow for the installation and safe operation of such systems in conjunction with any proposed water supply or well location.
6.07.04 Standards. When applicable, improvement plans for a permanent sewage system shall be provided showing pipe sizes, gradients, type of pipe, invert and finished grade elevations, location and type of manholes, treatment facilities, if applicable, and the location, type and size of all lift or pumping stations.
Design Standards of said system shall be subject to the approval of the City in accordance with the following standards:
1. At least 8-inch sewer lines will be installed.
2. At least 4-inch service connections from the sewer line to the property line of each lot will be installed with the location marked.
3. Manholes will be provided at all interceptor and lateral junctions, at the end of each line, and at all changes in direction, grade, and size.
Design standard of said system shall be in general compliance with the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (or successor agencies).
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 22
Section 6.08 Water Mains.
A water distribution system shall be designed and constructed by the subdivider to provide adequate water service to all lots in the proposed subdivision. The following requirements shall apply:
6.08.01 Type of Improvement. Within the corporate limits, a water distribution system including all pipes, fire hydrants, valves and other appurtenances shall be provided and said distribution system shall be connected to the public water system in accordance with plans acceptable to the Planning Commission and City Council.
Within the jurisdictional area of the City but outside the corporate limits, if a proposed subdivision is so located with regard to an adequate public water supply line, either existing or proposed within one year from the date of application for Final Plat approval or that said water line is located within 500 feet of the proposed subdivision or can be reached if the cost of connecting to said water line and installing an adequate distribution system to all lots shown upon said plat, exclusive of connections from individual structures, is equal to or less than 150 percent of the cost of installing an individual water system for all lots, then adequate connecting lines to said public water system shall be constructed.
If the subdivision is not so located relative to a public water line, the City may authorize a community well system. In addition, the City may require a plan for future extension of such utilities, including permanent easements, for utilities throughout the proposed subdivision.
6.08.02 Standards. When applicable, improvement plans for a permanent water system shall be provided showing pipe sizes, type of pipe, locations of fire hydrants and valves and, if applicable supply facilities, booster pumps, elevated or ground level storage tanks and other appurtenances.
Design Standards of said system shall be subject to the approval of the City in accordance with the following standards:
1. The minimum main or pipe size shall be determined by the type of uses to be served and the provision of adequate fire flow capacities. Generally, water lines shall be a minimum of 6-inches in diameter.
2. All hydrants will be located at a maximum of 300-foot intervals, unless otherwise authorized by the City. The layout and flow design must meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the City.
3. Gate valves on cross-connecting water lines shall be so located that no single break in the distribution system shall require more than 300 feet to be out of service in Commercial and Industrial districts or 800 feet in other districts.
Valves or cross-connecting mains shall be so located that a break in the secondary distribution system will not necessitate shutting down major distribution lines
Design standards of the water distribution system shall be in compliance with the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services (or successor agencies).
Section 6.09 Cost of Over-size Improvements.
Minimum street pavement widths for streets shall conform to the standards established in Section 5.25 of this Ordinance. Minimum utility sizes shall be determined by the standards of the City with regard to providing service to the subdivision in question.
Where pavement widths or larger pipe or main sizes are deemed necessary by the Planning Commission and City Council, the City may choose to bear the extra cost of providing such greater width or larger pipe or main sizes. The subdivider shall be required to pay for that part of the construction costs for the Arterial streets, trunk sewers, or water mains which are serving the proposed subdivision as determined by the Planning Commission and City Council. The City shall pay the remainder of the costs.
Section 6.10 Extension to Boundaries.
The subdivider may be required to extend all necessary improvements to the boundaries of the proposed subdivision at his/her expense to allow for services to future anticipated developments on the adjoining lands, as determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 23
Section 6.11 Off-site Extensions.
If streets or utilities are not available at the boundary of the proposed subdivision or within the distances or costs established in this Article and the Planning Commission determines that extensions across undeveloped areas are not warranted, the subdivider, if he/she wishes to proceed with the development, shall pay the cost of such off-site improvements and provide for appropriate off-site easements prior to the approval of the Final Plat. Such improvements shall be available for connections by subdividers of adjoining lands subject to City approval.
Section 6.12 Land Preparation.
Any cut, fill and compaction of land within, and if applicable, adjacent to the subdivision, shall be accomplished in accordance with design standards of the City or as approved by the City Engineer. To control erosion and sedimentation during and after land preparation, the subdivider, any successors and assigns shall provide for disturbing only the areas needed for construction; removing only those trees, shrubs and grasses that must be removed by construction; installing required sediment basins and diversion dikes before disturbing the land that drains into them; and temporary stabilizing each segment of graded or otherwise disturbed land by seeding and mulching or by other approved methods.
As land preparation is completed, the subdivider, any successors and assigns shall permanently stabile each segment with perennial vegetation and structural measures. Diversion dikes and sediment basins shall be leveled after areas that drain into them are stabilized, and permanent vegetation shall be established on those areas. Sediment basins that are to retained for storm water detention shall be seeded to permanent vegetation no later than nine months after completion of the sediment basins and shall be permanently maintained by the subdivider or any successors and assigns.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 24
ARTICLE 7: DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS ON PUBLIC LAND
Section 7.01 Dedication
As a condition of Final Plat approval, the subdivider shall dedicate to the public all streets and alleys as may be required by the Planning Commission and City Council. If such streets and alleys are not to be dedicated and are to be developed as private streets, the subdivider shall make adequate provision for an owner's association with direct responsibility to and control by the property owners of the subdivision, to provide for the maintenance of all such private streets and alleys and the removal of debris and snow therefrom so as to maintain adequate access at all times for fire, police, sanitation, utility and emergency vehicles. Legal assurances shall be provided which show that the association is self-perpetuating and has the authority to collect assessments from owners of property within the subdivision to accomplish these and other related purposes.
Such provisions shall also provide for agreement of the property owners that if the City is requested or required to perform any maintenance or snow removal from such streets in order to maintain adequate access, said owners shall pay the costs thereof to the City and that if not paid, the same shall become a lien upon the properties until such costs are paid in full.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 25
ARTICLE 8: WAIVERS AND ANNEXATIONS
Section 8.01 Granting of Waivers (Exceptions) and Conditions
In addition to the exceptions contained in this Ordinance, the Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may grant waivers from the provisions of these regulations, but only after determining that:
1. There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting the property that are not the result of actions by the subdivider.
2. The waivers are necessary for the reasonable and acceptable development of the property in question.
3. The granting of the waivers will not be detrimental to the public or injurious to adjacent and nearby properties.
Section 8.02 Subdivision; Annexation of Adjoining or Contiguous Properties
All subdivisions or additions laid out adjoining or contiguous to the corporate limits of Cozad may be included within the same and become a part of the City of Cozad upon approval of and acceptance by Ordinance. Such annexation shall only occur after the City Council has voted to approve said inclusion by a separate vote from that approving the Final Plat. Further, such annexation shall occur prior to approval of the Final Plat for the subdivision.
When the intent of the Planning Commission and City Council is to annex said subdivision or addition upon approval of the Final Plat; the following procedures shall be taken:
1. Notice of the time and place of separate public hearings for the Planning Commission to recommend and the City Council to approve the annexation shall be provided pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-904 (R.R.S.1997).
2. The Public Hearings listed above shall be held separate from the public hearings held to recommend and approve the Final Plat of the subdivisions or additions.
Section 8.03 Amendments
Any provision of these Regulations from time to time may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the City Council according to law; provided, however, that such amendments, supplements, changes, modifications or repealed provisions shall not become effective until after public hearing and report by the Planning Commission.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 26
ARTICLE 9: ADMINSTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 9.01 General
9.01.01 It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the Planning Commission and City Council any violation or lack of compliance herewith.
9.01.02 No owner or agent of an owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any parcel before a Final Plat of such subdivision has been approved by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, and filed for record with Dawson County Register of Deeds.
9.01.03 The subdivision or replat of any lot or any parcel by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease which would evade these regulations shall not be permitted. All such subdivisions shall be subject to all the requirements contained in these regulations.
9.01.04 No zoning permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or parcel subdivided, sold, transferred or leased in violation of the provisions of these regulations.
Section 9.02 Amendments
Any provision of this Ordinance may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed from time to time by the City Council according to law, provided however, that such amendments, supplements, changes, modification or repealed provisions shall not become effective until after the study, written report and recommendation by the Planning Commission to the City Council.
Section 9.03 Violation and Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of these regulations shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor. Such conviction shall carry a fine of up to 100 dollars plus the cost of prosecution for each violation. The non-payment of such fine and costs shall subject the guilty party to imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed the lesser of 1) 30 days, or 2) the time necessary to pay such fine and costs in full. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 27
ARTICLE10: CERTIFICATION AND DEDICATION STATEMENTS
Section 10.01 Notary Public Acknowledgment
STATE OF NEBRASKA )
) ss
COUNTY OF DAWSON )
The forgoing instrument was acknowledged before me this _____ day, of ______________ 20_____, by ___________________________________, who personally appeared before me and whose name is affixed to this plat and who acknowledge the execution thereof to be his/her voluntary act and deed.
WITNESS my hand and Notarial Seal the day and year last above mentioned.
____________________________________ (SEAL)
Notary Public
My Commission Expires: ______________
Section 10.02 Surveyor’s Certification
SURVEYORS CERTIFICATION:
I hereby certify that I am a professional land surveyor, registered in compliance with the laws of the State of Nebraska, and that this plat correctly represents a survey conducted by me or under my direct supervision on the _____ day of ______________, 20_____, that any changes from the description appearing in the last record transfer of the land contained in the Final Plat are so indicated, that all monuments shown thereon actually exist as described or will be installed and their position is correctly shown and that all dimensional and geodetic data is correct.
____________________________________ ____________________________________
Surveyor, RLS # Date
(SEAL)
Section 10.03 Approval of Cozad Planning Commission
APPROVAL OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION OF COZAD, NEBRASKA
This plat of __________________________________________________________________________________ was approved by the Cozad Planning Commission on this _____ day of ______________, 20_____.
____________________________________
Chairperson, Cozad Planning Commission
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 28
Section 10.04 Acceptance by Cozad City Council
ACCEPTANCE BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF COZAD, NEBRASKA
This plat of __________________________________________________________________________________ was approved by the City Council of the City of Cozad, Nebraska on this _____ day of ______________, 20_____, in accordance with the State Statutes of Nebraska.
____________________________________
(City of Cozad SEAL)
Mayor
ATTEST:
____________________________________
City Clerk
Section 10.05 Acceptance by Dawson County Register of Deeds
ACCEPTANCE BY DAWSON COUNTY REGISTER OF DEEDS
This plat of __________________________________________________________________________________ was recorded on this _____ day of ______________, 20_____, at book # ________, page # ________.
____________________________________
Dawson County Register of Deeds (SEAL)
Section 10.06 Review of Dawson County Surveyor
REVIEW OF DAWSON COUNTY SURVEYOR
This plat of __________________________________________________________________________________ was reviewed by the office of Dawson County Surveyor on this _____ day of ______________, 20_____.
____________________________________
Dawson County Surveyor (SEAL)
Section 10.07 Dawson County Treasurer’s Certifications
DAWSON COUNTY TREASURER’S CERTIFICATIONS
This is to certify that I find no regular or special taxes due or delinquent against the property described in the Surveyor’s Certificate and embraced in this plat as shown by the records of this office.
____________________________________ ____________________________________
Dawson County Treasurer Date
(SEAL)
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 29
Section 10.08 Administrative Plat Approval
APPROVAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE PLAT
This Administrative Plat was approved by the City of Cozad on this _____ day of ______________, 20_____.
____________________________________ ____________________________________
City Clerk Mayor
____________________________________
Zoning Administrator
(City of Cozad SEAL)
Section 10.09 Owners Certification
OWNERS CERTIFICATION
I/we, the undersigned owner(s) of the real estate shown and described herein, do hereby certify that I/we have laid out, platted and subdivided, and do hereby lay out, plat and subdivide, said real estate in accordance with this plat.
This subdivision shall be known and designated as ______________________________________________________ , an addition to the City of Cozad, Nebraska (delete previous phrase if the subdivision is located outside of the corporate limits and will not be annexed to the City). All streets and alleys shown and not heretofore dedicated are hereby dedicated to the public unless specifically noted herein. Other public lands shown and not heretofore dedicated are hereby reserved for public use.
Clear title to the land contained in this plat is guaranteed. Any encumbrances or special assessments are explained as follows: __________________________________________________________________________________.
There are strips of ground shown on this plat and marked easement, reserved for the use of public utilities and subject to the paramount right of a public utility or the City to install, repair, replace and maintain its installations.
(Additional covenants or restrictions and enforcement provisions therein may be inserted here or attached to the plat).
____________________________________ ____________________________________
Signature of Owner Signature of Owner
____________________________________ ____________________________________
Printed name Printed name
____________________________________ ____________________________________
Date Date
COZAD, NEBRASKA  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE  2016 30
ARTICLE 11: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
Section 11.01 Separability
Should any article, section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Section 11.02 Purpose of Catch Heads
The catch heads appearing in connection with the foregoing sections are inserted simply for convenience, to serve the purpose of any index and they shall be wholly disregarded by any person, officer, court or other tribunal in construing the terms and provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 11.03 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance, or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.
Section 11.04 Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication according to law.
ADOPTED AND APPROVED by the Governing Body of Cozad, Nebraska,
This ________ day of ______, 2016.
(Seal)
ATTEST: __________________________________ _________________________________
City Clerk Mayor
 
 
 
 
 




 


