CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§1-1.  How Code Designated and Cited
               All ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated and cited as the "Grand Island City Code."

 

§1-2.  Definitions and Rules of Construction
               In the construction of this Code and all other ordinances of the City, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise:

               City. The words "city", "the city," or "this city" shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Grand Island, Nebraska."

               Code. The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean "The Grand Island City Code."

               Computation of Time. The time within which an act is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day falls upon any legal holiday or on Saturday, in which case the period runs until the end of the next day.

               Council. Whenever the word "council" is used, it shall be construed to mean the council of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

               County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Hall County, Nebraska.

               Day. A day is a 24-hour period of time between any midnight and the following midnight.

               Daytime, Nighttime. "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.

               Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine.

               In the City. The words "in the city" shall mean and include all territory over which the city now has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.

               Joint Authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.

               Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.

               Number. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

               Oath. "Oath" includes affirmation.

               Offense. The doing of any act or thing prohibited or the failing to do any act or thing commanded to be done in this Code within the city is hereby declared to be an offense against the public peace, safety, morals, and general welfare of the people of the City.

               Or, And. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it.

               Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land, or vendee in possession under a land sale contract.

               Person. "Person" includes but is not limited to individuals, corporations, associations, firms, partnerships and limited liability companies.

               Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.

               Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.

               Public place. The words "public place" shall mean any public place or building or any private place, business or building, open to and frequented by the public.

               Real property. Real property shall mean any estate or interest in land, including all buildings, fixtures and improvements thereon and all rights-of-way, easements, rents, issues, profits, income, tenements, hereditaments, privileges and appurtenances thereunto belonging, used or enjoyed with said land, or any part thereof.

               Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.

               Signature or subscription by mark. "Signature" or "subscription by mark" includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when one witness shall sign his own name thereto.

               State. The word "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Nebraska.

               Tenant or occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or an oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.

               To. "To" means "to and including" when used in reference to a series of sections of this Code or when reference is made to the Nebraska Revised Statutes.

               Week. A week consists of seven consecutive days.

               Writing. Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing, in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.

               Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, except where otherwise provided.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9029, effective 03-01-2006

 

§1-3.  Continuations of Existing Ordinances
               The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.

 

§1-4.  Effect of Repeal of  Ordinances
               The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed.

 

§1-5.  Severability of Parts of Code
               It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.

 

§1-6.  Catchlines of Sections
               The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted.

 

§1-7.  Penalties; Continuing Violations
               (1) In any case where there shall be a violation of any city ordinance for which no penalty is provided, the person violating the same shall be subject to a fine of not less than one dollar nor more than five hundred dollars for each offense. Each day a violation of a continuing nature shall remain in existence shall constitute a separate offense.

               (2) The violation of any City Code provision or ordinance shall be deemed an infraction, and the only violation for which imprisonment may be imposed shall be a violation of §1-8 below, pertaining to the offense of failing to appear.

 

§1-8.  Citation; Failing to Appear; Penalty
               (1) Any person who fails to appear or otherwise comply with the command of a citation shall be guilty of an infraction.

               (2) Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9029, effective 03-01-2006

 

§1-9.  Aiding, Abetting or Procuring; Penalty
               Whoever aids, abets or procures another to violate a provision of this Code, or whoever is an accessory after the fact to the commission of any such violation shall be deemed guilty of an offense and punished in accordance with §1-7 of this Code.

               An accessory after the fact is a person who, after full knowledge that a violation of this Code has been committed, conceals it from a police officer, or harbors and protects the person charged with or found guilty of a violation of any provision of this Code or state law.

 

§1-10.  Amendments or Additions to Code
               All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, enacted or presented to the city council for enactment after the adoption of this Code, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments, or additions to the Grand Island City Code. Amendments to this Code shall be made by reference to the chapter and section of the Code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter and section.

 

§1-11.  Police Jurisdiction Outside City Limits
               The provisions of this Code enacted in the exercise of the police jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island for the regulation, use, operation, ownership, control, and protection of the public parks, waterworks system, sewerage system, electric generation and distribution system, and other municipal facilities, and portions thereof, shall apply to and be of the same force and effect upon the municipal golf course, public parks, waterworks systems, sewerage systems, and other municipal facilities, outside the corporate limits of the City of Grand Island, with the same effect as though such properties were located within the corporate limits of such City of Grand Island.

 

§1-12.  Extra Territorial Jurisdiction
               The City of Grand Island zoning and property use regulations, building ordinances, gas ordinances, and plumbing ordinances are hereby extended and apply to the area two miles beyond and adjacent to the corporate boundaries of the City of Grand Island with the same force and effect as if such outlying area were within the corporate limits of such city; provided, no such ordinance shall be extended or applied so as to prohibit, prevent, or interfere with the conduct of existing farming, livestock operations, businesses, or industry.

 

§1-13.  Sale of Abandoned Property
               The chief of police is hereby empowered to offer for sale and to sell at public auction including sale by internet or other electronic medium to the highest bidder, all personal property, except impounded vehicles, and except property of a nature dealt with in §1-14 which may come within the custody of the police department by reason of its being abandoned, recovered, confiscated, impounded, or unclaimed. Notice of such sale shall be printed once in a legal newspaper published in the City of Grand Island at least ten days prior to the sale; provided, that no such property shall be offered or sold unless it shall have remained unclaimed by the lawful owner for a period of six months after it shall have come within the custody of the chief of police or the police department, or, in the case of property taken from or deposited by, persons arrested, detained, or accused of crime, shall have remained unclaimed for a period of six months after the discharge, liberation or departure of the person from whom such property was taken or by whom such property was deposited.

               It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police to make such effort as he deems reasonable to notify the lawful owner of any such property that it will be sold or otherwise disposed of upon a given date.

               All money received from the sale of the unclaimed property shall be paid to the chief of police, whose duty it shall be to account for such money collected by him to the city treasurer who shall place the same in the police fund.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9029, effective 03-01-2006

 

§1-14.  Disposal of Contraband
               The chief of police is hereby authorized to cause to be destroyed, or to dispose of in such other lawful manner as he deems proper all firearms, alcoholic beverages, contraband, or such other property, the possession of which may be unlawful, prohibited or regulated by federal, state, or local statutes or ordinances, which may come within the custody of the police department by reason of its being abandoned, recovered, confiscated, impounded or unclaimed.

               That all such property shall be held for a period of not less than ninety (90) days prior to the disposition, and it shall be the responsibility of the chief of police to make such effort as he deems reasonable to notify the lawful owner of any such property prior to its disposal that it will be destroyed or otherwise disposed of upon a given date.

 

CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION

 

Article I.  Meetings; Committees

 

§2-1.  Form of Government
               The City of Grand Island is a City of the First Class with a municipal government organized pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16 of the Revised Statutes of Nebraska.

 

§2-2.  Regular Meetings
               The regular meetings of the council shall be held at 7:00 p.m. in the council chambers of city hall, on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month; providing that if such meeting date shall occur on a holiday, the meeting shall be on the next business day following, or such other time as the council may provide. Amendments to the schedule of city council meeting dates shall be by resolution.

 

§2-3.  Special Meetings
               Special meetings may be called by the mayor or any four council members, upon twenty-four hours written notice to every member of the council; provided, that the requirement of notice shall not be binding in any special meeting at which all members of the council are present without objection. Such notices may be served by any member of the police department or any other person in the City, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk when given such notices to serve the same or cause the same to be served immediately.

 

§2-4.  City Council; Study Sessions
               The City Council may hold a meeting to be referred to as a "Study Session" as needed and at the discretion of the City Council. Study sessions will be public meetings held at the time and place to be determined by the Council for which notice will be published pursuant to Nebraska statutory requirements. Study sessions shall be conducted to facilitate discussion between members of the Council and shall not be subject to formal parliamentary procedure. No motion, action, or vote of any kind shall be taken on any matter during a Study Session, except upon a motion to recess or to adjourn.

 

§2-5.  City Council; Quorum; Voting
               (1) A majority of all the members of the city council must be present at a regular or special meeting to constitute a quorum; but if less than such majority is present at the meeting; the majority of the council members present may adjourn the meeting from time to time without further notice.

               (2) Except in those cases where Nebraska law requires a greater number of votes, six (6) affirmative votes shall constitute a majority vote required to adopt a motion, resolution, ordinance, action, or policy. In those cases where the mayor is authorized by law to vote, the mayor's vote shall be counted as one of the six necessary affirmative votes.

               (3) On votes requiring two-thirds vote of the council, such vote shall require seven (7) affirmative votes to pass.

               (4) On votes requiring three-fourths vote of the council, such vote shall require eight (8) affirmative votes to pass.

 

§2-6.  Agenda For Meetings
               All matters for consideration at any regular meeting or study session of the city council shall be submitted in writing and filed in the office of the city clerk pursuant to the timetable established by resolution. All matters for consideration at any special meeting of the city council shall be submitted in writing and filed in the office of the city clerk at least twenty-four hours prior to the time set for such special meeting. The city clerk shall place upon the agenda of any regular, special, or study session meeting only those matters which have been directed by one council member, or authorized by the mayor or  the city administrator.

 

§2-7.  Rules of Order
               The current edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall guide the proceedings of the council where not in conflict with statutes or ordinances.

 

§2-8.  Disturbing Meetings
               It shall be unlawful to disturb or disrupt any regular, special, or study session meeting of the council. Any person or persons who repeatedly disturb or disrupt a meeting of the council may be summarily ejected from the council chambers and the city hall at the Mayor's discretion. The Police Chief or his/her designee shall carry out such Mayoral directive.

 

§2-9.  Council Committees
               Committees of the council may be created by the mayor and approved by a majority of the council to advise the council in regard to special issues. Each committee will consist of not more than five council members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council. The committees may also consist of other members, including staff, who shall serve only as non-voting members. The manner of appointment shall be the same. The chairman of the committee will be a council member. Council committees shall conduct their meetings in compliance with the open meetings law, shall maintain minutes of all meetings, and shall submit their minutes, findings, and recommendations to the city council in writing in a timely manner. Appointments to council committees shall be for a term of one year unless ended sooner by dissolution of the committee. The committee may be dissolved by any of the following actions:

               (1)  Majority vote of the committee to dissolve;

               (2)  Resolution of the special issue assigned;

               (3)  Majority vote of the city council; or

               (4)  Expiration of one year from date of creation unless reappointed.

 

§2-10.  Mayor's Committees
               Mayor's committees may be appointed by the mayor without council approval to advise the mayor in regard to special issues. Mayor's committees are subject to the open meetings law. Findings and recommendations of mayor's committees shall be submitted to the mayor and shall be considered as advising the mayor only and not the council.

 

§2-11.  Boards and Commissions
               The city council may establish citizen advisory boards and commissions of either a permanent or temporary nature to study and/or make recommendations on designated issues. Certain powers may be delegated to boards and commissions as provided for by statute. Boards and commissions of a permanent nature shall be established by ordinance. The structure and appointments of the boards and commissions shall be in accordance with other provisions contained herein.

 

§2-12.  Method of Publicizing  Meetings

(1)  For all Regular, Special, and Study Session meetings of the City Council, City staff shall make all reasonable attempts to publish notice of such meeting at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the scheduled starting time of such meeting by taking the following action:

a. Publication in The Grand Island Independent;

b. Publication on the City’s website;

c. Electronic Mail notification to news media outlets who previously requested such notice; and

d. Paper copies of meeting documents and materials accessible to the public in the lobby of City Hall.

(2) If after all reasonable efforts, City staff is not able to meet the terms of §2-12(1), it may publicize notice of meetings of the City Council by taking the following action:

a. Posting notice of such meeting in areas accessible to the public in the following buildings:

i. Grand Island City Hall;

ii. Hall County Courthouse;

iii. Grand Island Public Library; and

iv. The offices of The Grand Island Independent.

b. Publication on the City’s website;

c. Electronic Mail notification to news media outlets who previously requested such notice; and

d. Paper copies of meeting documents and materials accessible to the public in the lobby of City Hall.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9454, effective 10-15-2013


§2-13.  Reserved
§2-14.  Reserved

 

 

Article II.  Elected Officials

 

§2-15.  Mayor; Powers; Duties
               The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City of Grand Island, and advised by the members of the city council; shall in general supervise and control all of the business, affairs, and officers of the City of Grand Island. The mayor shall, when present, preside at all meetings of the city council. The mayor shall have the power, together with any other proper officer of the City of Grand Island, upon authorization by the city council, to sign certificates, deeds, mortgages, bonds, contracts, or other documents except in cases where the signing and execution thereof shall be expressly delegated by the city council to other officers or agents of Grand Island, and in general shall perform all duties incident to the mayor's office.

               The mayor shall have the right to vote when his or her vote shall be the sixth decisive vote upon any pending matter, legislation, or transaction. The mayor shall take care that the ordinances of the City and the provisions of the law relating to cities of the first class are complied with. The mayor may administer oaths, and shall sign the commissions and appointments of all officers appointed in the City.

 

§2-16.  Mayor; Veto Powers; Passage Over Veto
               The mayor shall have the power to approve or veto any ordinance passed by the city council, and to approve or veto any order, bylaw, resolution, award of, or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim; provided, any ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, award, or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim vetoed by the mayor may be passed over such veto by a vote of two thirds of all the members elected to the council, notwithstanding such veto. If the mayor neglects or refuses to sign any ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, award, or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim, and returns the same with objections in writing to the next regular meeting of the council, the same shall become a law without the mayor's signature. The mayor may veto any item or items of any appropriation bill, and approve the remainder thereof. An item or items so vetoed may be passed by the council over the veto as in other cases.

 

§2-17.  Mayor; Additional Powers; Duties
               In addition to the foregoing powers and duties, the mayor shall:

               (1)  Appoint and remove, with approval of the city council, all statutory officials; appoint with the approval of the city council, the Police Chief and the Fire Chief; appoint, remove, correct, or discipline all other hired officials and subordinate employees in the departments in both the classified and unclassified service, which appointments shall be upon merit and fitness alone pursuant to the personnel rules, and in the classified service all appointments and removals shall be subject to civil service requirements.

               (2)  Appoint all members of advisory boards, commissions, and committees established by ordinance or action of the council, subject to council approval.

               (3)  Have the power to grant reprieves and pardons for all offenses arising under the ordinances of the city after conviction to remit fines and forfeitures.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9389, effective 07/17/2012

 

§2-18.  Mayor; Compensation
               Beginning at the first regular Council meeting in December, 2014 and thereafter, the annual compensation for the mayor shall be sixteen thousand dollars ($16,000.00), payable monthly in equal installments as required by law.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9412, effective 12/09/2014

 

§2-19.  Council; Authority; Duties
               (1)  The council can bind the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, by their acts only when they are duly assembled at a regular or special meeting.

               (2)  The city council shall do all things necessary to comply with, and enforce the ordinances of the City of Grand Island and the laws of the State of Nebraska relating to cities of the first class.

               (3)  The city council specifically reserves the right to make inquiries of any personnel relative to municipal activities. Except for purpose of inquiry, the city council shall deal with the administrative services of the City through the administrator, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders directly to any subordinate of the city administrator.

               (4) The city council may by motion or resolution adopt appropriate personnel rules, and amend such rules in the same manner from time to time.

 

§2-20.  Council President; Election; Term; Duties
               The council shall elect one of the council members as president of the council. The term of the president shall be one year, commencing the first regular meeting in December, and terminating upon election of a new president at the first regular meeting in December of the following year. The president will assume the duties of the mayor during the mayor's absence or illness. Absence will be indicated by notification by the mayor, or through the mayor's inability to participate in a council meeting or city function. Illness shall be any sickness or injury preventing the mayor from participating in his or her daily administration or ceremonial duties.

 

§2-21.  City Council Members; Compensation
               Beginning at the first regular Council meeting in December, 2014 and thereafter, the annual compensation for members of the city council shall be seven thousand eight hundred dollars ($7,800.00), payable monthly in equal installments as required by law.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9411, effective 12/09/2014

 

§2-22.  Mayor and Council; Benefit Plans
               The mayor and members of the city council shall not be eligible to participate in the city employee health insurance, life insurance, disability insurance, or retirement plans.

 

§2-23.  Bonds for Elected Officials
               Before entering upon the duties of their office, the following named elective officers of the city are hereby required to give bonds and security as provided by law for the faithful performance of their duties, which bonds shall be approved by the city council and shall be given for the following sums:

Mayor                                                                              $ 20,000

City Council Member                                                     $  1,000

 

§2-24.  Removal of Elected  Official for Misconduct
               Any elected official of the city may be removed from office for misconduct or malfeasance pursuant to state statute by the mayor and council in the following manner:

               Upon the filing of written charges signed and verified, charging any such officer with misconduct, the council shall by resolution set a time for hearing not less than five days nor more than ten days subsequent to the passage of such resolution for a hearing on such charge. At such hearing, the officer whose conduct shall have been called into question shall have the right to be present to interrogate witnesses, to be represented by counsel, and either in person or by counsel make a statement or argument to the council. The city attorney shall act as prosecuting attorney and shall have the right to examine or cross examine each witness presented and to make any statement or argument to the council. If upon such hearing, the council shall by a three-fourths vote of all the council members, find or determine that the officer in question has been guilty of misconduct rendering him or her an unfit person to hold such office, then the city council may declare such office vacant and such office shall then be vacant forthwith.

 

§2-25.  Filling Vacancies of Elective Officers
               The mayor shall fill by appointment any vacancy which may exist, caused by death, resignation or disability of any elective officer of the City. Such appointment of the mayor shall be subject, however, to approval of the majority of the council.

 

§2-26.  Reserved
§2-27.  Reserved
§2-28.  Reserved
§2-29.  Reserved

 

 

Article III.  Appointed and Hired Officials

 

Division 1.  General

 

§2-30.  Officers; Appointive
               The following shall constitute the statutory officers of the City of Grand Island which shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. These officers shall hold office until the end of the mayor's term and until their successors are appointed and qualified. These appointive officers may be removed at any time by the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the council:

                              City Administrator

                              City Attorney

                              City Clerk

                              City Engineer / Public Works Director

                              City Treasurer / Finance Director

 

 

 

§2-31.  Hired Officials
               The officials set forth below shall be hired officials which shall be selected for employment by the city as set forth in the personnel rules and regulations. All of the hired officials shall be subject to the personnel rules of the City of Grand Island as adopted by resolution. The personnel rules are supplemental to the civil service rules for the officials set forth in subparagraph (B), and supplemental to the terms of interlocal agreements pertaining to the officials set forth in subparagraph (C) below.  The officials listed in subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall be hired by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The length of service of all the officials listed below shall be indefinite. The discipline and/or removal of the officials listed in subparagraphs (A), (C), and (D) shall be governed by the City’s personnel rules. The discipline and/or removal of the officials listed in subparagraph (B) shall be governed by the City’s personnel and civil service rules.

 

               (A)  The following shall constitute the general officials of the City of Grand Island:

                              Building Department Director

                              Human Resources Director

                              Parks and Recreation Director

                              Utility Director

 

               (B)  The following shall constitute the officials subject to the civil service rules of the City of Grand Island:

                              Fire Chief

                              Police Chief

 

               (C)  The following shall constitute the interlocal officials of the City of Grand Island:

                              Emergency Management Director

                              Planning Director

 

               (D)  The following shall constitute the official subject to the provisions of Article 2, Chapter 51 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes pertaining to libraries:

                              Library Director

Amended by Ordinance No. 9389, effective 07-17-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9390, effective 07-31-2012

 

§2-32.  Bonds for Appointed  Officials
               Before entering upon the duties of their employment, the following named appointed officials and employees of the city are hereby required to give bonds and security as provided by law for the faithful performance of their duties, which bonds shall be approved by the city council and shall be given for the following sums:

City Treasurer                                                               $100,000

Deputy City Treasurer                                                  $ 50,000

City Clerk                                                                       $ 10,000

City Administrator                                                        $ 20,000

 

§2-33.  Reserved
§2-34.  Reserved

 

 

Division 2.  City Administrator

 

§2-35.  Administrator; Appointment; Duties
               There is hereby created and established the office of city administrator, to be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council; provided, no elective officer of the City of Grand Island shall hold the position of city administrator. The city administrator shall be the chief operating officer of the City of Grand Island. The administrator shall hold office until the end of the mayor's term of office, and until a successor is appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed, or the ordinance creating the office shall be repealed, except as otherwise provided by law. The employment of the city administrator may be administered by a negotiated contract.

               The purpose of the office of city administrator is to provide for the day-to-day administration of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska. The city administrator will remain under the direction of the mayor and be responsible thereto for the efficient conduct of the office.

               The city administrator shall not participate in a local election that affects the office of mayor or city council, or any other elective municipal position or issue, except for the casting of an individual ballot.

The city administrator will keep the mayor informed and seek input on any action he or she takes or will take.       The salary of the city administrator shall be established by ordinance.

 

§2-36.  Administrator;  Qualifications
               The city administrator shall be chosen on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience, or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office. At the time of appointment, the city administrator need not be a resident of Grand Island, Nebraska, but during the term of office he or she shall reside within the city limits.

 

§2-37.  Administrator; Duties; General
               The duties of the city administrator are as follows:

        (1)  Attend all meetings of the city council and its committees unless excused, with the duty of reporting on any matter concerning the City under his or her direction; and to attend such other meetings of departments and officials as the duties of the office may require, or as may be directed by the mayor or council.

        (2)  Make investigation into all affairs of the City and to make recommendations to the mayor and council for the adoption of such measures and ordinances as are deemed necessary or expedient for the good government of the City.

        (3)  Analyze the functions, duties, and activities of the various departments, divisions, and services of the City, and of all employees thereof, and to make recommendations regarding the same to the mayor and council; and to faithfully carry out the directives and recommendations of the mayor and council in coordinating the administrative functions and operations of the various departments, divisions, and services.

        (4)  Keep the mayor and council fully advised as to the financial condition of the City. With the adoption of the budget and the passage of the appropriations ordinance by the governing body, the city administrator shall be responsible for the supervision and control of the budgeted expenditures.

        (5)   Oversee the supervision of all employees, and evaluate all appointed and hired officials, and recommend to the mayor the appointment, discipline, transfer and dismissal of all City personnel.

        (6)  Investigate or have investigated all complaints filed against an employee, department, division, or service of the City, and to report such investigation with recommendation to the mayor and council.

        (7)  Act as Program Administrator for the Economic Development Program of the City, act as ex-officio member of the Economic Development Committee, assist the committee, and provide the committee with necessary information and advice on the economic development program.

        (8)  Perform all other duties and exercise such other power as may be required by ordinance, or prescribed by resolution of the mayor and council.

 

 

Division 3.  City Clerk
 

§2-38.  City Clerk; Duties;  Compensation
               There is hereby created the office and position of city clerk. The city clerk shall be appointed by the mayor with approval of a majority of the city council. The city clerk shall have the custody of all laws, ordinances and official records, and keep a correct journal of the proceedings of the council, and perform all other duties and meet all requirements imposed by law upon the position or office of city clerk. The salary of the city clerk shall be fixed by ordinance.

 

 

 
Division 4.  City Treasurer
 

§2-39.  Finance Department; City Treasurer / Finance Director; Duties; Compensation
               There is hereby created a department of the City which shall be known as the Finance Department, which shall be responsible for the performance of the financial management and accounting functions of city government, including those of all departments and divisions thereof. The Department shall be responsible for developing, instituting, and maintaining all of the financial and accounting systems associated with the operation of city government including general ledger accounting; financial statements and reporting; cash management and investments; accounts payable and receivable; utilities billing and collection; payroll; and auditing. All personnel assigned to these functions shall come under the auspices of the Department and the direction of the finance director.

               There is hereby created the office and position of City Treasurer/Director of Finance. This position hereafter referred to as "Finance Director," shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the city council. The Director shall perform all duties and meet all requirements imposed by law upon the position or office and such other duties as directed. The Director shall assist the city administrator in the preparation of the annual budget. The finance director shall be responsible for the preparation of the annual estimates of revenues and expenditures of the proposed budget for the presentation of a complete financial plan for the City to the mayor and council prior to the consideration and adoption of the annual appropriation ordinance by the governing body. The finance director shall prepare and submit to the mayor and council, on a monthly basis, a complete report on the finance activities of the City. The salary of the position shall be fixed by ordinance.

 

 

Division 5.  City Attorney
 

§2-40.  City Attorney;  Duties;  Compensation
               The office of city attorney is hereby created, which office shall constitute a full-time obligation upon the individual so appointed. The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the city council.

               The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the council and city officers. The city attorney shall commence, prosecute, and defend all suits and actions necessary to be commenced, prosecuted, or defended on behalf of the City, or that may be ordered by the council. The city attorney shall attend meetings of the council and give an opinion upon any matters submitted by the council, either orally or in writing, as may be required. The city attorney may hire outside counsel on matters in which the city attorney lacks expertise or in which the city attorney has a conflict of interest.

               The salary of the city attorney shall be fixed by ordinance.

 

 

Division 6.  City Engineer / Public Works Director

 

§2-41.  City Engineer / Public Works Director; Duties; Compensation
               There is hereby created the office and position of City Engineer / Public Works Director, hereafter referred to as "Public Works Director". This position shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the city council.

               Among the duties required of the Public Works Director shall be making estimates of the cost of labor and material which may be done or furnished by contract with the city and make all surveys, estimates and calculations necessary to be made for the establishment of grades, the building of culverts, sewers, bridges, curbing, gutters, and the repair and improvement of streets.

               The Public Works Director shall make a record of the minutes of his surveys and of all work done for the city, including sewers and sewerage systems and accurately make such plats, sections, profiles and maps as may be necessary in the prosecution of any public work, which shall be public records and belong to the city and be turned over to his or her successor.

               In addition to the duties specifically set forth above, the Public Works Director shall perform such other duties as the city council may require or are required by law.

               The salary of the position of Public Works Director shall be established by ordinance.

 

§2-42.  Reserved
§2-43.  Reserved

 

 

Article IV.  Indemnification of Officers and Employees
 

§2-44.  Definitions
            Officer shall include any elected,  appointed, or hired official of the city;

Employee shall include all employees of the city, whether under civil service or not.

 

§2-45.  Representation; City Attorney
               Among the duties of the city attorney shall be that of representing as counsel, without charge to the persons represented, any city officer or employee in connection with any claim, suit for damages, or other action against such person arising in connection with the performance by such officer or employee of his or her public duties; provided that such employee or officer may have his or her own counsel to assist in the defense, at the expense of the employee or officer.

 

§2-46.  Indemnification; Good Faith
               Any officer or employee who is held liable for the payment of any claims or damages, by way of judgment or settlement, shall be entitled to indemnification by the city, where the acts resulting in such liability were done in good faith, without malice, within the scope of authority of the employee or officer.

 

§2-47.  Governmental Immunity
               Nothing in this Article shall be construed as waiving the city's defense of governmental immunity to it or its employees or officers in any action brought against the city or such officer or employee.

 

§2-48.  Notice
               The provisions of this Article shall apply only where the city has been given notice of any actions brought against any city employee or officer, based upon any action of such employee or officer within the scope of his or her authority as such.

 

§2-49.  Representation; Conflict of Interest
               Nothing in this Article or in any ordinance of the city, and nothing in any agreement with the city attorney shall be construed to require the city attorney to provide legal services in any manner which would cause the attorney to be involved in a conflict of interest.

 

§2-50.  Reserved
§2-51.  Reserved
§2-52.  Reserved
§2-53.  Reserved

 

 

Article V.  Emergency Interim Successors
 

§2-54.  Emergency Succession; Declaration
               In accordance with the terms and conditions of the state General Emergency Succession Act, hereinafter referred to as "such act," the mayor and council declare that it is necessary to invoke the provisions of such act in the City.

 

§2-55.  Officers To Appoint Successors
               Emergency interim successors shall be designated pursuant to the Local Emergency Operations Plan on file with the City Clerk and the Emergency Management Director.

 

 

 

§2-56.  Reserved
§2-57.  Reserved
§2-58.  Reserved

 

 

Article VI.  Retirement and Pension Plans

 
§2-59.  Ratification of Existing Plans
               The City hereby affirms and ratifies the existing pension and retirement plans it has established which specifically includes the following plans:

        (1)  A Police Officers Retirement System Fund and retirement plan pursuant to Neb. R.R.S. §16-1001 et seq;

        (2)  A Fire Fighters Retirement System Fund and retirement plan pursuant to Neb. R.R.S. §16-1020 et seq;

        (3)  A general employee pension fund and pension plan pursuant to Neb. R.R.S. §19-3501.

Said funds and plans are hereby ratified and confirmed.

 

Entire Chapter 2 Amended and Reorganized Pursuant to Ordinance No. 9036, effective 04-12-2006

 

Article VII.  Community Development Division

 

Repealed by Ordinance No. 9525, effective 04-01-2015 

CHAPTER 3

ALARM SYSTEMS

 

§3-1.  Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be defined as herein set forth:

               Alarm system means any mechanical or electrical device that is arranged, designed, or used to signal the occurrence in the City of Grand Island of a burglary, robbery, other criminal offense, fire emergency, or medical emergency requiring urgent attention, and to which law enforcement, fire, or emergency medical personnel are expected to respond. Alarm systems include those through which Public Safety personnel are notified directly of such signals through automatic recording devices or are notified indirectly by way of third persons who monitor the alarm systems and who report such signals to Public Safety personnel. Alarm systems also include those designed to register a signal which is so audible, visible, or in other ways perceptible outside a protected building, structure, or facility as to notify persons in the neighborhood beyond the zoning lot where the signal is located, who may in turn notify the Public Safety personnel of the signal. Alarm systems do not include those affixed to automobiles. Further, alarm systems do not include auxiliary devices installed by telephone companies to protect telephone equipment or systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system.

               False alarm is any signal created by an alarm system (including but not limited to alarm signals initiated by human error) which signal directly or indirectly notifies Public Safety personnel of the occurrence of a burglary, robbery, other criminal offense, fire emergency or medical emergency when no such emergency exists and when law enforcement, fire, or emergency medical personnel are not needed to respond to a burglary, robbery, other criminal offense, fire emergency, or medical emergency.

               Subscriber is any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity who or which purchases, leases, contracts for, or obtains an alarm system.

               Vendor is any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity associated with an alarm business or company, either indirectly or directly, whose duties include but are not limited to any of the following: selling, replacing, moving, repairing, maintaining, or installing an alarm system on or in any structure, building, or facility.

 

§3-2.  Duties of Subscriber and of Vendor
               (1)  Duties of Subscriber.  It shall be the responsibility of each subscriber to see that the standards of installation and maintenance set forth in this chapter are adhered to.

               (2)  Duties of Vendor.  It shall be the responsibility of any vendor causing installation of or maintaining an alarm system to cause such installation or maintenance to conform to the requirements of the Fire Code and the Electric Code applicable in the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

               (3)  Duties of Subscriber and Vendor.  Each alarm system shall be utilized only for the purposes of summoning the Public Safety personnel for emergency and/or life hazard situations. Without the prior express consent of the Communications Division of the Emergency Management Department, systems shall not be tested so as to transmit a signal to Public Safety personnel when an emergency or life hazard situation does not exist. It shall be the responsibility of each subscriber and also each vendor not to make such tests.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9037, effective 04-12-2006

 

§3-3.  Standards Required For Alarm Systems
               (1)  Notification.  Each subscriber must provide to the City of Grand Island on a form provided by the Communications Division of the Emergency Management Department the name, address, and telephone number of the subscriber and of the vendor, if any, with whom the subscriber has contracted for maintenance of the alarm system. Each subscriber shall also provide the City with the names, addresses, and phone numbers of those persons (not less than two) who can be contacted 24 hours a day and seven days a week to turn off or deactivate an alarm system. It shall be the obligation of the subscriber to keep this information current and correct through supplementary notifications filed from time to time on the same form.

               (2)  Designated Telephone Lines.  No person shall use or cause to be used an alarm system or device of any kind that automatically dials or calls any telephone line of the offices of the City of Grand Island or any department or division thereof except such telephone line or lines as may be designed by the Communications Division of the Emergency Management Department of the City for the specific purpose of receiving signals from alarm systems.

               (3)  Automatic Dialing or Calling Devices.  Alarm systems that automatically dial or call a telephone line designated by the Communications Division of the Emergency Management Department shall comply with the following requirements:

               (A)  Total length of the recorded message being transmitted to the Communications Division of the Emergency Management Department (including repetition of message) shall not exceed 30 seconds duration.

               (B)  The recorded message transmitted shall be repeated not less than two nor more than three times.

               (C)  The recorded message being transmitted shall incorporate language specifically identifying the message as a "recording" with the balance of the message identifying by street number and street name the location of the emergency and the nature of the event which caused the alarm system to activate. If the location of the event signaled by the alarm system is in a multi-family building or a multi-unit office or commercial building, the message shall also identify by number and by floor the particular dwelling unit, office unit, or commercial unit in which the event occurred.

               (D)  The recorded message being transmitted to the department shall be appropriate for the purpose for which the alarm system was installed, and the message in its entirety shall be intelligible and spoken in the English language.

               (E)  The City of Grand Island's cost of providing monitoring and telephone lines designated for alarm systems that use automatic dialing or calling devices, including any re-occurring fees charged, shall be paid in advance each year to this City by the subscribers. The fee shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. If payment is not received within thirty days after billing, the system must be disconnected immediately in the manner described in §3-5(3).

               (4)  Digital Alarm Systems.  Subscribers to alarm systems that automatically transmit digital data via common telephone line to a receiving unit located at the Communications Center shall pay a digital alarm system monitoring fee, in advance, in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

               (5)  Supervised (Dedicated line) Alarm Systems.  Subscribers that automatically transmit alarm conditions via dedicated telephone line to a receiving unit at the Communications Center shall pay a supervised (dedicated line) alarm system monitoring fee, in advance, in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

               (6)  Video (Live) Alarm Systems.  Subscribers that transmit continuous video to a receiving unit at the Communications Center for the purpose of monitoring a premise shall pay a video (live) alarm system monitoring fee, in advance, in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9037, effective 04-12-2006

 

§3-4.  Standards For Future Alarm Systems
               Systems installed shall comply with the following standards as to installation and maintenance (and, in addition, shall also comply with the standards set forth in §3-3):

        (1)  Alarm systems must incorporate a device that allows an adequate delay before the time at which activation of the system would directly or indirectly signal Public Safety personnel, or signal other parties who in turn might be expected to notify Public Safety personnel. This delay is to permit the subscriber to stop a false alarm from being transmitted.

        (2)  The alarm system shall incorporate a device that limits any exterior signal to a period of time not to exceed fifteen minutes in duration. At the expiration of the maximum time permitted, the alarm system shall automatically cease to emit a signal.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9037, effective 04-12-2006

 

§3-5.  Excessive False Alarms
               If any alarm system produces three false alarms in any twelve consecutive months, written notice of that fact shall be given by certified mail or delivery to the subscriber, or other appropriate party listed in the notification required in §3-3(1) at the addresses listed in the most recent such notification for that alarm system. Thereafter, the Communications Division of the Emergency Management Department shall have the power to require the subscriber to comply with any one or combination of the requirements set forth below as would minimize, such false alarms in the future:

        (1)  The subscriber may be charged a fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. Such charges shall continue for each excessive false alarm until six consecutive months have elapsed during which no false alarms have been registered, and must be paid within 15 days after notice thereof is given in the same manner as provided by this section for notice of excessive false alarms.

        (2)  The subscriber may be required to cause the alarm system to comply immediately with the applicable standards referred to in §3-4.

        (3)  The subscriber may be required to disconnect the alarm system immediately in such fashion that signals are not emitted so as to notify Public Safety personnel directly or indirectly through automatic telephone recording devices or to register a signal which is so audible, visible, or in other ways perceptible outside a protected building, structure, or facility as to notify persons in the neighborhood who may in turn notify Public Safety personnel of the signal.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9037, effective 04-12-2006

 

§3-6.  No Liability on Part  of the City
               Nothing in this chapter nor the existence of any other fact(s) shall be construed to require a response by Public Safety personnel to an address or location registering an alarm. The City shall neither assume nor bear any liability for its failure to respond to such an alarm signal.

 

§3-7.  Penalty
               Any person in violation of §3-2 shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9037, effective 04-12-2006

 
CHAPTER 4

ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES

 

§4-1. Definitions
               For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

                Alcohol means the product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol and alcohol processed or sold in a gaseous form. Alcohol does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol;

               Spirits means any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, or other spirituous liquors and such liquors when rectified, blended, or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances;

               Wine means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits;

               Beer means a beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley or other grain, malt, and hops in water and includes, but is not limited to, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, and near beer;

               Alcoholic liquor includes alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and any liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. Alcoholic liquor also includes confections or candy with alcohol content of more than one-half of one percent alcohol. The act does not apply to (a) alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with acts of Congress and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to such acts, (b) flavoring extracts, syrups, medicinal, mechanical, scientific, culinary, or toilet preparations, or food products unfit for beverage purposes, but the act applies to alcoholic liquor used in the manufacture, preparation, or compounding of such products or confections or candy that contains more than one-half of one percent alcohol, or (c) wine intended for use and used by any church or religious organization for sacramental purposes;

               Near beer means beer containing less than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume;

               Original package means any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead, or other receptacle or container used, corked or capped, sealed, and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor;

               Manufacturer means every brewer, fermenter, distiller, rectifier, winemaker, blender, processor, bottler, or person who fills or refills an original package and others engaged in brewing, fermenting, distilling, rectifying, or bottling alcoholic liquor, including a wholly owned affiliate or duly authorized agent for a manufacturer;

               Nonbeverage user means every manufacturer of any of the products set forth and described in subsection (4) of section 53-160, when such product contains alcoholic liquor, and all laboratories, hospitals, and sanatoria using alcoholic liquor for nonbeverage purposes;

               Manufacture means to distill, rectify, ferment, brew, make, mix, concoct, process, blend, bottle, or fill an original package with any alcoholic liquor and includes blending but does not include the mixing or other preparation of drinks for serving by those persons authorized and permitted in the act to serve drinks for consumption on the premises where sold;

               Wholesaler means a person importing or causing to be imported into the state or purchasing or causing to be purchased within the state alcoholic liquor for sale or resale to retailers licensed under the act, whether the business of the wholesaler is conducted under the terms of a franchise or any other form of an agreement with a manufacturer or manufacturers, or who has caused alcoholic liquor to be imported into the state or purchased in the state from a manufacturer or manufacturers and was licensed to conduct such a business by the Nebraska State Liquor Control Commission on May 1, 1970, or has been so licensed since that date. Wholesaler does not include any retailer licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises who sells alcoholic liquor other than beer or wine to another retailer pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-175, except that any such retailer shall obtain the required federal wholesaler's basic permit and federal wholesale liquor dealer's special tax stamp. Wholesaler includes a distributor, distributorship, and jobber;

               Person means any natural person, trustee, corporation, partnership, or limited liability company;

               Retailer means a person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and not for resale in any form except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-175;

               Sell at retail and sale at retail means sale for use or consumption and not for resale in any form except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-175;

               Commission means the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission;

               Sale means any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner or by any means for a consideration and includes any sale made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee;

               To sell means to solicit or receive an order for, to keep or expose for sale, or to keep with intent to sell;

               Restaurant means any public place (a) which is kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, (b) which has no sleeping accommodations, and (c) which has adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests;

               Club means a corporation (a) which is organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor, (b) which is kept, used, and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, (c) which owns, hires, or leases a building or space in a building suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests, and (d) which has suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing, and serving food and meals for its members and their guests. The affairs and management of such club shall be conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting, and no member, officer, agent, or employee of the club shall be paid or shall directly or indirectly receive, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members other than any salary fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by the governing body of the club out of the general revenue of the club;

               Hotel means any building or other structure (a) which is kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent, or residential, (b) in which twenty-five or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests, and (c) which has one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same buildings in connection therewith and such building or buildings or structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity;

               Nonprofit corporation means any corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for profit, which has been exempted from the payment of federal income taxes;

               Minor means any person, male or female, under twenty-one years of age, regardless of marital status;

               Brand means alcoholic liquor identified as the product of a specific manufacturer;

               Franchise or agreement, with reference to the relationship between a manufacturer and wholesaler, includes one or more of the following: (a) A commercial relationship of a definite duration or continuing indefinite duration which is not required to be in writing; (b) a relationship by which the wholesaler is granted the right to offer and sell the manufacturer's brands by the manufacturer; (c) a relationship by which the franchise, as an independent business, constitutes a component of the manufacturer's distribution system; (d) a relationship by which the operation of the wholesaler's business is substantially associated with the manufacturer's brand, advertising, or other commercial symbol designating the manufacturer; and (e) a relationship by which the operation of the wholesaler's business is substantially reliant on the manufacturer for the continued supply of beer;

               Territory or sales territory means the wholesaler's area of sales responsibility for the brand or brands of the manufacturer;

               Suspend means to cause a temporary interruption of all rights and privileges of a license;

               Cancel means to discontinue all rights and privileges of a license;

               Revoke means to permanently void and recall all rights and privileges of a license;

               Generic label means a label which is not protected by a registered trademark, either in whole or in part, or to which no person has acquired a right pursuant to state or federal statutory or common law;

               Private label means a label which the purchasing wholesaler or retailer has protected, in whole or in part, by a trademark registration or which the purchasing wholesaler or retailer has otherwise protected pursuant to state or federal statutory or common law;

               Brewpub means any restaurant or hotel which produces on its premises a maximum of ten thousand barrels of beer per year;

               Manager means a person appointed by a corporation to oversee the daily operation of the business licensed in Nebraska. A manager shall meet all the requirements of the act as though he or she were the applicant, except for residency and citizenship;

               Shipping license means a license granted pursuant to section 53-123.15 of the Revised Statutes of Nebraska;

               Sampling means consumption on the premises of a retail licensee of not more than five samples of one fluid ounce or less of alcoholic liquor by the same person in a twenty-four-hour period;

               Microbrewery means any small brewery producing a maximum of ten thousand barrels of beer per year;

               Craft brewery means a brewpub or a microbrewery;

               Local governing body means (a) the city council of the City of Grand Island; and

               Consume means knowingly and intentionally drinking or otherwise ingesting alcoholic liquor.

 

§4-2. Declared Legislative Intent
               It is hereby declared to be the intent and purpose of the city council in adopting and administering the provisions of this chapter:

        (A)  To express the community sentiment that the control of availability of alcoholic liquor to the public in general and to minors in particular promotes the public health, safety, and welfare;

        (B)  To encourage temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquor by sound and careful control and regulation of the sale and distribution thereof; and

        (C)  To ensure that the number of retail outlets and the manner in which they are operated is such that they can be adequately policed by local law enforcement agencies so that the abuse of alcohol and the occurrence of alcohol-related crimes and offenses is kept to a minimum.

 

§4-3.  Liquor Application; Standards
               The city council shall consider the licensing standards and criteria at the hearing and evaluate any applicant for a retail alcoholic liquor license, whether for a new license, a renewal of an existing license, or a modification of an existing license, for the purpose of formulating a final order from the governing body to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission in accordance with the Nebraska Liquor Control Act.

 

§4-4.  Applicant to Appear Personally at Hearing
               It shall be the duty of every applicant for an alcoholic liquor license, whose application is pending before the council, to appear before the council personally (if a partnership, at least one of the partners; and if a corporation, at least one managing officer thereof) on the date of the hearing upon the propriety of granting or recommending such license, provided for by §53-134, R.R.S. 1943, of said Liquor Control Act, to answer such questions as may be asked him or her in determining the facts required by law and this chapter, concerning the propriety of granting such license, and a failure to so appear without reasonable excuse, shall be grounds for denying such application. Such applicant may at said hearing present evidence, other than his or her own testimony, which shall be considered by the council in determining the propriety of recommending approval of such license. In adopting any recommendation for approval of such license, the council may require certain conditions to be effected to ensure that the applicant performs in conformance with applicant's representations and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

 

§4-5.  Notice
               Notice of a hearing held pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-134 shall be given to the applicant by the city clerk and shall contain the date, time, and location of the hearing. Two or more proceedings which are legally or factually related may be heard and considered together unless any party thereto makes a showing sufficient to satisfy the council that prejudice would result therefrom.

 

§4-6.  Liquor Application Procedure
               The hearing will be informal and conducted by the Mayor. The hearing shall be held for the purpose of inquiring into the facts and shall not be an adversary action. Each witness may present testimony in narrative fashion or by question and answer.

               The governing body or the applicant may order the hearing to be recorded by an official court reporter or by the Clerk, at the expense of the applicant.

               The governing body and its representatives shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence, and shall have full authority to control the procedures of the hearing including the admission or exclusion or testimony or other evidence. The governing body may admit and give consideration to evidence which possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonably prudent individuals. The Mayor may limit testimony where it appears to be incompetent, irrelevant, or unduly repetitious. If there is opposition to any application and such opposition desires the opportunity to present arguments and to cross-examine the applicant and any witnesses in favor of such application, they shall choose a spokesperson to perform such function who shall notify the Mayor of his/her representation prior to the start of the hearing.

 

§4-7.  Applications for Liquor Licenses
               In order to assist the council in determining the general fitness of an applicant for a retail liquor license, and the character and reputation of the applicant in the community, the applicant shall provide the city clerk at least ten days before the council hearing on the application the following information:

               The application for a new license shall be submitted upon such forms as the commission may prescribe. Such forms shall contain:

               (A)  The name and residence of the applicant and how long he or she has resided within the State of Nebraska.

               (B)  The particular premises for which a license is desired designating the same by street and number if practicable or, if not, by such other description as definitely locates the premises.

               (C)  The name of the owner of the premises upon which the business licensed is to be carried on.

               (D)  A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States, that the applicant and the spouse of the applicant are not less than twenty-one years of age, and that such applicant has never been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a felony or been adjudged guilty of violating the laws governing the sale of alcoholic liquor or the law for the prevention of gambling in the State of Nebraska, except that a manager for a corporation applying for a license shall qualify with all provisions of this subdivision as though the manager were the applicant, except that the provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to the spouse of a manager-applicant.

               (E)  A statement that the applicant intends to carry on the business authorized by the license for himself or herself and not as the agent of any other persons and that if licensed he or she will carry on such business for himself or herself and not as the agent for any other person.

               (F)  A statement that the applicant intends to superintend in person the management of the business licensed and that if so licensed he or she will superintend in person the management of the business, and

               (G)  Such other information as the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission may from time to time direct. The applicant shall also submit two legible sets of fingerprints to be furnished to the Federal Bureau of Investigation through the Nebraska State Patrol for a national criminal history record check and the fee for such record check payable to the patrol.

               (H)  No license for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises shall be recommended for approval until the Building Department, Fire Department and Police Department have completed inspections and have certified that the premises meets all Building and Life Safety Codes. If a license is recommended for approval pending final inspections, the City Clerk shall not issue the license until such time as all inspections have been complete fro full compliance.

               The application shall be verified by the affidavit of the petition made before a notary public or other person duly authorized by law to administer oaths. If any false statement is made in any part of such application, the applicant or applicants shall be deemed guilty of perjury and upon conviction thereof, the license shall be revoked and the applicant subjected to the penalties provided by law for that crime.

 

§4-7.1.  Special Designated Liquor Licenses
               All applications for a special designated liquor license shall be reviewed administratively, and approved or denied, in accordance with established criteria adopted by the City of Grand Island.  Any applicant denied a special designated liquor license based on the adopted criteria may request that such application be heard by the City Council.

 

§4-8.  Grounds for Revocation or  Cancellation
            A retail license to sell alcoholic liquors, which this council is legally empowered to revoke, may be revoked by the city council whenever it shall find, after notice and hearing as provided by law, that the holder of any such license has violated any of the provisions of said Nebraska Liquor Control Act, or of this chapter, or rule or regulation of the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission; or any statutory provision or ordinance of the City now existing or hereafter passed, enacted in the interest of good morals and decency; or for any one or more of the following causes:

        (A)  The licensee, his/her manager or agent in charge of the premises licensed, has been convicted of or has pled guilty to a felony under the laws of the State of Nebraska, or of any other state of the United States.

        (B)  The licensee, his/her manager or agent in charge of the premises licensed, has been convicted of or has pled guilty to being the proprietor, manager or agent in charge of a gambling house, or of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.

        (C)  The licensee, his/her manager or agent in charge of the premises licensed, has been convicted of or pled guilty to violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic liquors.

        (D)  That the licensee either swore falsely to any question in his/her application for said license, or has failed to comply with the statements and representations made by the answer to any question or questions in said application; or has failed to perform in accordance with any other statement or representation, or keep any promise, oral or written, made to the council, in connection with such licensee's request for said license.

        (E)  The licensee, his/her manager or agent in charge of the premises licensed, shall have forfeited bond to appear in court to answer charges for any one of the violations of law or ordinances referred to in this section.

        (F)  It shall be cause for revocation as herein provided if the licensee, his/her manager or agent, shall allow any live person to appear, or have reasonable cause to believe that any live person shall appear in any licensed premises in a state of nudity, to provide entertainment, to provide service, to act as hostess, manager or owner, or to serve as an employee in any capacity. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "nudity" shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks, or the human female breast including the nipple or any portion below the nipple with less than a full opaque covering.

        (G)  It shall be cause for revocation when a licensee, his/her manager or agent in charge of the premises has successive violations that meet the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission standard of violation, the City Council may revoke or cancel the liquor license.

              

§4-9.  Hours of Operation; Retail Establishment
        (A)  No alcoholic liquor, including beer, shall be sold at retail or dispensed on any day between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

        (B)  No alcoholic liquor, including beer, shall be sold at retail or dispensed between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday.

        (C)  Alcoholic liquor, including beer, may be sold at retail and dispensed from 12:00 noon on Sunday until 1:00 a.m. the following Monday.

 

§4-10.  Reserved
§4-11.  Reserved
§4-12.  Reserved
§4-13.  Reserved
§4-14.  Reserved

 

§4-15.  Occupation Tax; Amounts
               (A)  For the purpose of raising revenue, there is hereby levied upon distributors, retailers, and nonbeverage users of alcoholic liquor in the City of Grand Island an annual occupation tax in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.  No reduction in occupation tax except as hereinabove stated shall be made regardless of the time when the application for license is made, or the license is issued. Such occupation tax, or any part of it, shall not be refunded for any cause.

               (B)  All occupation taxes levied pursuant to section (A) above, shall be due and payable within thirty days of the date of the renewal of the licensee's state liquor license.

 

§4-16.  Delivery by Distributor on Sunday
               It shall be unlawful for any licensed distributor or wholesaler of beer to deliver such beverage to any retailers of the same in the city on the first day of the week, commonly called Sunday.

 

§4-17.  Licensed Premises; Lights Required
               All rooms where alcoholic liquors are sold shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural or artificial light.

 

§4-18.  Consumption in Public Places
               It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquors within the city in the public streets, alleys, roads or highways, or upon property owned by the state or any governmental subdivision thereof, or inside vehicles while upon the public streets, alleys, roads, or highways, in any dance hall, restaurant, cafe, club, or any place open to the general public except as permitted by a license issued to such premises. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing or conducting any dance hall, restaurant, cafe, club, or any place open to the general public to permit or allow any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon the premises, except as permitted by a license issued to such premises.

 

§4-19.  Possession in Parks Prohibited
               It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his/her possession or physical control any alcoholic liquors upon any of the property belonging to the City designated as a city park or playground.

 

§4-20.  Minors Not Permitted After 9 P.M.
               It shall be unlawful for any licensed retailer or his, her, or its agent or employee to suffer or permit any minor to be or remain in any room or compartment of such licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is being sold or consumed after 9 p.m. of any day; provided, that this section shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by his or her parent or adult guardian, or to any licensed premises which derives its principal business from the sale of services or other commodities other than alcoholic liquor.

 

§4-21.  Violations; Liability of Licensee
               Any act or the omission of any act constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager, or other agent or employee of any licensee under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, if such act is committed or such omission is made with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of such licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee, and such employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by him personally.

 

§4-22.  Right of Entry of Officers
               All police officers of the city are authorized to enter at any time upon the premises of any license under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act within the City to determine whether or not any of the provisions of such Act or of this chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted by the City or by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission have been or are being violated and at such time to examine sufficiently such premises of such licensee in connection therewith.

 

§4-23.  Unlawful Presence in Establishments
               It shall be unlawful for any person to be present in any establishment where alcoholic liquors are sold or dispensed at any time during which sales of alcoholic liquors are prohibited by the foregoing sections; provided, that a person may be present in such an establishment for only fifteen minutes after the time required for cessation of sales of alcoholic liquors set out in prior §4-9 to allow the person present in the establishment at closing time to leave the premises; provided further, that the word "person" shall not include the owner or operator or his/her agent or employee when actually engaged in cleanup or custodial work. This section shall not apply to restaurants which are open for business. 

 

 

CHAPTER 5
ANIMALS

Article I. General

§5-1.  Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following terms mean:

               Abandon. To leave any animal in one’s care, whether as owner or custodian, for any unreasonable length of time without making effective provision for its food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal’s health.

               Animal. Any live, member of the Animal Kingdom with the following exceptions:

1.       Human beings;

2.      Animals that are sold commercially as food for human consumption;

3.      Animals that are slaughtered as food for human or animal consumption;

4.      Animals that are slaughtered or processed for human use;

5.      Animals that are used for scientific research conducted at commercial or academic facilities;

6.      Animals that are used as commonly acceptable bait for lawful fishing activities; or

7.      Vermin.

Animal Abuse.  To knowingly, willfully, intentionally or inhumanely kill, maim, injure, torture, or beat an animal with the following exceptions:

1.      Euthanization or treatment by a Veterinarian or at a Veterinary Hospital or Clinic;

2.      Euthanization or treatment at an Animal Control Facility;

3.      Killing or injuring by members of law enforcement or Animal Control Officers in the course of their duties;

4.      Killing or injuring by persons protecting themselves or others from potential death or serious injury; or

5.      Training or disciplining an animal using commonly accepted methods.

Animal Control Authority.  The entity contracted to enforce the City of Grand Island’s animal control laws.  This also includes any law enforcement agencies authorized to enforce local, State, or Federal animal control laws.

Animal Control Officer.  Any person employed or designated by any Animal Control Authority or law enforcement agency to enforce local, State, or Federal animal control laws.

               Animal Shelter. Any facility operated by the City or by the duly authorized Animal Control Authority for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter.

               Anti-Escape Barrier.  Any housing, fencing, or device humanely designed to prevent a dog from leaving an area.

               Apiary.  A place where bee colonies are kept.

               Auctions Facility. Any commercial establishment place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this ordinance. This section does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners.

Bedding.  Dry material such as straw, cedar or wood chips, or any other absorbent material that provides insulation.

Bee.  Any stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis Mellifera Species.

               Bird. Any feathered vertebrate, including pigeons, but excluding poultry.

               Bite.  Any seizure with the teeth or mouth by an animal which causes injury or harm.

               Boarding Kennel.  Any commercial facility used to house animals owned by persons other than the owner or operator.

               Breeder.  Any person or entity engaged in breeding and/or selling more than ten (10) animals in any twelve (12) month period.

               Circus. A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment.

Colony.  A hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb, honey, pollen and brood.

               Commercial Animal Establishment. Any pet shop, grooming shop, auction facility, riding school or stable, performing animal exhibition, or kennel with the following exceptions:

1.      An animal shelter;

2.      A veterinary hospital or clinic;

3.      A commercial facility that sells, slaughters, or processes animals; or

4.      A commercial or academic animal research facility.

Cruelly mistreat.  To knowingly and intentionally kill, maim, disfigure, torture, beat, mutilate, burn, scald, or otherwise inflict harm upon any animal.

Cruelly neglect.  To fail to provide any animal in one’s care, whether as owner or custodian, with food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal’s health.

Dangerous Animal. An animal that has killed a human being, inflicted injury on a human being that requires medical treatment, or killed a domestic animal without provocation with the following exceptions:

1.      An animal that is provoked;

2.      An animal that is serving as a guard for persons or property; or

3.      An animal that kills or injures a person who is trespassing.

Domestic animal.  Shall mean a cat, a dog, or livestock.

Enclosure. Any tract of land intended to restrain or contain an animal by means of a building, fence, or any other means.

Fowl. Any poultry, other than pigeons.

Grooming Shop. A commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked, or otherwise groomed.

Health Department.  The agency or organization the City contracts with or designates to enforce the provisions of Chapter 5 - Animals of the Grand Island City Code related to public health and welfare.

Hive.  A structure intended for the housing of a bee colony.

Hybrid animal.  Any animal which is the product of the breeding of a domestic dog with a nondomestic canine species.

Humane killing.  The destruction of an animal by a method which causes the animal a minimum of pain and suffering.

Kennel. Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats.

Livestock.  Any hoofed animal commonly associated with domestic agricultural purposes, including but not limited to: horses, mules, donkeys, cows, sheep, goats, llamas, hogs, bovine, equine, swine, sheep, goats, domesticated cervine animals, ratite birds, or poultry.

Medical treatment.   Treatment administered by a physician or other licensed health care professional.

Mutilation.  Intentionally causing permanent injury, disfigurement, degradation of function, incapacitation, or imperfection to an animal. Mutilation does not include conduct performed by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine and surgery in this state or conduct that conforms to accepted veterinary practices.

Owner. Any person(s) or legal entity having permanent control of an animal or housing, feeding, or controlling an animal for more than three (3) days with the following exceptions:

1.      A boarding kennel; or

2.      A veterinarian, veterinary hospital, or veterinary clinic.

Performing Animal Exhibition. Any spectacle, display, act, circus fair, or event in which animals perform.

Pet. Any animal kept for pleasure or companionship rather than solely for utility.

Pet Shop. Any person, partnership, or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business except for a licensed kennel, that buys, sells, or boards any species of animal.   
               Potentially Dangerous Animal.  (a) Any animal that when unprovoked:

(i)             inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require medical treatment; or

(ii)            injures a domestic animal; or

(iii)          chases or approaches a person upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or

(b)  any specific animal with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack when unprovoked, to cause injury, or to threaten the safety of humans or domestic animals.

Restraint. Securing an animal by a leash or lead, which results in it being under the control of owner or custodian, or being confined within the real property limits of its owner or custodian.

Riding School or Stable. Any place which has available for hire, boarding and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule, or burro.

Running at Large.  Any dog or other animal outside the premises of  its owner or custodian and not controlled by a leash, cord, chain, rope, cage or other suitable means of physical restraint.

Shelter. Any structure with a roof and at least three (3) walls designed and capable of protecting and/or housing one or more animals while providing protection from the elements and affording any animal housed or protected in it, the space to sit, stand, lie down, and turn around.

Torture.  Intentionally subjecting an animal to pain, suffering, or agony with the following exceptions:

1.      The slaughter of animals as food for human or animal consumption;

2.    The slaughter or processing of animals for human use;

3.    The use of animals for scientific research conducted at commercial or academic

        facilities;

4.    The use of animals as commonly acceptable bait for lawful fishing activities;

5.    The extermination of vermin;

6.    The euthanization or treatment of an animal by a Veterinarian or at a Veterinary

        Hospital or Clinic;

7.    The euthanization or treatment of an animal at an animal control facility;

8.    The killing or injuring of animals by members of law enforcement or Animal Control

        Officers in the course of their duties;

9.    The killing or injuring of animals by persons protecting themselves or others from

        potential death or serious injury; or

10. The training or disciplining of animals using commonly accepted methods.

Vermin. Animals that infest places where humans live, work, or control and which are commonly considered objectionable, excluding animals used solely as feeder animals.  Examples include but are not limited to rodents and insects.

Wild Animal. Any animal that is native to a foreign country, of foreign origin or character, not native to the United States, not native to the State of Nebraska, and/or is any wild, poisonous, or potentially dangerous animal not normally considered domesticated, including but not limited to monkeys, raccoons, skunks, snakes and lions but excluding birds and those animals listed on the Approved Animal List.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9229, effective 08-26-2009

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9537, effective 05-19-2015

 

§5-2.  Animal Advisory Board; Establishment
               There is hereby established the Animal Advisory Board of the City of Grand Island, whose duty it shall be to advise the mayor and city council on all matters relating to this chapter. The board shall be composed of nine members: five (5) members appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council; one (1) of whom shall be a licensed veterinarian, three (3) shall be registered voters residing within the City of Grand Island; and one (1) member of the City Council.  The other four (4) non-appointed members shall consist of the Chief of Police or his/her designee, the City Attorney or his/her designee, the director of the Animal Control Authority or his/her designee, and the director of the designated health department or his/her designee.  Appointed members shall serve without compensation. The Animal Advisory Board shall meet during January of each year and/or such other occasions as may be established by said board.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9229, effective 08-26-2009

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-3.  Composition and Membership;  Term of Office; Quorum;  and Procedure

               Said advisory board shall be composed of the following voting members:  one (1) veterinarian and three (3) representatives from the community at large, a member of the City Council, the Chief of Police or his/her designee, the director of the Animal Control Authority or his/her designee, and the director of the health department or his/her designee.  The City Attorney or his/her designee shall serve as an ex officio member without voting privileges.  The original appointees to the Animal Advisory Board shall serve terms as follows: One for one year, one for two years, and one for three years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three year terms, provided, any appointment to fill a vacancy shall only be for the unexpired portion of the term of the member being replaced. The mayor may remove any appointed member without cause.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-4.  Enforcement; Jurisdiction; Agencies; Duties
               (A) This chapter shall be enforced only within the corporate limits of the City of Grand Island.

               (B)  The Code provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the agency with which the City contracts to enforce said provisions and the Police Department. All employees of said Animal Control Authority shall be designated animal control officers for the purposes of this chapter.

               (C)  The Health Department shall assist in enforcement of code provisions relating to public health, safety and welfare.

               (D)  This Chapter shall not apply to:

(1) Care or treatment of an animal by a veterinarian licensed under the Nebraska Veterinary Practice Act until December 1, 2008, and the Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act on and after December 1, 2008;

(2) Commonly accepted care or treatment of a police animal by a law enforcement officer in the normal course of his or her duties;

(3) Research activity carried on by any research facility currently meeting the standards of the federal Animal Welfare Act, 7 U.S.C. 2131 et seq., as such act existed on January 1, 2003;

(4) Commonly accepted practices of hunting, fishing, or trapping;

(5) Commonly accepted practices occurring in conjunction with rodeos, animal racing, or pulling contests;

(6) Humane killing of an animal by the owner or by his or her agent or a veterinarian upon the owner’s request;

(7) Commonly accepted practices of animal husbandry with respect to farm animals and commercial livestock operations, including their transport from one location to another and nonnegligent actions taken by personnel or agents of the Nebraska Department of Agriculture or the United States

Department of Agriculture in the performance of duties prescribed by law;

(8) Use of reasonable force against an animal, other than a police animal, which is working, including killing, capture, or restraint, if the animal is outside the owned or rented property of its owner or custodian and is injuring or posing an immediate threat to any person or other animal;

(9)  Killing of house or garden pests;

(10) Commonly followed practices occurring in conjunction with the slaughter of animals for food or byproducts; and

(11) Commonly accepted animal training practices.

(12) The Nebraska State Fair; and

(13) Post-secondary educational institutions.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9531, effective 04-15-2015

 

§5-5.  Interference with Animal  Control Officer
               It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with an animal control officer in the performance of his or her duties.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 
Article II. Commercial Animal Establishments
§5-6.  Commercial Animal Establishments
               All provisions of this chapter relating to the care and control of animals shall apply to commercial animal establishments as to all animals not kept for sale or resale; and, as to all animals kept for sale or resale, all provisions shall apply except for the enclosure distance requirements set forth in §5-16 and §5-17; the limitations of the number of animals set forth in §5-18; the minimum area requirements set forth in §5-18; the prohibition of  roosters as set forth in §5-41.1; and the registration of dogs and cats set forth in §5-12.

 

§5-7.  Permits Required

               No person, partnership, or corporation shall operate a commercial animal establishment within the City of Grand Island without first obtaining a commercial permit. Operation of a commercial animal establishment without a commercial animal establishment permit shall constitute a public nuisance, subject to abatement pursuant to §20-15 of the Grand Island City Code and fine pursuant to §1-7 of this Code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-7. 1.  Selling and/or Giving  Away Animals on City  or Private Property
               No person, partnership, corporation, or any other legal entity shall sell and/or give away animals on City property.  Before the sale and/or giving of animals may occur on private property, the animal owner must first obtain the written permission of the property owner.  Refusal to leave upon request shall be punishable by a fine as listed in §1-7 of this Code.

Added by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-8.  Commercial Permits; Fee; Renewal
               (A)  A commercial permit fee as adopted by the  Health Department and identified in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule shall be paid to the Health Department for each commercial animal establishment within the City.

               (B)  Each permit shall be effective for one year, beginning on August 1 of each year and ending on July 31 of the following year.

               (C)  Renewal applications shall be made no sooner than thirty days prior to, nor later than thirty days after, the first day of August.

 

§5-9.  Commercial Permits;  Transfer
               Permits may be transferred upon a change of ownership of a commercial animal establishment upon  payment of a transfer fee as adopted by the  Health Department and identified in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§5-10.  Commercial Establishments;  Inspections
               It shall be a condition of the issuance of a permit for operating a commercial animal establishment that the Animal Control Authority on behalf of the City, or the City’s designee or the Health Department shall be permitted to inspect the premises and all animals thereon semi-annually. Refusal to allow an inspection by any authorized agent of the City or Health Department shall be grounds for revocation of said permit.  All commercial animal establishments shall comply with the Minimum Standards of Sanitation, Care, and Adequate Housing to be promulgated and adopted by the Animal Advisory Board and approved by the Mayor and City Council. Copies of the Minimum Standards of Sanitation, Care, and Adequate Housing shall be on file with the City Clerk and the Animal Control Authority, and shall be available for public inspection.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-11.  Commercial Permits;  Revocation
               The city council may, after notice and hearing as provided by law, revoke or suspend any commercial permit for one or more of the following causes:

               (A)  Refusal by the commercial permit holder to allow the City or an animal control officer to inspect the premises or examine the animals thereon.

               (B)  The conviction of the commercial permit holder or any of his or her employees for the offense of cruelty to or neglect of animals, whether or not said conviction is based upon the treatment of any animal on the premises of the commercial animal establishment.

               (C)  Three or more convictions of the commercial permit holder and/or any of his or her employees for violations of any provision of this chapter within any twelve month period where said violations are based upon the care and/or control of the animals on the premises of said establishment.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

 
Article III.  Animal Licenses
§5-12.  Registration Fee;  Amounts; Delinquent
               (A)  The owner of any dog or cat over the age of three months in the City of Grand Island shall pay an annual pet license fee for said dog or cat. Such fee shall be adopted by the governing body and identified in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

               The annual pet license as provided in this section shall be for the period of January 1 through December 31 of the licensing year. The pet license provided for by this section shall be secured by each new owner or new resident within thirty days of establishing residency in the City or after acquiring said animal, notwithstanding the fact that the dog or cat may have been registered within the annual period by a previous owner or that the dog or cat had been registered with another authority other than the City of Grand Island.

               (B)  The fee required in (A) above shall become due on January 1 of the licensing year and shall become delinquent on February 1 of each year. The owner of any dog or cat in the City of Grand Island registering the same after said fee has become delinquent shall pay a surcharge in accordance with the fees adopted by the governing body identified in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

               (C)  No dog or cat shall be registered and licensed unless and until the owner shall display a certificate of a licensed veterinarian showing that such dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies.

               (D)  The owner of any dog or cat that has been declared “potentially dangerous” or “dangerous” shall pay, in addition to the pet license above, an annual kennel inspection fee. Such fee shall become due at the time of the declaration, and then shall be paid annually thereafter with the annual fee becoming due on January 1 of the year following the declaration, and shall become delinquent on February 1 of said year. The kennel inspection fee shall be adopted by the governing body and identified in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9142, effective 11-28-2007

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

 

§5-13.  Pet Tag; Issuance
               (A)  Upon the payment of the pet license fee required by §5-12, the owner shall be issued a metal tag for each dog or cat registered, which tag shall be marked and numbered with the year         for which the tag is purchased and fee paid, and the number corresponding with the number of the dog or cat on the fee list.  The pet tag must be attached to a collar or a harness and must be worn by each dog or cat at all times while it is outside its owner’s residence.        
               (B)  Each dog or cat registered must be listed and numbered by the treasurer and listed at the offices of the Animal Control Authority.   
               (C)  If a pet license tag is lost, a replacement tag must be issued upon payment of a fee as                adopted and identified in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

 
Article IV. Animal Care
§5-14.  Shelter Required
               No owner shall fail to provide pets with shelter of sufficient size to allow each pet to stand, turn around, and lie down, and be of sufficient construction to shield the pets from the wind, sun, precipitation and extreme weather conditions.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-15.  Enclosure Required
               Every owner shall confine his or her animals within an enclosure of sufficient size and design to prevent the animal from escaping or to restrain said animal by a securely fastened rope, chain, cord, or trolley/pulley system, all of which must be of a size and weight appropriate to the size, weight and temperament of the animal.  Confinement shall be done in such a manner as to prevent such animal from going onto any public property or onto the property of another.  Enclosures, other than appropriate full yard fences, shall be at least ten (10) feet from any property line.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9229, effective 08-26-2009

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-16.  Enclosures; Requirements
               (A)  All enclosures and restraints required by §5-15 which are used to confine horses, mules, donkeys, cows, sheep, goats or llamas shall be no less than 150 feet from any residence other than the residence of the owner of said enclosure unless a waiver or variance is obtained as provided in subsection (C) below.

               (B)  All enclosures and restraints required by §5-15 which are used to confine rabbits, birds, chickens shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from any privately-owned property abutting the owner's property.
               (C)  The owner of any animal affected by subsection (A) may keep or maintain an enclosure within the prohibited distance by either obtaining a waiver from all property owners within the prohibited distance stating that said property owners do not object to the keeping of animals within the prohibited distance, and filing the same with the City Clerk, or obtaining a variance from the city council; provided, that no variance shall be granted by the city council for a distance less than 75 feet. The council shall consider the following factors in determining whether or not to issue a variance:

               (1) That the variance, if allowed, is in harmony with the general purpose and interest of this animal ordinance;

               (2) That there are practical difficulties or practical hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this animal ordinance;

               (3) For the purpose of supplementing the above requirements, the council in making the determination whether there are practical difficulties or particular hardships, shall also take into consideration the extent to which the following facts, favorable to the applicant, have been established by the evidence:

               (i)  that the majority of the applicant's neighbors have presented no objection to the proposed variance;

               (ii)  that the variance, if granted, would not be a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare;

               (iii)  that the variance, if granted, would not materially reduce the marketability of surrounding real property.        

               (4) Upon the filing of a request for variance under this subsection, the city clerk shall cause notice of the time and place of the hearing for variance to be mailed to all residences within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the enclosure for which the variance is sought.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9229, effective 08-26-2009

 

§5-17.  Enclosures; Registration Required
               (A)  The location of all enclosures with the distance requirements as set forth by §5-16 shall be registered with the Animal Control Authority within ten days of placing any animal upon an unregistered location. Said registration shall be non-reoccurring for each owner, but shall be nontransferable.
               (B)  The location of all enclosures in existence prior to the effective date of this ordinance                shall be registered with the Animal Control Authority within 90 days of the effective date of this ordinance.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

 

§5-18.  Number of Animals;  Limits
               (A)  No residential property shall have more than one of the following animals over weaning age per half acre of outdoor enclosure area where said animals are of the following livestock species:
               (1)  horses;
               (2)  mules;
               (3)  donkeys;
               (4)  cows;
               (5)  sheep;
               (6)  goats; and
               (7)  llamas;
               (i.e. two acres of outside enclosure area may be occupied by two horses and two cows, not four                horses and four cows).

               (B)  No person, except for commercial retail establishments that offer live fowl (including chickens) for retail sale and governmental and/or non-profit educational facilities, shall keep or maintain on his or her property any fowl (including chicken hens) in a number that exceeds four (4) per one acre with a minimum of land being one (1) acre (i.e., two acres may be occupied by eight (8) fowl).
               (C)  All properties which do not comply with subsection (A) or (B) shall either be brought into compliance by October 3, 2006 or shall obtain a conditional use permit as provided by §36-88 of this Code. The issuance of the conditional use permit shall be subject to the following conditions:

(1)  A description of the species and numbers of animals to be kept on the premises during the term of the conditional use permit shall accompany this application.          
(2)  Written waivers approving the proposed conditional use permit shall be obtained from all persons residing within one hundred fifty (150.0) feet of the subject property and shall accompany the application.

(3)  If the subject property shall be brought into compliance with Section (A) or (B) above for one hundred eighty (180) or more consecutive days, the conditional use permit shall terminate and shall not be renewed or reissued.

               (D)  No residential property shall have more than fifteen (15) rabbits of weaning age at any one time.

               (E) No residential property shall have more than thirty (30) birds over six months of age at any one time. 

               (F)  For the purposes of this section, the number of animals permitted to be kept under subsection (A) shall be reduced by one if rabbits are also kept on said property, and also by one if birds or fowl are kept on said property.

               (G)  No residential property shall have more than four dogs and/or cats over three months of age.   
               (H)  No residential property shall have more than four different species of animals sheltered and/or enclosed outside the residence.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9142, effective 11-28-2007

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-19.  Reserved

 

§5-20.  Shelters and Enclosures; Sanitation
               No owner shall fail to keep the shelters and enclosures on his or her property in a sanitary condition. As a minimum, owners shall not fail to:


               (A)  Remove or dispose of in a sanitary manner, the bedding, offal manure, and waste materials accumulating from livestock at least once every seven (7) days.

               (B)  Remove or dispose of in a sanitary manner, the bedding, offal manure, and waste materials accumulating from all other animals at least once daily.

               (C)  Clean and disinfect said shelters and enclosures so as to prevent the breeding of flies and insects and the emission of deleterious and offensive odors therefrom.

 

§5-21.  Food, Water, Health Care, Grooming; Owner's Duty
               Owner shall provide at a minimum:

(A)            Food of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal and fresh, clean water for his or her animals, in containers of sufficient weight and design as to preclude readily tipping over and spilling the contents.

(B)             Adequate shelter in subzero degree temperatures, excessive heat or stormy weather.

(C)             Grooming of animals as required to keep the animal free from dangerous matting, skin disease and insect infestation which can affect the health of the animal.

(D)            Keep the enclosure or tethered area where the animal is kept free from unsanitary conditions, vermin-harboring debris, junk, contaminated materials, chemicals dangerous to the health of the animal or any other dangerous items that may cause injury to the animal or in any other way endanger the health of the animal.

(E)             Appropriate veterinary care for treatment of injuries, parasite and disease, sufficient to maintain good health.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-22.  Cruelty to Animals  Prohibited
               (A)  No person shall beat, cruelly mistreat, torment, tease, torture, cruelly neglect, or otherwise abuse any animal.

               (B)  No person shall cause, instigate, or permit any fight or other combat between animals, or between animals and humans.

               (C) No person shall cause, place or confine an animal or allow an animal to be confined in a dwelling, motor vehicle or trailer under such conditions or for such periods of time as to endanger the health or well-being of the animal including, but not limited to, extremes of heat or cold, lack of food or water, or any other circumstance which may cause suffering, disability, injury or death.

 

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

 

§5-23.  Abandonment of Animals  Prohibited
               No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.

 

§5-24.  Exposing Poison  Prohibited
               No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal; provided, that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances on his or her own property.

 

§5-25.  Accidents Involving Animals; Duties
               No person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes an animal, shall fail to stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner, the police, or the animal control authority for the City.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9229, effective 08-26-2009

 

§5-26.  Ear Cropping, Dewclaw  Removal, and Taildocking;  Prohibition
               No person, other than a licensed veterinarian, shall crop the ears, remove the dewclaws, or dock the tail of an animal.

 

§5-27.  Restricted Sale of Chicks and Ducklings
               Chickens or ducklings younger than eight weeks of age may not be sold in quantities of less than twenty-five to a single purchaser.

 

§5-28.  Animals as Prizes  Prohibited
               No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such animal as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.

 

§5-29.  Performing Animal  Exhibitions
               (A)  No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which animals are                induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, or manual                devices in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical injury or suffering.

               (B)  All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. 

 
Article V. Rabies Control
 

§5-30.  Rabies Vaccination
               (A)  No owner of a dog, cat or ferret over the age of three (3) months shall fail to cause            the same to be vaccinated against rabies by a duly licensed veterinarian.

               (B)  No owner of a dog, cat, or ferret vaccinated as required by subsection (A) shall fail to have such dog, cat, or ferret revaccinated within ten days of the expiration date set forth for the original or any subsequent vaccination of said dog, cat, or ferret.

 

§5-31.  Vaccination Certificate
               Every veterinarian who vaccinates a dog, cat, or ferret for rabies shall provide the owner thereof with a certificate showing the date of such vaccination. A copy of each such certificate or a compilation thereof providing notification that a vaccination certificate has been issued shall be provided by each veterinary hospital or veterinary clinic to the City of Grand Island, or its designee, by the 10th of each month following the date of issuance.

 

§5-32.  Vaccination Certificate; Duty to Exhibit
               The owner of a vaccinated dog, cat, or ferret shall exhibit the certificate of vaccination to        any animal control officer upon demand.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

 

Article VI. Animal Control
§5-33.  Stallions, Jacks, and Bulls
               No owner of any stallion, jack, or bull shall indecently exhibit the same or permit any such animal to be bred to any mare, jenny, or cow, except where the same is not exposed to public view.

 

§5-34.  Running at Large; Restraint Required
               It shall be unlawful for any owner to suffer or permit any dog or other animal to run at large within the corporate limits of the City of Grand Island. "Running at Large" shall mean any dog or other animal off the premises of the owner and not under the immediate control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal by holding a leash, cord, chain, rope, cage or  other suitable means of physical restraint or if the animal is out of doors on the premises of the owner, the animal shall be in an adequate fenced in area or securely fastened to a leash, chain, or trolley system that is of a size and weight appropriate to the size, weight and temperament of the animal to prevent the animal from leaving the owner's premises. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Authority or other appropriate city law enforcement officer to impound any animal found running at large within the City of Grand Island. Every dog found running at large in violation of this or any other section of the Grand Island City Code is declared to be a public nuisance and may be impounded as the discretion of the Animal Control Authority or other appropriate city law enforcement officer.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9229, effective 08-26-2009

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

 

§5-34.1.  Reserved

Deleted by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

 

§5-34.2.  Animals Used and  Trained for Law  Enforcement;  Exemption
               Any animal used by law enforcement agencies including but not limited to the City of Grand Island Police Department, the Hall County Sheriff's Department or the Nebraska State Patrol shall be exempted from the provisions of the Grand Island City Ordinances including the Animal Running at Large and Dangerous Dogs Ordinances while such animal is being trained or used for law enforcement purposes.

 

§5-35.  Isolation of Female Animals in Heat
               No owner of a female cat or dog in heat shall fail to take reasonable measures to isolate said female from male cats and dogs to prevent contact with such male animals except for planned breeding.

 

§5-36.  Dangerous Animals or Potentially Dangerous  Animals on Owner's  Property

               (A)  While unattended on the owner's property, a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal shall be securely confined, in a humane manner, indoors or outdoors in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitably designed to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the animal from escaping. The pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be embedded into the ground at a depth of at least one foot. The pen or structure shall also protect the animal from the elements. The owner of a dangerous animal shall post warning signs on the property where the animal is kept that are clearly visible from all areas of public access and that inform persons that a dangerous animal is on the property.  Each warning sign shall be no less than ten (10)  inches by twelve (12) inches and shall contain the words warning and dangerous animal in high-contrast lettering at least three (3) inches high on a black background.

               (B)  All pens or structures for confining dangerous animals or potentially dangerous animals constructed after November 1, 2008 shall be at least ten  (10.0) feet from any privately-owned property abutting the animal owners' property.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-36.1.  Dangerous and Potentially  Dangerous Animals; Actions  Required; Costs

               (A)  A dangerous or potentially dangerous animal that has been declared as such shall be spayed or neutered and implanted with a microchip identification number by a licensed veterinarian within thirty (30) days after such declaration.  The cost of both procedures shall be the responsibility of the owner of the dangerous or potentially dangerous animal.  Written proof of both procedures and the microchip identification number shall be provided to the Animal Control Authority after the procedures are completed not to exceed thirty (30) days after the declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous has been made.

               (B)  Failure to have the animal spayed or neutered and implanted with a microchip identification number within thirty (30) days of the declaration will result in the impoundment of the animal pursuant to §5-44.

               (C)  Failure to provide proof the animal being spayed or neutered and implanted with a microchip identification number within thirty (30) days of the declaration will result in the impoundment of the animal pursuant to §5-44.

               (D)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined pursuant to §1-7 of this code.  If a violation is of a continuing nature, i.e., each day after the deadline that the animal is not spayed/neutered or microchipped, each day of the violation shall constitute a separate violation.

Added by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-37.  Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous Animals  Restraint; Impoundment;  Confiscation

               (A)  No owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal shall fail to keep such animal securely muzzled and restrained by a leash or chain whenever off the owner's property.

               (B)  Any dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal in violation of §5-36 or §5-37 of the Grand Island City Code may be immediately impounded by animal control officers. The owner shall be responsible for the costs incurred by the Animal Control Authority for the care of the dangerous or potentially dangerous animal confiscated by the Animal Control Authority or for the destruction of any dangerous or potentially dangerous animal if the action by the Animal Control Authority is pursuant to law.

               (C)  In the event an animal conforming to the definition of  potentially dangerous animal inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require medical treatment, injures a domestic animal, or threatens the safety of humans or domestic animals, the potentially dangerous animal shall be immediately confiscated by an animal control officer, placed in quarantine for the proper length of time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.

(D)  An animal conforming to the definition of dangerous animal shall be immediately confiscated by an animal control officer, placed in quarantine for the proper length of time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.

(E)  Disposition of any animal impounded under this chapter shall be governed by §5-44.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9229, effective 09-26-2009

 

§5-38.  Animal Noise
               (A)  No owner shall allow conditions to exist on said owner's property whereby the owner's animal or animals annoy or disturb any neighborhood or any person by loud, continuous,  or frequent barking, howling, yelping, or crowing.       

               (B)  Owners will be subject to fine pursuant to §1-7 of this code, or Nuisance Owner declaration pursuant to §5-46 at the discretion of the Animal Control Authority or other law enforcement personnel.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-39.  Pet Excreta; Removal by  Owner
               The owner of any animal which, while off the property of its owner, deposits excreta on public property, or private property, shall be responsible for its removal. It shall be a violation of this section for the owner to fail to immediately remove such excreta when notified of its existence and location, either by the City or  by the owner of the property on which the excreta was deposited.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-40.  Wild Animals Prohibited
               (A)  No person shall keep, or permit to be kept on their residential premises any wild animal as a pet, for display, or for exhibition purposes, except as those on an Approved Animal List to be promulgated and adopted by the Animal Advisory Board and approved by the Mayor and City Council. Copies of the       Approved Animal List shall be on file with the City Clerk and the Animal Control Authority, and shall be     available for public inspection.

               (B)  No person or commercial animal establishment shall offer any wild animal for sale                unless included on the Approved Animal List.

               (C)  The owner of any wild animal listed on the Approved Animal List over the age of six (6) months shall pay an annual wild animal license fee  as adopted and identified in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. The annual wild animal license, as provided in this section, shall be for the period of January 1 through December 31 of the licensing year. The wild animal license provided for by this section shall be secured by each owner or new resident within thirty (30) days of establishing residency in the City or after acquiring said animal, notwithstanding the fact that the wild animal may have been registered within the annual period by        a previous owner or that the wild animal may have been registered in another authority other than the City of Grand Island. The wild animal license fee shall become due on January 1 of the licensing year and shall become delinquent on March 1 of each year.               

(D)  Failure to obtain a wild animal license will result in a fine as listed §1-7 of the City Code.
               (E)  In the event a person wishes to keep or permit to be kept on his or her residential premises,                any wild animal not listed on the Approved Animal List, application in writing may be made to the Animal Advisory Board for adding said species to the Approved Animal List. The primary factor to be considered by the Animal Advisory Board in adding a species to the Approved           Animal List shall be whether allowing animals of said species to be kept within the corporate limits of the City of Grand Island presents a risk to public health, safety and welfare or the health, safety and welfare of other species already allowed to be kept as pets.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

§5-41.  Swine Prohibited
               No person shall keep or maintain swine, including the species known as miniature potbellied pigs, on his or her residential premises within the City.

 

§5-41.1.  Roosters Prohibited

               No person shall keep or maintain roosters on his or her property within the city, except for commercial retail establishments who offer live fowl or chickens for retail sale, and governmental and/or non-profit educational facilities.

 

§5-42.  Impoundment of Animals  at Large
               All animals not under restraint may be taken into custody by any animal control officer and impounded in the animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

 

§5-43.  Rabies Control; Reporting and Impoundment
              (1) Any animal which is owned by a person and has bitten any person or caused an abrasion of the skin of any person shall be seized by the animal control authority for a period of not less than ten days if:

               (a) The animal is suspected of having rabies, regardless of the species and whether or not the animal has been vaccinated;

               (b) The animal is not vaccinated and is of a species determined by the State of Nebraska to be a rabid species; or

               (c) The animal is of a species which has been determined by the State of Nebraska to be a rabid species not amenable to rabies protection by immunization, whether or not such animal has been vaccinated.  If, after observation and examination by a veterinarian, at the end of the ten-day period the animal shows no clinical signs of rabies, the animal may be released to its owner unless otherwise prohibited by law.

               (2)(a) Except as provided in subdivision (b) of this subsection, whenever any person has been bitten or has an abrasion of the skin caused by an animal owned by another person, which animal has been vaccinated in accordance with State law or regulation or if such injury to a person is caused by an owned animal determined by the State of Nebraska to be a rabid species amenable to rabies protection by immunization which has been vaccinated, such animal shall be confined by the owner or other responsible person as required by the animal control authority for a period of at least ten days and shall be observed and examined by a veterinarian at the end of such ten-day period. If no clinical signs of rabies are found by the veterinarian, such animal may be released from confinement unless ownership of the animal is otherwise prohibited by law.

               (b) A vaccinated animal owned by a law enforcement or governmental military agency which bites or causes an abrasion of the skin of any person during training or the performance of the animal's duties may be confined as provided in subdivision (a) of this subsection. Such agency shall maintain ownership of and shall control and supervise the actions of such animal for a period of fifteen days following such injury. If during such period the death of the animal occurs for any reason, a veterinarian shall within twenty-four hours of the death examine the tissues of the animal for clinical signs of rabies.

               (3) Any animal of a rabid species which has bitten a person or caused an abrasion of the skin of a person and which is unowned or the ownership of which cannot be determined within seventy-two hours of the time of the bite or abrasion shall be immediately subject to any tests which the animal control authority believes are necessary to determine whether the animal is afflicted with rabies. The seventy-two-hour period shall include holidays and weekends and shall not be extended for any reason. The tests required by this subsection may include tests which require the animal to be destroyed.        

               (4)  All incidents of biting or scratching shall be reported in writing to the Animal Control Authority by the medical professional treating the injury, the injured party, or in the case of a minor child,

the parent or guardian.

               (5)  In the case of domestic or hybrid animals known to have been bitten by a rabid animal, the following rules shall apply:

               (a) If the bitten or exposed domestic or hybrid animal has not been vaccinated in accordance with State statute, such bitten or exposed domestic or hybrid animal shall be immediately destroyed unless the owner is willing to place such domestic or hybrid animal in strict isolation in a kennel under veterinary supervision for a period of not less than six months; and

(b) If the bitten or exposed domestic or hybrid animal has been vaccinated in accordance with State statutes, such domestic or hybrid animal shall be subject to the following procedure: (1) Such domestic or hybrid animal shall be immediately revaccinated and confined for a period of not less than thirty days following vaccination; (2) if such domestic or hybrid animal is not immediately revaccinated, such domestic or hybrid animal shall be confined in strict isolation in a kennel for a period of not less than six months under the supervision of a veterinarian; or (3) such domestic or hybrid animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply with either subdivision (1) or (2) of this subdivision.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9229, effective 08-26-2009

 

§5-44.  Impounded Animals;  Disposition
               (A)  All animals that are not domestic animals, including but not limited to feral cats, may be humanely euthanized as soon as they are captured or otherwise taken into custody.

               (B)  All animals impounded pursuant to §5-43 and not euthanized shall be retained until completion of the observation period and the determination by a licensed veterinarian that said animal is not infected with rabies, and then may be redeemed by its owner upon payment of the fees for impoundment and cost of care as adopted by the Animal Control Authority and identified in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.  Any domestic animal not claimed within three (3) clear working days after being impounded or such extended period as is granted in writing by the Animal Control Authority to allow the animal’s owner to construct a pen or structure in conformance with §5-36 or comply with §5-36.1 shall become the property of the Animal Control Authority and may be placed for adoption or humanely euthanized by said agency at its discretion.

               (C)  Any animals determined to have rabies by a licensed veterinarian shall be destroyed as soon as possible after that determination is made.

               (D)  All domestic animals impounded pursuant to other sections of this Chapter shall be retained until redeemed by their owner upon payment of fees for impoundment and cost of care in an amount adopted by the Animal Control Authority and identified in the Grand Island Fee Schedule. Any domestic animal not claimed within three (3) clear working days after being impounded or such extended period as is granted in writing by the Animal Control Authority to allow the animal’s owner to construct a pen or structure in conformance with §5-36 or comply with §5-36.1 shall become the property of the Animal Control Authority and may be placed for adoption or humanely euthanized by said agency at its discretion.  The foregoing time period shall not include the day of impoundment.       

(E)  No dog or cat impounded under this Chapter shall be released until said animal is vaccinated and licensed as required by the provisions of this ordinance. 

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

 

Article VII. Penalties
§5-45.  General Penalty
               Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to §1-7 of this code. If a violation is of a continuing nature, each day of the violation shall constitute a separate violation.


§5-46.  Nuisance Owner

               (A) Any owner or custodian in possession of any animal or bee hive regulated by this Chapter may be declared a Nuisance Owner upon written request by the Animal Control Authority, Animal Advisory Board or Law Enforcement of the City of Grand Island for any one of the following:

1.  The owner is convicted of one or more violations of this Chapter on four (4) separate occasions in a twenty-four (24) month period; or

2.  The owner has failed to comply with the requirements of City Code after the animal has been deemed Potentially Dangerous or Dangerous;

               (B) Upon written request by the Animal Control Authority, Animal Advisory Board or Law Enforcement officials to declare an owner a Nuisance Owner, the owner must surrender the animal or bee hive(s) to the Animal Control Authority within five (5) days of receiving notice of Nuisance Ownership.  Service of Nuisance Ownership shall be by personal service or certified U.S. Mail to the last known address of the owner.  The animal or bee hive(s) will be impounded by the Animal Control Authority until a final determination of Nuisance Ownership has been made.

               (C)  In the event continuation of the nuisance ownership might cause irreparable harm or poses a serious threat to public health, safety or welfare, or the health, safety or welfare of residents of the property where the animal or bee hive(s) resides, the animal or bee hive(s) shall be impounded immediately by the Animal Control Authority and held until final determination of Nuisance Ownership is made.

               (D)  The owner may accept the Notice of Nuisance Ownership as a final determination, or the owner may appeal the Notice of Nuisance Ownership pursuant to Article VIII of this Chapter.

               (E)  Upon either acceptance of a Nuisance Ownership determination or after appeal and a determination by the Animal Advisory Board of Nuisance Ownership, the disposition of the animal or bee hive(s) will be at the discretion of the Animal Control Authority and what it determines appropriate.

               (F)  The owner will be responsible for payment of all impoundment fees as laid out in the City Fee Schedule.

               (G)  Nuisance owners shall be prohibited from owning or residing with any animal or keeping bees within the corporate limits of the City of Grand Island for a period of two (2) years from the date of determination.  Owners found to be in violation of this subsection shall be subject to the Animal Control Authority immediately impounding and disposing of the animal or bee hive(s).  Ultimate disposition of the animal or hive(s) will be at the discretion of the Animal Control Authority.

               (H)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined pursuant to §1-7 of this code.  If a violation is of a continuing nature, i.e., each day after the deadline that the animal or bee hive(s) is in the possession of a prohibited owner, each day of the violation shall constitute a separate violation.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9479, effective 04-15-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9537, effective 05-19-2015

 

Article VIII. Appeal Procedure

§5-47.  Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous; Nuisance Owner;  Declaration; Appeal; Disposition

               (A)  If it shall appear to an animal control officer that any animal conforms to the definition of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal, or an owner is a Nuisance Owner pursuant to §5-46 above, written notice declaring the animal a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal or an owner a Nuisance Owner shall be delivered to the animal’s owner either by personal service or by Certified U.S. mail addressed to the last known address of said owner.

               (B)  In the case of a dangerous animal, within five (5) days of personal service or mailing of a notice of declaration to the animal’s owner said owner shall deliver said animal to the Animal Control Authority for impoundment and disposition pursuant to §5-37. In the case of a potentially dangerous animal, within five (5) days of personal service or mailing of a notice of declaration to the animal’s owner said owner shall either provide reasonable proof of compliance with §5-36 and §5-37 of the Grand Island City Code or shall deliver said animal to the Animal Control Authority for impoundment and disposition . Refusal or failure by the owner of any animal declared a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal to comply with this subsection  shall be a violation of the Grand Island City Code and shall be subject to abatement as a public nuisance pursuant to §5-46.

               (C)  The owner of any animal declared a potentially dangerous animal or dangerous animal by an animal control officer, or declaration of a Nuisance Owner pursuant to §5-46 above may appeal the decision to the Animal Advisory Board by submitting a letter of appeal to the Animal Control Authority within 72 hours of either receiving personal service or mailing of the written notice of declaration. The Animal Advisory Board shall hold a hearing within ten (10) days of delivery of the letter of appeal to the Authority. The hearing shall be conducted informally. The animal’s owner and Animal Control Authority shall present oral or written statements or reasons supporting or opposing the declaration to the Animal Advisory Board. Statements by each participant shall be limited to a total time of thirty (30) minutes or less. Upon conclusion of the hearing the Animal Advisory Board may reverse, modify or affirm the declaration of the Animal Control Authority. Notice of the determination of the Animal Advisory Board shall be given to the animal’s owner and the Animal Control Authority, either personally or by United States Mail.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9200, effective 12-17-2008

 

Article IX. Apiaries

§5-48.  Hives

All bee colonies shall be kept in a hive that is capable of being inspected and with removable combs, which shall be kept in a sound and usable condition.

 

§5-49.  Location of Hives

No person shall establish or maintain any hive or box where bees are kept, or keep any bees on the premises within fifty (50) feet of any dwelling (excluding the dwelling of the owner of such bees) or within fifteen (15) feet of any lot line, sidewalk, alley, or other public way.

 

§5-50.  Fencing of Flyways

In each instance, the owner shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six (6) feet in height consisting of a solid wall or fence around the hives or boxes so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six (6) feet above ground level in the vicinity of the hive or box.

 

§5-51.  Minimum Area Required

No person shall establish or maintain more than two (2) hives or boxes where bees are kept on any lot.

 

§5-52.  Standards for Management

Any person keeping bees shall:

(a) Minimize swarming of bees;

(b) Provide an adequate year round source of water on the premises;

(c) Provide an adequate number of hives or boxes; and

(d) Maintain and manage such boxes or hives so as not to create a nuisance.

 

§5-53.  Permits Required

Anyone desiring to keep bees on their property in the City of Grand Island must first apply for and be granted a permit. The permit will be issued by the Central District Health Department or their designee upon payment of a permit fee as established and adopted by the Board of Health renewable annually, without inspection, upon showing of no complaints received about the bee keeping operation and payment of renewal feel as established and adopted by the Board of Health. If complaints have been received within the prior year, a new application and application fee shall be submitted. All permit fees paid pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be paid to the Central District Health Department. Permits shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

a.     Applicant must be a resident of the City of Grand Island;

b.    Proof of the specific lot or parcel inclusive of the lot size (available for free on

the City of Grand Island’s website) where the bees are to be kept;

c.     Whether or not the lot is the primary residence of the applicant;

d.    Location of the proposed hives or boxes on the lot or parcel;

e.     Two (2) forms of contact for the applicant;

f.     Proof of education on bee keeping which may be proven by;

a.     Certificate of completion of an educational course including a minimum of three (3) hours of practical application;

b.    Certificate of completion of an educational course with a minimum of three (3) hours of practical application under an established beekeeper in the State of Nebraska signed by the cooperating beekeeper;

c.     Affidavit of applicant that the applicant has spent a minimum of twelve (12) hours of internship under an established beekeeper in the State of Nebraska signed by the cooperating beekeeper; or

d.    Affidavit of applicant stating that the applicant has been active in beekeeping in Nebraska for a period of not less than two (2) consecutive years and has established hives.

g.     Enclosure of the hives or boxes by a six (6) foot privacy structure with a sign posted on the enclosure stating that bee hive(s) are present;

h. Year round water source for the bees; and

i. Other such information as may be deemed necessary by the issuing agency.

 

§5-54.  Falsifying Permits

All statements on the required permits will be made under oath. Upon showing of any false statements by the applicant, the applicant shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine pursuant to §1-7 of this Code and their hives or boxes will be forfeited to the appropriate agency. The applicant will be barred from keeping bees for a period of two (2) years upon proof of falsifying a permit.

 

§5-55.  Queens

In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually aggressive characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due provocation or exhibits an unusual disposition towards swarming, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to re-queen the colony. Queens shall be selected from stock bred for gentleness and nonswarming characteristics.

 

§5-56.  Nuisance

The keeping by any person of bee colonies in the City not in strict compliance with this section is prohibited. Any bee colony not residing in a hive structure intended for beekeeping, or any swarm of bees, or any colony residing in a standard or homemade hive, which, by virtue of its condition, has obviously been abandoned by the beekeeper, is deemed a hazard to the health and welfare of the community, is unlawful, and may be removed from the City or turned over to a beekeeper by the Animal Control Authority or their designee.

 

§5-57.  Penalty for Violations

Any person upon whom a duty is placed by the provisions of this Article who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to perform such duty, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this Article, shall be fined pursuant to §1-7 of this Code and be subject to the provisions of §5-46 Nuisance Owner of this Code. Each day that a violation of any section of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. The penalties herein provided shall be cumulative with and in addition to any penalty or forfeiture elsewhere in this chapter provided.

Added by Ordinance No. 9537, effective 05-19-2015

 
CHAPTER 6

RESERVED

 

Chapter 6 repealed by Ordinance No. 9043, effective 5-17-2006.

CHAPTER 7

RESERVED

 
CHAPTER 8

BUILDINGS

 

Article I. General

Division 1. International Building Code

§8-1.  International Building Code (IBC) Adopted
               The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, together with any amendments thereto as may be made from time to time, except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by ordinance and set forth in this chapter of the City Code. The following sections of the Appendix shall also be adopted:

Appendix C Group U – Agricultural Buildings
Appendix I – Patio Covers
               One copy of the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, and all supplements or amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the city clerk as provided by law.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§8-2.  International Residential Code (IRC) Adopted
               The International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, together with any amendments thereto as may be made from time to time, except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by ordinance and set forth in this chapter of the City Code.

               One copy of the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, and all supplements or amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk as provided by law.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§8-3.  International Building  Code (IBC) and  International Residential  Code (IRC); Standards Adopted
The following standards shall be used with the International Building Code and the International Residential Code adopted by §8-1 and §8-2 above:

               Acceptable Wind Load Design Procedures:

                              2015 I.B.C. - Basic Wind Speed

                              The ultimate design wind speed shall be 120 mph, in risk category II,III,&IV.

                                Exposure C only

               Roof Snow Load - 30 pounds per sq. ft.

               Frost Depth - 36 inch minimum

               Seismic Design Category A, Site Class D

               IRC, Table R301.5 Amend live load for sleeping rooms from 30 pounds to 40 pounds per square foot.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§8-4.  IBC - Certain Sections Not Adopted
               It is especially provided that the following chapters, sections, and tables of the International Building Code are not adopted or approved, and the same shall be of no force and effect:

Chapter 1

   Section 101.4.1 Gas

   Section 101.4.2 Mechanical

   Section 101.4.3 Plumbing

   Section 101.4.4 Property Maintenance

   Section 101.4.6 Energy

   Section 103 Department of Safety

   Section 106 Floor and Roof design Loads

   Section 107.2.5.1 Design Flood Elevations

   Section 108 Temporary Structures and Uses

   Section 113 Board of Appeals

Chapter 13 – Energy Efficiency

   Section 1809.5 – Frost Protection; #2 Constructing in accordance with ASCE-32, and

Exception: 1,2,3.

Chapter 27 – Electrical

Chapter 28 – Mechanical

Chapter 30 – Elevators and Conveying Systems

Chapter 32 – Encroachments into the Public Right-of-Way

Chapter 33 – Safeguards During Construction

Chapter 34 – Reserved

Appendix A Employee Qualifications

Appendix B Board of Appeals

Appendix D Fire Districts

Appendix E Supplementary Accessibility Requirements

Appendix F Rodent Proofing

Appendix G Flood-Resistant Construction

Appendix H Signs

Appendix J Grading

Appendix K Administrative Provisions

Appendix L Earthquake Recording Instrumentation

Appendix M Tsunami-Generated Flood Hazard

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§8-5.  IRC – Certain Sections and Parts Not Adopted
               It is especially provided that the following parts, chapters, and sections of the International Residential Code are not adopted or approved, and the same shall be of no force and effect:

               Section R105.3.1.1 Determination of Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings in flood hazard areas.

               Section R107 – Temporary Structures and Uses

               Section R109.1.3 – Floodplain Inspections

               Section R112 – Board of Appeals

               Section 313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems

               Section R322 – Flood-Resistant Construction

               Section R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection; 2. Constructing in Accordance with Section R403.3

               Section R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection; 3. Constructing in Accordance with ASCE 32.

               Section R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection; Exceptions: 1, 2, & 3

               Section R403.3 – Frost Protected Shallow Foundations

               Section R403.3.1 – Foundations Adjoining Frost Protected Shallow Foundations

               Section R403.3.1.1 – Attachment to Unheated Slab-on Ground Structure

               Section R403.3.1.2 – Attachment to Heated Structure

               Section R403.3.2 – Protection of Horizontal Insulation Below Ground

               Section R403.3.3 – Drainage

               Section R403.3.4 – Termite Protection

               Section R406.2 – Concrete and masonry foundation waterproofing

               Part IV - Energy Conservation

               Part V - Mechanical

               Part VI - Fuel Gas

               Part VII – Plumbing

               Part VIII – Electrical

               Appendices, A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H,I,J,K,L,M,N,O,P,&Q

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§8-6.  Building Code Advisory  Board
There is hereby established a Building Code Advisory Board set out as follows:

BUILDING CODE ADVISORY BOARD
               The purpose of the Building Code Advisory Board is to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction.

Purpose. Whereas, there may arise a design or material that may not meet the exact criteria of the Building Code, especially in the areas of Energy Related projects, this Board shall examine the data available, and/or may require any additional data, to determine that the proposed material or method is at least equivalent of the purpose as set forth in the Building Codes. The Board may not waive any requirements of the Building Codes, but only approve in lieu of/alternate methods of materials.

               Member. The Building Code Advisory Board members will be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. They shall be persons who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction. The Board shall consist of seven members. The chief building official shall be an ex officio member and will act as secretary of the Board. One city council member shall also act as an ex officio member. At least four members of the Board must be present to constitute a quorum and be able to act.

               Chairman/Officers; Length of Service. A chairman and vice chairman will be selected from among the seven members and each will serve a two-year term. The seven members will serve two-year terms, alternating four and three on a yearly basis.

               Request Procedure. The request process for the Board shall be as follows:

  (1) If an applicant shall be denied a building permit or shall receive disapproval from the chief building official, the applicant may file a request on the forms furnished by the Building Department, together with a request procedure fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, stating in full detail what the product or project is, the use, sections of the Code that cannot be fully complied with, what the alternative material or method will be, and sufficient evidence supporting the request. This shall be filed with the chief building official who shall then notify the officers of the Board, who shall set a time of meeting, and the meeting shall be within ten (10) days of the date of application.

  (2) The meeting of the Building Code Advisory Board shall be presided over by the chairman.

  (3) The Board shall hear all evidence by the party requesting consideration and a presentation by the chief building official.

  (4) After hearing all evidence presented, the Board shall determine whether the proposed alternate method of material is equivalent with the interest and safety of the Code, or may recommend changes to their satisfaction.

  (5) An order approving such a request shall require a "Yes" vote of four of the Board members.

  (6) The Board shall render all decisions in writing to the applicant and the chief building official within a reasonable period of time.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005
Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006

 

§8-7.  International Existing Building Code (IEBC) Adopted

The International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted.

One copy of the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, shall be filed in the office of the City clerk as provided by law..

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014

 

§8-8.  IBC - Amendment of Section 109; Fees; Plan Review Fee
Section 109 of the International Building Code is hereby amended by adding the following:

           Fee Refunds. The building official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

           The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

           The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done.

           The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

 

§8-9.  IBC - Amendment of Section 110
               Section 110 of the International Building Code shall be amended to include the following subsection:

Section 110.7.  Reinspections.

               A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made.

               This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection.

               Reinspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the building official.

               To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished for that purpose and pay the reinspection fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

               In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

 

§8-9.1. IBC – Amend Section 309 by adding section 309.3 Tenant Separation
               A tenant separation wall complying with section 708 shall be required between any tenant space in all buildings with independent tenants with exits to the exterior.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014

 

§8-9.2. IBC – Amend Section 406.3.2 #2 by adding 2’ or more in residential zoned properties.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014

 

§8-10.  IBC - Amendment of Table 602
Table 602 of the International Building Code is hereby amended by adding thereto the following:

The provisions set forth above for RD-Residential Development Zone as identified in Chapter 36 of the Grand Island City Code shall be determined not from the location of a structure from the property line but from the location of a primary structure to another primary structure located on an adjacent lot. All requirements pertaining to fire resistant walls and window opening protection as set forth in Table No. 602 shall be complied with when such adjacent primary structures are closer than ten feet apart. Distance shall be measured at right angles from the wall of one structure to the closest wall of an adjacent primary structure.

Footnote h. amend 5’ to 2’.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§8-11.  IBC - Amendment of Section 1029.1 and IRC – Amendment of Section R303 & R310
The following are hereby amended to Section 1030.1 exception 3 of the International Building Code add exceptions:

        EXCEPTION: 3.Basements used exclusively for the service of buildings and which do not exceed 300 square feet.

R303.1 add exception #4. Basements shall be provided with glazed areas of not less than 2% of the floor area.

Section 310.1 Exceptions: Basements used only to house mechanical equipment and not exceeding total floor area of 300 square feet.

               In existing single family residential occupancies other than apartments, a sleeping room may be added in an existing basement if the following conditions are met:

(1) The sleeping room must have an openable window.

(2) Smoke detectors have been installed in the sleeping room, the furnace room, and in the exitway of the basement.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§8-12.  IBC - Amendment of Section 1809.1 and 1809.7
Section 1809.7 of the International Building Code is hereby amended by adding the following:

   Bearing Walls

Bearing walls shall be supported on masonry or concrete foundations or piles or other approved foundation system which shall be of sufficient size to support all loads. Where a design is not provided herein, the minimum foundation requirements for stud bearing walls shall be as set forth in Table No. 1809.7.

EXCEPTIONS:
  (1) A one-story wood or metal frame building not used for human occupancy and not over 200 square feet in floor area, may be placed upon a concrete slab of four inch minimum thickness.

  (2) Detached accessory buildings not exceeding 625 feet in floor area may use a six-inch wide by eighteen inch deep foundation system with at least twelve inches below grade.

1805. Omit 2. Constructing in accordance with ASCE 32.

               Omit Exceptions, 1.2.&3.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

 

§8-13.  IRC – Amendment to Sections R403 and R404, and Tables R404.1.1(1) & R404.1(2)
Sections R403 Footings and R404 Foundation Walls of the International Residential Code are hereby amended by adding the following to read as follows:

   Minimum Footing and Foundation Requirements for Residential Construction

  (1) The minimum footing foundation requirement, balanced fill, for a one-story residence shall be six (6) inches in width by thirty-six (36) inches below grade, with two #4 horizontal rebar continuous.

  (2) The minimum footing foundation requirement, unbalanced fill, for a one- or two-story frame residence shall be sixteen (16) inches in width by eight (8) inches deep, with two #4 rebar continuous and a minimum eight (8) inch wall of block or concrete.

  (3) In addition to the requirements set forth in subparagraphs (1) and (2) above, the following reinforcement requirements for wall foundation must be met:

8" solid concrete from 60" up to 84" unbalanced fill – three #4 horizontal strands, equally spaced throughout height of wall;

8" block - from 48" to 60" unbalanced fill - one #4 rebar vertical, 4' on center to grade height;

8" block - from 60" to 84" unbalanced fill - one #4 rebar vertical, 4' on center to top of foundation.

R403.1.6 Foundation Anchorage.

Maximum anchor-bolt spacing shall be 6 feet on center, there shall be a minimum of two bolts per plate section with one bolt located not more than 12 inches from each end of the plate section. Bolts shall be at least ½ inch in diameter and shall extend a minimum of 7 inches into masonry or concrete.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

 

§8-14.  IBC – Amendment of Section 1805 and IRC- Amendment of R406
Section 1805 of the International Building Code and Section R406 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended by adding thereto the following:

  1805.2.2 & 1805.2.2.1 Walls. & Surface preparation of walls, and R406, R406.2, subsurface drainage system shall be included as an alternative to waterproofing. Add Backplaster and Dampproofing

Exterior foundation walls below grade of any building consisting of masonry units having a basement shall be backplastered with one-half inch (1/2") Portland cement and sand mix (1:2 1/2 by volume) or two one-fourth inch (1/4") coats of Type M mortar, and with an approved dampproofing material. Poured concrete foundations shall be coated with dampproofing without back plaster. Alternative dampproofing may be approved by the building official.

1805.4 Delete existing and add Subsurface Drainage Systems

All buildings constructed with basements or floor levels twenty-four (24) inches or more below the elevation of the center line of the adjacent public street shall be provided with a subsurface drainage system. A subsurface drainage system shall consist of the minimum following elements:

(1)   Minimum four (4") diameter perforated or scored drain pipe embedded in four inches (4") of coarse gravel installed around the inside of the perimeter footing such that no floor location is greater than ten feet (10') to such drain pipe.

(2) Minimum fifteen inch (15") diameter by thirty inch (30") deep sump pump pit for each one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area to be drained.

(3) Minimum two inch (2") diameter weep holes through the footing at eight foot (8') on center intervals with a minimum of four inch (4") of gravel cover on the exterior of the footing.

(4) Minimum four inch (4") gravel bed under floor slab.

(5) A 3” minimum diameter pipe shall be installed through the floors and into the attic, capped and sealed to facilitate a future soil gas ventilation system.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9481, effective 04-15-2014

 

§8-15.  Amend Chapter 29 section 2901.1 replace reference to International Plumbing code to Uniform Plumbing Code and International Private Sewage Disposal Code to State of Nebraska Title 124.

Amend table 2902.1 footnote e. replace the number 15 to 30. Reserved

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 03-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§8-16.  IRC – Amendment of Table R301.2(1) and Table 301.5

Section R301.2 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended by adding criteria as set forth in Table R301.2(1). Ground snow load – 25#

               Wind Speed -- 115

               Seismic Design Category A, Site Class D.

               Weathering --sever

               Frost line Depth --36”

               Termite -- M/H

               Winter Design Temp -- -3

               Ice Barrier Underlayment Required – NO

               Flood Hazard – Firm

               Air Freezing Index -- >1000-2000

               Mean Annual Temp – 50 F

Amend Table R301.5 Minimum Uniform Distributed Live Loads – Sleeping Rooms – 40#

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§8-17.  IRC – Amendment of Section R302.1
Exception #4 within Section R302.1 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows: Detached garages accessory to a dwelling located within 2 feet of a property line may have roof eaves projections not exceeding 12 inches.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§8-18.  IRC. – Amend Section R302.5.1 and R302.13

Section R302.5.1 Opening protection, delete, equipped with a self-closing device.

Section R302.13 Fire protection of floors, delete entire section.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§8-19.  IRC – Amendment of Section R311.7.5.1
Section R311.7.5.1 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to reflect that the maximum riser height shall be 8 inches.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§8-20.  IRC Delete section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinklers.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

§8-20.1.  IRC Section R907 Reroof #2. Add or asphalt shingle.

                                                            #3. Delete

Amended by Ordinance No. 9475, effective 04-15-2014

 

§8-21.  Buildings Having Historical Significance
               Buildings or structures which have been designated by official action of the Grand Island City Council as having special historical or architectural significance may comply with Section 12 of the 2015 International Building Code for historic buildings.

               Historical buildings shall be buildings which are currently listed on the National Register of Historical Buildings or are at least fifty years old and have one of the following characteristics: is associated with an important person or event which has contributed significantly to history, contains significant architectural or artistic design, or has significant archeological properties.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9661, effective 01-01-2018

 

§8-22.  Permits Required; Amendment of IBC Section 105 and IRC Section R105
Section 105 of the International Building Code and Section R105 of the International Residential Code shall be amended by adding the following:

               No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate building permit for each such building or structure from the Building Department; provided, no permit shall be issued by the Building Department unless and until authorized by resolution of the City Council in any one or more of the following cases:

        (1)  Where the real property described in the application for permit does not front upon a dedicated street or public road;

        (2)  Where a subdivision as required by state statutes has not been lawfully approved and recorded with the Register of Deeds.

        (3)  When the City Engineer certifies that surface water drainage is unavailable or inadequate to drain the public street or road abutting upon the real property described in the application for permit.

        (4)  Where the City Engineer certifies that surface water drainage from the real property described in the application for permit will create or add to an impounding of surface water upon a public street or road.

Amend section R105.2 Work exempt from building permit.  Buildings 1. Replace 200 square feet with 120 square feet.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

 

§8-23.  Temporary Retail Buildings; Restrictions
               No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, construct, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any temporary building or structure in the City or two-mile jurisdiction or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate building permit for each such temporary building from the Building Department.

               Temporary buildings shall be those buildings built and designed for use no longer than 120 calendar days to facilitate special events or annual sales.

               Temporary buildings shall be constructed to support required wind load, adequately anchored, and located no closer than 20 feet to any adjacent structure, or be separated by a two-hour fire wall. Exterior walls shall be one-hour fire resistive if less than 20 feet from a property line and the allowable area shall comply with the adopted building code.

               Exiting shall be provided as required for permanent buildings.

               Temporary buildings shall not be connected to permanent utilities, e.g., sewer, water, electric, or gas.

               Temporary buildings permits shall be limited to one per tract of land, not to exceed 120 days per calendar year. The fee for a temporary building permit shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8955, effective 3-31-2005

 

§8-24.  Commercial Display Buildings; Definition; Restrictions
               No person, firm, or corporation shall place upon any property, any commercial display building without first obtaining a permit from the Building Department for the placement of such commercial display building(s).

               Commercial display buildings shall be those structures which are offered for sale or used as display or inventory.  They shall not be used for any other purpose, occupied, or used as storage facilities.

               Commercial display buildings shall be constructed to support required wind loads, be adequately anchored, and in all other aspects comply with adopted building and zoning codes.

               Commercial display buildings shall not be connected to permanent utilities.

               The fee for commercial display buildings shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§8-25.  Barb Wire and Electrified Fences
               It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, or corporation, either in person or through his or their employees or agents, to erect or cause to be erected or to maintain any barb wire or electrified fence or any barb wire or electrified string along or upon any fence or string as a barrier within the city limits of the City of Grand Island, except that it shall be permissible to string not more than three strands of barb wire or electrified fence upon supports inclined at an angle not greater than sixty degrees with the horizontal plane, when such wires are strung so that they are suspended above and within the privately owned enclosed property, and the bottom strand of such barb wire or electrified fence is not less than six feet above the surface of the ground.

 

§8-26.  Reserved
§8-27.  Reserved
§8-28.  Reserved
§8-29.  Reserved
§8-30.  Reserved
§8-31.  Reserved
§8-32.  Reserved

 

 

Division 2. Reserved
 

§8-33.  Reserved
§8-34.  Reserved
§8-35.  Reserved
§8-36.  Reserved
§8-37.  Reserved
§8-38.  Reserved
§8-39.  Reserved
 

 

Division 3. Swimming Pools
 

§8-40.  Swimming Pool; Definition
               Private Swimming Pool means any constructed or assembled pool that is not publicly owned which is more than 24 inches in depth and has a surface area of more than 150 square feet and which is used or intended to be used as a swimming pool.

               Storable pool means any inflatable or soft-sided pool that has the ability to be taken down and stored.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006

 

§8-41.  Swimming Pool; Permit Required
               It shall be required that a permit be issued for the construction or placement of a private swimming pool from the chief building official prior to such construction or placement. An application for a permit shall be submitted by the owner or his agent of the property upon which the pool is to be located. Such application shall be accompanied by a duplicate set of plans, specifications, and plot plans. The plot plan shall show the accurate location of the proposed pool on the property and properly establish distances to existing lot lines, buildings and fences, and to additional proposed structures or fences. No permit shall be issued until such plans, specifications and plot plans have been approved by the chief building official as being in conformance with all local regulations pertaining to private swimming pools.

               Storable pools shall not require a permit as identified by this section.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006

 

§8-42.  Swimming Pool; General
               The pool shall be constructed or assembled so as to be water tight, easily cleaned and maintained, made of non-absorbent and durable material, and be free of open cracks and joints.

 

§8-43.  Swimming Pool; Conformance with Codes
               All building, plumbing, electrical, and other codes as adopted by the City Council shall be adhered to in the construction or assembly of the private swimming pool.

 

§8-44.  Swimming Pool; Enclosure Required
               Every private swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four (4) feet in height which shall be of a type which precludes passage through or under and is not readily climbable by small children. This shall not mean an additional fence within a completely fenced yard, provided, the fence meets the stated minimum requirement. All gates shall be equipped with a latch which is not readily operated by small children.

               The main building, or any accessory structure, on the site may form part of the enclosure. The sides of above-ground pools are acceptable as integral barriers, provided, that the sides extend not less than four (4) feet above the outside ground at all points, and provided further, that access steps or ladders are capable of being rendered inaccessible by being removed or raised more than four (4) feet above the outside grade.

 

§8-45.  Swimming Pool; Retroactivity
               The lack of a minimum enclosure as herein described, on any existing pool, is hereby deemed to be a serious public safety hazard. The owner of the property, upon which such a pool is located, shall comply with the enclosure requirements of §8-44 within thirty (30) days after date of notification to comply.

 

§8-46.  Swimming Pool; Discharge System
               All private swimming pools constructed after the effective date of this ordinance shall be provided with an approved drainage outlet to the city sanitary sewage system, or may be used for surface irrigation of the owner's property, provided, that no water shall overflow onto adjacent private or public property in a manner as to cause a nuisance.

 

§8-47.  Reserved
§8-48.  Reserved
§8-49.  Reserved

 

 

Article II.  Permits Generally
 

§8-50.  Reserved


§8-51.  Buildings Not Otherwise Provided
               If permits pursuant to the Grand Island City Code are requested for buildings or structures not otherwise provided for, valuations of the cost of such building shall be based upon written estimate filed with the building department.

 

§8-52.  Valuation; Commercial and Industrial Buildings
               For commercial and industrial buildings the fees to be collected for permits pursuant to this article shall be based upon the value as determined by the figures fixed by the contract for construction.

 

§8-53.  Review of Plans by Fire Department; Fee
               In addition to the building permit fee, there shall be a fire plan review fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule paid to the fire department for the review of said plans as required by state statutes.

 

§8-54.  Construction Prior To Permit Issuance
               When any construction, alteration or repair of buildings shall have been started before a permit therefor has been issued, an investigation fee in addition to the building permit fee shall be collected. The investigation fee shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§8-55.  Reserved
§8-56.  Reserved
§8-57.  Reserved
§8-58.  Reserved
§8-59.  Reserved
§8-60.  Reserved
§8-61.  Reserved
§8-62.  Reserved
§8-63.  Reserved

 

 

Article III.  Reserved
 

§8-64.  Reserved
§8-65.  Reserved
§8-66.  Reserved
§8-67.  Reserved
§8-68.  Reserved
§8-69.  Reserved
§8-70.  Reserved
§8-71.  Reserved
§8-72.  Reserved
§8-73.  Reserved
§8-74.  Reserved

 

 

Article IV.  Moving Buildings
 

§8-75.  Registration Required to Move Buildings
               (A) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of moving houses and buildings within the City limits and within two miles of the corporate boundary of said City without first being registered as such by the City and paying the fee therefor; provided, however, no registration shall be required to move a building which has a floor surface of one hundred square feet or less. Buildings which do not exceed sixteen feet in width or twenty-four feet in length may be exempted from the requirements of this Article by the chief building official upon finding that such exemption would not adversely affect the public interest. Such registration shall be issued by the chief building official, and the same shall expire on December 31 of the year the same is issued.

               (B) The registration fee shall be paid in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§8-76.  Insurance
    (1)             Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska, with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:

(a)   Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.

(b)  A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.

 (c) The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Building Department a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance coverage.

(d)  Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy herein required to expire or lapse.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9143, effective 01-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

 

§8-77.  Permit - Required; Fee
               Before any house or building can be moved, a permit must be issued authorizing the moving of the same. Upon the granting of a moving permit, the applicant shall pay a fee to the City in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§8-78.  Height and Width Restrictions; Permits
               No permit shall be issued to move any house or structure if any part thereof has a loaded height in excess of twenty-six feet, and if any part thereof at its greatest width is in excess of thirty-four feet; provided, except, the chief building official may authorize the granting of permits in cases of buildings exceeding such width or height limitation, or both, when there is filed and deposited in the office the following:

(1) An application for a specific permit to move a specific building or structure, in triplicate, with the following documents attached thereto, to wit:

(a) A drawing or chart showing the specific route proposed to be followed, and exact location of buildings, structures, trees, and other objects which may interfere with the moving of such building or structure.

(b) A drawing to scale showing the dimensions of length, width, and height, and kind of structure proposed to be moved.

(c) Agreement of all property owners who may be affected by reason of trimming of trees, or ownership of structures, or device, legally above, upon, or under the surface of any such street, waiving any and all claims against the City of Grand Island for damages which may happen to any such trees, pavement, curb, driveway, pole, structure, or device.

(d) Statements of the city engineer, utilities director, chief of police, and fire chief relating to their approval of the arrangements for such moving.

(e) Consent to the moving of such building or structure of any affected telephone company, gas company, telegraph company, railroad(s), and waiver of every and all claims for damages against the City with regard thereto.

(2)  The permit fee required by §8-77 of this Code.

(3)  The chief building official may waive any of the foregoing requirements determined to be inapplicable or unnecessary to protect the public interests.

 

§8-79.  Examination of Building; Denial of Permit
               Before a permit is issued for any of the operations defined by this article and before any of the operations defined herein shall have begun, the chief building official shall examine the building, structure or part thereof on which it is desired to perform such operations, and the chief building official shall refuse to grant a permit for same if any of the conditions following are found to exist:

  (1) No building shall be removed from its present location or lot to a new location or lot so situated that the construction on such new location or lot of a similar new building would be in violation of any of the provisions of this article.

  (2) No building shall be moved that is more than fifty percent structurally deficient.

 

§8-80.  Reserved

Deleted by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006

 

§8-81.  New Construction Requirements
               No building or structure, regardless of size, which has been moved shall be placed or located within the city unless it shall comply with the requirements of new construction.

 

§8-82.  To be Moved on Permitted Streets Only
               It shall be unlawful for any such housemover under the permit to move the structure for which the permit is given, over, upon or along other streets than those mentioned in the permit.

 

§8-83.  Planking of Streets When Required
               It shall be the duty of any person moving any house or structure to plank streets if and when ordered so to do by the chief building official.

 

§8-84.  Utility Lines; Mover to Pay Expenses
               It shall be the duty of the mover of houses and buildings to pay all expenses and costs incurred in the lifting, removal, and restoration of all utility wires, conduits and poles.

 

§8-85.  Building on Street; Misdemeanor
               It shall be unlawful for any mover of houses or buildings or the owner of any house or building being moved under the provisions of this article to allow the same to remain standing on any street or public grounds longer than is reasonable and necessary, and any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished as hereinafter provided.

 

§8-86.  Protecting Public During Moving
               It shall be the duty of the mover of houses and buildings to exercise due care at all times to protect the public from injury or accidents. It shall be the duty of such movers of houses and buildings to provide watchmen to warn the public if and when any wires, ropes or cables are extending across streets or alleys or public grounds so that the public will not be injured thereby.

               If during the moving of any house or structure it shall become necessary to leave the same standing on any street, avenue, highway or public place, the same shall be left standing as near to the right side of the road as possible in order to leave free passage on the other side thereof. It shall further be the duty of the mover of houses and buildings to leave lighted flares about such house or structure or moving equipment left standing over night in any such street, avenue, highway or public place during the hours between sunset and sunrise.

 

§8-87.  Moving Equipment to be Rubber Tired
               No permit shall be issued by the chief building official to move any house or structure unless the moving equipment employed by the mover of houses and buildings is rubber tired in order to safeguard and protect streets, avenues, alleys, highways and public grounds from being damaged.

 

§8-88.  Leave Property in Safe, Clean Condition
               It is hereby declared unlawful for any mover or owner of houses and buildings to move any building or structure in such a manner that there shall remain holes or depressions dangerous to life or limb; there shall not remain debris or rubbish from which dust or offensive odors shall emanate detrimental to public health. Such premises shall be left in a safe, clean, and sanitary condition. When a building has been moved for the purpose of erecting thereon another building or structure, the chief building official at his discretion may permit the owner of such property to maintain for a period not to exceed six months any remaining hole or depression if the following conditions are met: Such hole or depression is maintained in a sanitary condition and kept clean of all rubbish or debris of any nature; that such hole or depression is surrounded and protected by a strong and suitable barricade not less than five feet high; that such barricade is maintained in a sound and proper condition; and that said owner shall covenant for himself, his heirs and assigns, to properly fill such remaining hole or depression at the conclusion of the said six month period unless building operations thereat have then been begun; provided, that the city council may, upon good cause shown, extend the period of time during which the hole or depression may be maintained, subject to any conditions that the city council may prescribe.

 

§8-89.  Mover to Disconnect Utilities
               It shall be the duty of the property owner and the house or building mover to see that all utilities such as water, gas, sewer and electricity are shut off either at the street line or in the alley. The sewer service from the house to the alley shall be properly closed at the main sewer line in accordance with the ordinances of the City. If the water service to the property is to be abandoned, the abandonment shall be in accordance with the requirements Chapter 35 of this Code. No permit to move a house or building may be issued until this section is complied with.

 

§8-90.  Applicability of Article
               The provisions of this Article pertaining to the moving of buildings and structures shall apply with equal force and effect to such operations within the corporate limits of the City and all that area within two miles of the corporate boundary of said City.

 

§8-91.  Penalty for Violation; Continuing Violations
               Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. If any such person shall permit such violation to continue, each day shall be considered a separate offense and be punished accordingly.

 

§8-92.  Reserved
§8-93.  Reserved
§8-94.  Reserved
§8-95.  Reserved
§8-96.  Reserved

 

Article V.  Razing and Demolishing Buildings

 

§8-97.  Registration Required; Fee; Term
  (1) Any person engaged in the business of razing and demolishing buildings and houses in the City and in the area within two miles of the corporate boundary of said City, shall, before starting such business in the City or within such two mile area beyond its corporate limits, secure from the chief building official a certificate of registration to engage in such business.

  (2) The annual registration fee and the renewal fee for such registration, which shall expire on December 31, following the date of issuance, shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§8-98.  Permit to Raze Building
               Any person registered under this article to engage in the business of razing and demolishing buildings and houses shall, before proceeding with such razing or demolition of any structure in the city or within two miles of the corporate boundary of said city, secure a permit to do so from the chief building official. Such permit shall not be granted until after the payment of the permit fee hereinafter set forth.

 

§8-99.  Permit to Raze Building; Fees
               It shall be the duty of the chief building official to collect fees for razing and demolishing of structures in the same manner and in the same amount as set forth in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule pertaining to building permit fees.

 

§8-100.  Insurance
  (1) Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska, with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:

(a) Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.

(b) A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.

(c) The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Building Department a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance coverage,

(d) Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy herein required to expire or lapse.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9143, effective 01-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9162, effective 05-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010

Amended by Ordinance No. 9365, effective 03-30-2012

 

§8-101.  Right of Owner to Raze Own Buildings
               Any person may raze or demolish one or two story dwellings, provided he is the actual owner thereof and does the work himself and for himself without compensation from others. Such building or buildings must be situated at least twenty feet from the front lot line and at least eight feet from other buildings situated on either side or to the rear thereof. It is expressly provided that any such owner may raze or demolish such dwellings without first securing the registration provided in §8-97 hereof; provided, however, such owner must secure a permit so to do from the chief building official and pay the permit fee and call for inspections by the chief building official. Such owners must otherwise comply with all of the other provisions of this article.

               It is expressly provided that the right of an owner to raze or demolish his own dwellings shall include the right to raze or demolish a private garage.

 

§8-102.  Leave Property in Safe, Clean Condition
               It is hereby declared unlawful for any registrant to raze or demolish any building or structure in such a manner that there shall remain holes or depressions dangerous to life or limb. The registrant shall remove from the site all wood, metal, and foundation and footing materials subject to decomposition. Concrete, bricks, and concrete blocks may be used as fill material for holes or depressions; provided, the materials are entirely covered by fill sand or earth which is then compacted. Holes must be made in concrete floors to permit passage of water.

 

§8-103.  Responsibility to Disconnect Utilities
               It shall be the duty of the registrant to see that all utilities such as water, gas, sewer and electricity are shut off either at the street line or in the alley. The service sewer from the house to the alley shall be properly closed at the main sewer line in accordance with the ordinances of the city. The water service line shall be properly closed at the main water line in accordance with Chapter 35 of this Code. The registrant must provide certification that the building has been inspected by a State of Nebraska certified asbestos inspector or removal contractor and that either no asbestos materials exist or all have been properly removed. No permit to raze or demolish a house or building may be issued until after compliance with this section. The city will not burn a house or building at the owner's request until the owner has complied with this section.

 

§8-104.  Penalty for Violation
               Any person violating the provisions of this article shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as provided in this Code.

 

§8-105.  Reserved
§8-106.  Reserved
§8-107.  Reserved
§8-108.  Reserved
§8-109.  Reserved

 

Article VI.  Abatement of Unsafe Buildings

 

§8-110.  Condemnation of Unsafe Buildings
               Any building or other structure, or any part thereof which is in part or in whole structurally unsafe, dilapidated, defective, unhealthful, insufficient, or unsafe for the purposes for which it is used, detrimental to the community for any just cause, or in violation of the Grand Island City Code or Building Code as amended and adopted, is hereby determined to be dangerous and shall be made safe by the owner of record of the property within the time set forth in written notice from the Building Department Director, or his/her designee. Where immediate action is deemed necessary to protect life, health, or property, the Building Department Director, or his/her designee may direct such building or other structure or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith, closed and not used or occupied until made safe as required by the said Building Department Director, or his/her designee. Any buildings or other structures, or any part thereof which is determined after inspection by the Building Department Director, or his/her designee to be dangerous as defined above, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, alteration, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with this Code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006

 

§8-111.  Written Notice; Mailing, Contents
               Whenever the Building Department Director, or his/her designee has inspected any building or other structure, or any part thereof and determined that such property is a dangerous building, he/she shall send a written notice to the owner of record of the property by ordinary first class mail and by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of said owner. The written notice shall contain the following information:

  (1) The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises on which the dangerous property is located.

  (2) A brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the property dangerous as defined by this Code.

  (3) A brief and concise description of the action required to be taken to render the property in compliance with this Code.

  (4) A brief and concise statement advising the owner of record that if required repair, alteration, rehabilitation, demolition or removal work is not completed within the time specified, the Building Department Director, or his/her designee may order the dangerous property vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed, and may request consent of the mayor to have the city attorney file an action to abate the public nuisance and charge the costs thereof against the real estate and the owner of record.

 

§8-112.  Notice to Vacate; Posting
               In the event the Building Department Director, or his/her designee directs any building or other structure or any portion thereof to be vacated, a copy of a notice to vacate shall be served along with the written notice set forth in §8-111 and shall be posted at or upon each entrance to the property in substantially the following form:

NOTICE TO VACATE
DO NOT ENTER - UNSAFE TO OCCUPY

It is a misdemeanor to occupy this property
or to remove or deface this notice to vacate.
Dated _______________.
CITY OF GRAND ISLAND, NEBRASKA,
A Municipal Corporation
By _______________________________
Building Department Director

 

§8-113.  Maintenance of Public Nuisance Unlawful
               It shall be unlawful for any owner of record to maintain or permit any person to occupy any building or other structure or any part thereof which is declared a public nuisance by the chief building official at the expiration of the time period specified in the written notice set forth in §8-111, or to permit any person to occupy any building or other structure or any part thereof in violation of the Notice to Vacate set forth in §8-112.

 

§8-114.  Procedure for Abatement of Nuisances
               If the owner of record of any property declared to be a public nuisance by the Building Department Director, or his/her designee fails to abate said nuisance within the time specified in the written notice set forth in §8-111, the City of Grand Island, at the written request of the Building Department Director, or his/her designee directed to the City Attorney, may proceed to abate said public nuisance pursuant to §20-15 of the Grand Island City Code, and charge the costs thereof against the real estate or the owner of record.

               In the event continuation of a public nuisance might cause irreparable harm or poses a serious threat to public health, safety or welfare or the health, safety or welfare of residents of the property in violation, the written notice to abate pursuant to §20-15 shall not be required as a condition precedent to commencing a legal action to obtain abatement of the nuisance and the City of Grand Island, with the consent of the Mayor, may immediately file an action requesting such temporary or permanent order as is appropriate to expeditiously and permanently abate said nuisance and protect the public health, safety or welfare or the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the property in violation.

 

§8-115.  Standards for Repair, Etc.
               The following standards shall be observed or followed in determining whether a public nuisance shall be repaired, altered, rehabilitated, demolished or removed:

  (1) If the building or other structure or any part thereof can reasonably be repaired, altered, or rehabilitated so that it will no longer exist in violation of the Grand Island City Code or Building Code as amended and adopted, it shall be ordered repaired, altered, or rehabilitated.

  (2) If the building or the structure or any part thereof is in such condition that it cannot reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the Grand Island City Code or Building Code as amended and adopted, it shall be ordered demolished or removed.

  (3) In any case where a building or other structure or any part thereof is fifty percent damaged, decayed or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished or removed.

  (4) In any case where a building or other structure or any part thereof is a fire hazard existing in violation of the Grand Island City Code or Building Code as amended or adopted, or the Statutes of the State of Nebraska, including but not limited to the Life Safety Code, it shall be demolished or removed.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006

 

§8-116.  Reserved
§8-117.  Reserved
§8-118.  Reserved
§8-119.  Reserved

 

 

Article VII. Property Maintenance Code

Division 1. Title and Scope

 

§8-120.  Title
               These regulations shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code," may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this code."

 

§8-121.  Purpose
               The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the use of occupancy, location and maintenance of all residential and commercial building and structures within this jurisdiction.

 

§8-122.  Scope
               The provisions of this code shall apply to all buildings or portions thereof. Such occupancies in existing buildings may be continued as provided in the Building Code, except such structures as are found to be substandard as defined in this code.

               Where any building or portion thereof is used or intended to be used as a combination apartment house-hotel, the provisions of this code shall apply to the separate portions as if they were separate buildings.

               Every rooming house or lodging house shall comply with all the requirements of this code for dwelling.

 

§8-123.  Application to Existing Buildings and Structures
  (1) Additions, Alterations or Repairs. For additions, alterations or repairs, see the Building Code.

  (2) Relocation. Buildings or structures moved into or within this jurisdiction shall comply with the requirements in the Building Code for new buildings and structures.

 

§8-124.  Reserved
§8-125.  Reserved
§8-126.  Reserved
§8-127.  Reserved

 

 

Division 2. Enforcement

 

§8-128.  General
  (1) Authority. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this code. For such purposes, he shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer. He is empowered to adopt and enforce rules and regulations to clarify and expand the provisions of this code in conformity with the spirit and intent of its stated purpose.

  (2) Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the building official or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this code, provided that if such building or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the building official or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.

  (3) Responsibilities Defined. Every owner remains liable for violation of duties imposed upon him by this code even though an obligation is also imposed on the occupants of his building, and even though the owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of furnishing required equipment or of complying with this code.

  All buildings and structures and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for such maintenance. To determine compliance with this subsection, the building may be reinspected.

  Every owner, or his agent, in addition to being responsible for maintaining his building in a sound structural condition, shall be responsible for keeping that part of the building or premises which he occupies or controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition, including the shared or public areas in a building containing two or more dwelling units.

  Every owner shall, where required by this code, the health ordinance or the health officer, furnish and maintain such approved sanitary facilities as required, and shall furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities for the prevention of insect and rodent infestation, and where infestation has taken place, shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests when such extermination is not specifically made the responsibility of the occupant by law or ruling.

  Every occupant of a dwelling unit, in addition to being responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling or dwelling unit or premises which he occupies and controls, shall dispose of all his rubbish, garbage and other organic waste in a manner required by the health ordinance and approved by the health officer.

  Every occupant shall, where required by this code, the health ordinance or the health officer, furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities necessary to keep his premises safe and sanitary.

 

§8-129.  Substandard Buildings
               All buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be substandard as defined in this Code are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in Article VI of Chapter 8 of the Grand Island City Code.

 

§8-130.  Violations
               It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code.

 

§8-131.  Reserved
§8-132.  Reserved
§8-133.  Reserved
§8-134.  Reserved

 

 

Division 3. Permits and Inspections

 

§8-135.  General
               No building or structure regulated by this code shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate permit for each building or structure has first been obtained from the building official in the manner and according to the applicable conditions prescribed in the Building Code.

 

§8-136.  Fees
               Whenever a building permit is required by the Building Code, the appropriate fees shall be paid to the building official as specified for building permits in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§8-137.  Inspection
               All building or structures within the scope of this code and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official in accordance with and in the manner provided by this code and the Building Code.

 

§8-138.  Reserved
§8-139.  Reserved
§8-140.  Reserved

 

 

Division 4. Definitions

 

§8-141.  Definitions
               For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this chapter or as specified in the Building Code. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, copyright 1981, shall be considered as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine, and the feminine the masculine.

  BUILDING CODE is the Building Code adopted by the City of Grand Island.

  EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT is a dwelling unit containing only one habitable room and meeting the requirements of the Building Code Exception.

  HEALTH OFFICER is the legally designated head of the Department of Health of this jurisdiction.

  HOT WATER is hot water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a temperature of not less than 110°F.

  MECHANICAL CODE is the Uniform Mechanical Code adopted by the City of Grand Island.

  NUISANCE. The following shall be defined as nuisances:

  (1) Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence.

  (2) Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, or the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.

  (3) Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the health officer.

  (4) Overcrowding a room with occupants.

  (5) Insufficient ventilation or illumination.

  (6) Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.

  (7) Uncleanliness, as determined by the health officer.

  (8) Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the health officer.

  PLUMBING CODE is the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by the City of Grand Island.

  WORKMANLIKE is executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-9-2006

 

§8-142.  Reserved
§8-143.  Reserved
§8-144.  Reserved

 

 

Division 5. Space and Occupancy Standards

 

§8-145.  Location on Property
               All buildings shall be located with respect to property lines and to other buildings on the same property as required by the Building Code.

 

§8-146.  Yards and Courts
  (1) Scope. This section shall apply to yards and courts having required windows opening therein.

  (2) Yards. Every yard shall be not less than 3 feet in width for one-story and two-story buildings. For buildings more than two stories in height the minimum width of the yard shall be increased at the rate of 1 foot for each additional story. Where yards completely surround the building, the required width may be reduced by 1 foot. For buildings exceeding 14 stories in height, the required width of yard shall be computed on the basis of 14 stories.

  (3) Courts. Every court shall be not less than 3 feet in width. Courts having windows opening on opposite sides shall be not less than 6 feet in width. Courts bounded on three or more sides by the walls of the building shall be not less that 10 feet in length unless bounded on one end by a public way or yard. For buildings more than two stories in height the court shall be increased 1 foot in width and 2 feet in length for each additional story. For buildings exceeding 14 stories in height, the required dimensions shall be computed on the basis of 14 stories.

  Adequate access shall be provided to the bottom of all courts for cleaning purposes. Every court more than two stories in height shall be provided with a horizontal air intake at the bottom not less than 10 square feet in area and leading to the exterior of the building unless abutting a yard or public way. The construction of the air intake shall be as required for the court walls of the building, but in no case shall be less than one-hour fire-resistive.

 

§8-147.  Room Dimensions
  (1) Ceiling Heights. Habitable space shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6 inches except as otherwise permitted in this section. Kitchens, halls, bathrooms and toilet compartments may have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. Where exposed beam ceiling members are spaced at less than 48 inches on center, ceiling height shall be measured to the bottom of these members. Where exposed beam ceiling members are spaced at 48 inches or more on center, ceiling height shall be measured to the bottom of the deck supported by these members, provided that the bottom of the members is not less than 7 feet above the floor.

  If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half the area thereof. No portion of the room measuring less than 5 feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area thereof.

  If any room has a furred ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height is required in two-thirds the area thereof, but in no case shall the height of the furred ceiling be less than 7 feet.

  (2) Floor Area. Every dwelling unit shall have at least one room which shall have not less than 120 square feet of floor area. Other habitable rooms, except kitchens, shall have an area of not less than 70 square feet. Where more than two persons occupy a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be increased at the rate of 50 square feet for each occupant in excess of two.

EXCEPTION: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of an efficiency living unit within an apartment house meeting the following requirements:

  (a) The unit shall have a living room of not less than 220 square feet of superficial floor area. An additional 100 square feet of superficial floor area shall be provided for each occupant of such unit in excess of two.

  (b) The unit shall be provided with a separate closet.

  (c) The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be provided.

  (d) The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

  (3) Width. No habitable room other than a kitchen shall be less than 7 feet in any dimension.

  Each water closet stool shall be located in a clear space not less than 30 inches in width and a clear space in front of the water closet stool of not less than 24 inches shall be provided.

 

§8-148.  Light and Ventilation
  (1) Natural Light and Ventilation. All guest rooms, dormitories and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit shall be provided with natural light by means of exterior glazed openings with an area not less than one twentieth of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of 5 square feet. All bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area not less than one-twentieth of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of 1 1/2 square feet. All guest rooms, dormitories and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area of not less than one-twentieth of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of 5 square feet.

  (2) Origin of Light and Ventilation. Required exterior openings for natural light and ventilation shall open directly onto a street or public alley or a yard or court located on the same lot as the building.

EXCEPTION: Required windows may open into a roofed porch where the porch:

(a) Abuts a street, yard, or court; and

(b) Has a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet; and

(c) Has the longer side at least 65 percent open and unobstructed.

  A required window in a service room may open into a vent shaft which is open and unobstructed to the sky and not less than 4 feet in least dimension. No vent shaft shall extend through more than two stories.

  For the purpose of determining light and ventilation requirements, any room may be considered as a portion of an adjoining room when one half of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than one tenth of the floor area of the interior room or 25 square feet, whichever is greater.

  (3) Mechanical Ventilation. In lieu of openable windows for natural ventilation, a mechanical ventilation system may be provided. Such system shall be capable of providing two air changes per hour in all guest rooms, dormitories, habitable rooms, and in public corridors. One-fifth of the air supply shall be taken from the outside. In bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms, and similar rooms, a mechanical ventilation system connected directly to the outside or into attic space properly ventilated in compliance with the current building code capable of providing five air changes per hour, shall be provided.

  (4) Hallways. All public hallways, stairs and other exitways shall be adequately lighted at all times in accordance with the Building Code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006

 

§8-149.  General
  (1) Dwelling Units and Lodging Houses. Every dwelling unit and every lodging house shall be provided with a bathroom equipped with facilities consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and either a bathtub or shower.

  (2) Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, there shall be provided on each floor for each sex at least one water closet and lavatory and one bath accessible from a public hallway. Additional water closets, lavatories and baths shall be provided on each floor for each sex at the rate of one for every additional ten guests, or fractional number thereof in excess of ten. Such facilities shall be clearly marked for "Men" or "Women."

  (3) Kitchen. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen. Every kitchen shall be provided with a kitchen sink. Wooden sinks or sinks of similarly absorbent material shall not be permitted.

  (4) Fixtures. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and cold running water necessary for its normal operation.

  All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved glazed earthenware type of a similarly nonabsorbent material.

  (5) Water Closet Compartments. Walls and floors of water closet compartments, except in dwellings, shall be finished in accordance with the Building Code.

  (6) Room Separations. Every water closet, bathtub or shower required by this code shall be installed in a room which will afford privacy to the occupant. A room in which a water closet is located shall be separated from food preparation or storage rooms by a tight-fitting door.

  (7) Installation and Maintenance. All sanitary facilities shall be installed and maintained in safe and sanitary condition and in accordance with applicable requirements of the Plumbing Code.

 

§8-150.  Grading and Drainage
               All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon.

 

§8-151.  Accessory Structures
               All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.

 

§8-152.  Insect Screens
               During the period from June 1 to October 31 every door, window and other outside opening used or required for ventilation purposes serving any building containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products used in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.

  EXCEPTION: Screen doors shall not be required for out-swinging doors or other types of openings which make screening impractical, provided other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans are employed.

 

§8-153.  Doors
               All exterior doors and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and guest rooms shall tightly secure the door.

 

§8-154.  Accumulation of Rubbish or Garbage
               The interior of every structure shall be free from any accumulation of litter, as defined in §17-1 of the Grand Island City Code.

 

§8-155.  Reserved
§8-156.  Reserved
§8-157.  Reserved
§8-158.  Reserved

 

 

Division 6. Structural Requirements

 

§8-159.  General
  (1) General. Buildings or structures may be of any type of construction permitted by the Building Code. Roofs, floors, walls, foundations and all other structural components of buildings shall be capable of resisting any and all forces and loads to which they may be subjected. All structural elements shall be proportioned and joined in accordance with the stress limitations and design criteria as specified in the appropriate sections of the Building Code. Buildings of every permitted type of construction shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Building Code.

  (2) Shelter. Every building shall be weather protected so as to provide shelter for the occupants against the elements and to exclude dampness.

  (3) Protection of Materials. All wood shall be protected against termite damage and decay as provided in the Building Code.

 

§8-160.  Reserved
§8-161.  Reserved
§8-162.  Reserved

 

 

Division 7. Mechanical Requirements

 

§8-163.  Heating and Ventilation
  (1) Heating. Every dwelling unit and guest room shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 70 degrees F. Such facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with the provisions of the Grand Island City Code, and all other applicable laws. No unvented or open flame gas heater or apparatus shall be permitted. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type.

  (2) Electrical Equipment. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type.

  (3) Ventilation. Ventilation for rooms and areas, and for fuel burning appliances shall be provided as required in the Grand Island City Code. Ventilating equipment shall be of an approved type, installed and maintained in a safe manner and in compliance with the current building code and all other applicable laws. When mechanical ventilation is provided in lieu of the natural ventilation, such mechanical ventilating system shall be maintained in operation during the occupancy of any building or portion thereof.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006

 

§8-164.  Facilities Required
               Every building used for human occupancy shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Code – NFPA Article 70.

 

§8-165.  Receptacles
               Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at lease two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded type receptacle. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle.

 

§8-166.  Lighting Fixtures
               Every public hall, interior stairway, watercloset compartment, bathroom, laundry room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric lighting fixture.

 

§8-167.  Service
               The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall be used as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with NFPA 70. Every dwelling shall be served by a main service which is not less than 60 ampere, three wire.

 

§8-168.  Installation
               All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.

 

§8-169.  Electrical System Hazards
               Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.

 

§8-170.  Reserved
§8-171.  Reserved
§8-172.  Reserved

 

 

Division 8. Exits

 

§8-173.  General
               Every dwelling unit or guest room shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with exits, exitways and appurtenances as required by the Building Code.

               Every sleeping room below the fourth story shall have at least one operable window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue. The units shall be operable from the inside to provide a full clear opening without the use of separate tools.

 

§8-174.  Reserved
§8-175.  Reserved
§8-176.  Reserved

 

 

Division 9. Fire Protection

 

§8-177.  General
  (1) All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with the degree of fire-resistive construction as required by the Building Code for the appropriate occupancy, type of construction and location on property; and shall be provided with the appropriate fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by the Building Code.

  (2) Smoke detector; number; location; operation. Smoke detectors shall be mounted in accordance with the rules and regulations regarding the number and location of smoke detectors in accordance with the Building Code. When activated, the detector shall provide and alarm in the dwelling unit, guest room, dormitory, or mobile home.

  (3) Smoke detector; rental property; responsibility for installing, maintaining.

  (a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this subsection, the owner of every apartment house, dwelling, hotel, lodging house, dormitory, or manufactured home or the owner's authorized agent shall be required to supply, install, maintain, and test the smoke detectors.

  (b) In case of a dwelling unit, guest room, hotel room, or manufactured home which is being occupied for one month or more by the same occupant, it shall be the responsibility of such occupant to perform the tests on the smoke detector as are recommended by the manufacturer's instructions and immediately notify, in writing, the owner or authorized agent of any deficiencies. The owner of the dwelling, apartment house, lodging house, hotel, or manufactured home shall provide a notice to such occupant containing instructions for the testing of the device. For purposes of this subsection, deficiencies shall not include a worn battery or other replaceable energy unit. The occupant shall be responsible for replacement of the battery or unit, except that such battery or unit shall be in operating condition at the time the occupant takes possession. The owner or authorized agent shall correct any reported deficiencies in the smoke detector and shall not be in violation of this section for a deficient smoke detector when he or she has not received notice of the deficiency.

  (c) In buildings constructed prior to January 1, 1982, smoke detectors shall not be required to be attached to a centralized power source.

  (d) Subsection 3 of §8-177 shall apply solely to rental property.

 

§8-178.  Reserved
§8-179.  Reserved
§8-180.  Reserved
§8-181.  Reserved

 

 

Division 10. Substandard Buildings

 

§8-182.  Standards
  (1) General. Any building or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room, or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the following listed conditions to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public, or the occupants thereof, shall be deemed and hereby is, declared to be a substandard building. The extent of danger of life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be determined by the chief building official and the health and sanitation officer, and upon request, the fire chief.

  (2) Inadequate Sanitation. Inadequate sanitation shall include but not be limited to the following:

  (a) Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or lodging house.

  (b) Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of guests in a hotel.

  (c) Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.

  (d) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel.

  (e) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or lodging house.

  (f) Lack of adequate heating facilities.

  (g) Lack of, or improper operation of required ventilating equipment.

  (h) Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by this code.

  (i) Room and space dimensions less than required by this code.

  (j) Lack of required electrical lighting.

  (k) Dampness of habitable rooms.

  (l) Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents as determined by the health officer.

  (m) General dilapidation or improper maintenance.

  (n) Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.

  (o) Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by the health officer.

  (3) Structural Hazards. Structural hazards shall include but not be limited to the following:

  (a) Deteriorated or inadequate foundation.

  (b) Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports

  (c) Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.

  (d) Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.

  (e) Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.

  (f) Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members with sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.

  (g) Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.

  (h) Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle, due to defective material or deterioration.

  (i) Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety.

  (4) Nuisance. Any nuisance as defined in this code.

  (5) Hazardous Electrical Wiring. Electrical wiring which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation or electrical wiring not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or which has not been maintained in good condition or which is not being used in a safe manner shall be considered substandard.

  (6) Hazardous Plumbing. Plumbing which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation or plumbing not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or which has not been maintained in good condition or which is not free of cross-connections or siphonage between fixtures shall be considered substandard.

  (7) Hazardous Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation or mechanical equipment not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or which has not been maintained in good and safe condition shall be considered substandard.

  (8) Faulty Weather Protection, which shall include but not be limited to the following:

  (a) Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster.

  (b) Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors.

  (c) Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering.

  (d) Broken, rotten, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings.

  (9) Fire Hazard. Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste or vegetation which, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department or his deputy, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause.

  (10). Faulty Materials of Construction. All materials of construction except those which are specifically allowed or approved by this code and the Building Code, and which have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition.

  (11) Hazardous or Unsanitary Premises. Those premises on which an accumulation of litter, weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or conditions constitute fire, health or safety hazards.

  (12) Inadequate Exits. Except for those buildings or portions thereof which have been provided with adequate exit facilities conforming to the provisions of this code, buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities were installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of their construction or whose exit facilities have not been increased in number or width in relation to any increase in occupant load due to alterations, additions or change in use or occupancy subsequent to the time of construction shall be considered substandard.

  Notwithstanding compliance with code requirements in effect at the time of their construction, buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard when the building official finds that an unsafe condition exists through an improper location of exits, a lack of an adequate number or width of exits, or where other conditions exist which are dangerous to human life.

  (13) Inadequate Fire-protection or Fire-fighting Equipment. All buildings or portions thereof which are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by this code, except those buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy.

  (14) Improper Occupancy. All buildings or portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies.

 

§8-183.  Reserved
§8-184.  Reserved
§8-185.  Reserved

 

 


Division 11. Reserved

Division 11 deleted pursuant to Ordinance No. 9044, effective 6-7-2006

 

 
CHAPTER 9

CABLE TELEVISION

§9-1.  Title
                This ordinance may be known and cited as the Multi-Channel Service Providers Regulatory Ordinance for the City of Grand Island Nebraska.

 

§9-2.  Construction
                This ordinance shall be construed in light of applicable Federal and State laws and regulations governing multi-channel service practices which specifically includes cable television.

 

§9-3.  Scope
                This ordinance shall be effective within the geographical limits of the City, including any areas subsequently annexed by the City.

 

§9-4.  Severability
                If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of this ordinance, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining provisions of this ordinance, and all applications thereof, not having been declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in full force and effect. The Council/franchising authority declares that no invalid or proscribed provision or application was an inducement to this ordinance, and that it would have enacted this ordinance regardless of the invalid or proscribed provision or application.

 

§9-5.  Definitions
                (1) "A/B switch" or "Input selector switch" means any device that enables a viewer to select between a multi-channel service and off-the-air television signals. Such a device may be more sophisticated than a mere two-sided switch, may utilize other multi-channel system interface equipment, and may be built into television receivers.

                (2) "Access channel" or "non-broadcast channel" means a government, education, or public channel which is carried on a multi-channel system, but which is not part of any institutional network.

                (3) "Activated channel" means a channel engineered at the headend of the cable system for the provision of services generally available to residential subscribers of the cable system, regardless of whether such services actually are provided, including any channel designated for governmental, educational, or public use.

                (4) "Abandoned calls" mean telephone calls that are connected to an MCS provider's general information and service number, but the caller hangs up without being attended to by a representative of the MCS provider, or by a device capable of problem resolution (e. g. accepting a service request or a work order, directing calls to the appropriate personnel, or such similar functions or service).

                (5) "Alternative user charge" means a charge used in place of a franchise fee that the Council requires as payment for the privilege of using the streets, easements, public ways, or rights-of-way, of the City in order to construct, maintain, and operate a multi-channel system. An alternative user fee is not based on an MCS provider's gross annual revenues (as is the case in a franchise fee), but rather is based on the value of the City property that an MCS provider is using to construct, maintain, and operate its multi-channel system.

                (6) "Annual gross revenues" means any and all compensation which is derived from the operation of the MCS system, and which is attributable to the subscribers or customers within the City, or the grant of a franchise granted to a franchisee to operate a multi-channel system. Further, "annual gross revenues" means any, and all, compensation, in whatever form (except as exempted by this definition), exchange or otherwise derived from all multi-channel services, MCS operations, and MCS-related activities within the City including, but not limited to, revenues from subscriber rates, pay television, premium channels, service tiers, service clusters, institutional networks, advertising, installations, rebates or commissions received from services carried or provided on the system, or commercial access. Also, unless prohibited or preempted by either Federal or State law, "annual gross revenues" shall mean any, and all, compensation from all ancillary multi-channel services, MCS operations, and MCS-related activities within the City, including, but not limited to, sale of MCS or MCS equipment, advertising stuffers inserted into periodic billing statements or other notices, rental or sale of video discs, rental or sale of video cassettes, rental or sale of descrambling converters, or other devices, rental or sale of remote control devices (including those with volume control), rental or sale of a/b or input switches, rental or sale of channel lock-out devices or technology, rental or sale of interactive games or software, rental or sale of digital radio equipment, sale of satellite antenna dishes, sale of satellite antenna-received programming for a programmer or distributor of services, or from revenues received as the billing agent, collector, or retailer of satellite antenna-received service. However, "annual gross revenues" does not mean, any taxes imposed and/or assessed by law on subscribers (including State sales taxes, but excluding any state or local franchise fees) which an MCS provider is obligated to collect and pay in full to the applicable authorities.

                (7) "Applicant" means a person submitting an application or proposal to the City for a license or franchise (where required) to operate a multi-channel system under the terms and conditions set forth in this ordinance, and any State regulations.

                (8) "Application" or "Proposal" are synonymous for the purposes of this ordinance. An "application" or "proposal" means the process by which the applicant submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted a license or franchise (where required) for all, or a part, of the City. An "application" or "proposal" includes all written documentation, and verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the Council/franchising authority concerning the construction, rendering of services, maintenance, or any other matter pertaining to the proposed multi-channel system.

                (9) "Assignment of a franchised MCS provider's franchise" or "Transfer of a franchised MCS provider's franchise" means any transaction or action which effectively or actually changes operational or managerial control from one person or entity to another.

                (10) "Auxiliary equipment" means equipment supplied by the MCS provider (such as a converter, remote control unit, or input selector switch), which enhances or assists in the reception or provision of multi-channel service.

                (11) "Basic cable television service" means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.

                (12) "Cable channel" or "Cable television channel" or "Data channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic or light frequency spectrum which is capable of delivering a television channel (as "television channel" is defined by the FCC regulation).

                (13) "Cable operator" or "operator" means any person or group of persons who:

   (a) provides cable television service over a cable system and directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or

   (b) otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.

                (14) "Cable service" means:

   (a) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and

   (b) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming service.

                (15) "Cable system" or "Cable television system" means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video, voice or data programming, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the City. However, such terms do not include the following:

   (a) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more broadcast stations; or

   (b) a facility that serves only subscribers in one (1) or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management unless such facility or facilities uses any public rights-of-way; or

   (c) a facility or a common carrier which is subject, in whole, or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the CCPA -- codified at 47 USC 541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video, voice, or data programming or service directly to subscribers or;

   (d) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility.

                (16) "CCPA" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended.

                (17) "Charge" means a one-time or non-regularly occurring cost paid by the subscriber, and which is associated with the installation, maintenance, service, or repair of the multi-channel service.

                (18) "Cherry-picking" or "cream-skimming" means the process whereby an MCS provider targets only selected areas of the City for service (either through a new-build, overbuild, or selective upgrade), and then primarily for reasons of higher than average density, or the relative affluence of the area.

                (19) "City" means the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, or its lawful successor.

                (20) Reserved

                (21) Reserved

                (22) Reserved

                (23) Reserved

                (24) Reserved

                (25) "Collection charge" means a charge or fee imposed on a customer by an MCS provider for such provider's efforts at collecting, or attempting to collect, a past due account.

                (26) "Commercially impracticable" means with respect to any requirement applicable to an MCS provider, that it is commercially impracticable for such an MCS provider to comply with such requirement as a result of a change in conditions which is beyond the control of such an MCS provider, and the non-occurrence of which, was the basic assumption on which the requirement was based.

                (27) "Converter" means any electric, electronic, or other device, separate and apart from the subscriber's receiver that is capable of converting or changing signals to a frequency not intended to be susceptible to interference within the television, video, or data receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel or other type of selector may also permit a subscriber to view or otherwise use signals delivered at designated dial locations, or such other reception and use allocations as may be applicable and required for the practical use of the signal.

                (28) "Council" or "Council/franchising authority" means the City Council for the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, or its lawful successor, which is the lawful legislative body for the City.

                (29) "Customer" means a subscriber or user of the services and/or facilities of the multi-channel system provided by an MCS provider.

                (30) "DBS" means direct broadcasting satellite.

                (31) "DBS provider" or "Direct Broadcast Satellite provider" means any person who delivers and/or provides multi-channel services from a satellite to a subscriber's residence through the use of a small earth or satellite station.

                (32) "Decoder" or "Descrambler" means a device which enables a subscriber to convert a scrambled signal into a viewable or otherwise useable signal.

                (33) "Disaster emergency" or "Disaster" or "Emergency" means an imminent, impending, or actual natural or humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety, or welfare of all, or a representative portion of the residents of the City is threatened. A "disaster emergency" (by illustration) may include a snowstorm, flood, tornado, severe thunderstorm, hazardous waste infiltration, petroleum, munitions, or nuclear explosion, or aircraft crash.

                (34) "Drop" means a small branch of cable, or other transmitting medium which connects the terminals on the back of the subscriber's receiver to the feeder cable or future technical equivalent on the street, easement, rights-of-way, or public way.

                (35) Easement" means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the City for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever, including cable television, or any other MCS provider. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of cable service or any other multi-channel service.

                (36) "FCC" or "Federal Communications Commission" means the Federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level.

                (37) "Fiber cable" or "Fiber optic cable" means very thin and pliable cylinders, or strands of glass or plastic, or any future developed technical equivalent, used to carry wide bands of multiple frequencies.

                (38) "Franchise" means the initial authorization, or subsequent renewal granted by the Council/franchising authority in order for a person to construct, operate, and maintain a franchised MCS system in all, or part, of the City.

                (39) "Franchised MCS provider" means a person that is awarded a franchise by the Council/franchising authority to construct and operate a franchised multi-channel system, within all, or part, of the City. The term "franchised MCS provider" specifically includes the term "cable operator".

                (40) "Franchise expiration" means the date of expiration, or the end of the term of a franchised MCS provider, as provided under a franchise agreement.

                (41) "Franchise fee" means a fee or charge that the City requires as payment for the privilege of using the streets, rights-of-way, public ways, and easements of the City in order to construct, maintain, and operate a franchised MCS system.

                (42) "Franchising authority" or "Council/franchising authority means the City Council for the City of Grand Island, Nebraska. This definition specifically includes the situation wherein the Council in its franchising authority capacity grants a franchise, or renews a franchise, or approves a franchise transfer by an applicant for an MCS franchise, or a franchised MCS provider.

                (43) "Headend" means the electronic control center, where incoming signals, including those of television broadcast stations are amplified, modulated, filtered, converted, or in any way processed or converted for redistribution to subscribers.

                (44) "Hub" means the satellite or remote receiving, processing and/or transmitting facility, enabling the signal to be extended beyond the physical/electronic capabilities of the multi-channel electronics and/or to serve as a remote switching facility.

                (45) "Late charge" means a charge which is added to a subscriber's account or bill for non-payment of a previously due and delinquent account.

                (46) Reserved

                (47) Reserved

                (48) Reserved

                (49) Reserved

                (50) Reserved

                (51) Reserved

                (52) Reserved

                (53) Reserved

                (54) Reserved

                (55) "Mayor" means the Mayor for the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, or the Mayor's official designee.

                (56) "MCS" means multi-channel service.

                (57) "MCS provider" or "Multi-channel service provider" means any person or group of persons who:

   (a) provides multi-channel communications service over a multi-channel system and directly or indirectly owns a significant interest in such multi-channel system; or

   (b) who otherwise controls or is responsible through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a multi-channel system.

The term "MCS provider" or "multi-channel service provider" specifically includes the terms "cable operator", "DBS operator" or "direct broadcast satellite provider", "MDS provider" or "multi-point distribution system provider", "MMDS provider", and "SMATV operator."

                (58) "MDS" means multi-point distribution system.

                (59) "MDS provider" or "Multi-point distribution system provider" means any person or group of persons who is authorized by the FCC to transmit (via Super High Frequency) specialized multi-channel programming or data or facsimile transmission to subscriber-selected locations.

                (60) "Multi-channel programming service" or "Multi-channel service" means:

   (a) means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and

   (b) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service.

                (61) "Ordinance" means the Multi-Channel Service Providers Regulatory Ordinance for the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

                (62) "Other programming service" means information that an MCS provider (specifically including a cable operator) makes available to all subscribers generally.

                (63) Reserved

                (64) Reserved

                (65) Reserved

                (66) Reserved

                (67) Reserved

                (68) Reserved

                (69) Reserved

                (70) Reserved

                (71) "Pay-per-view" or "Premium channel" means the delivery over the multi-channel system of audio and/or video signals in an unintelligible form to subscribers for a fee or charge (over and above the charge for standard or basic service) on a per program, or per channel basis where said unintelligible or unusable form for viewing is made intelligible only to subscribers paying a separate fee or charge for the viewing or use of the signals.

                (72) "Person" means any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association of two (2) or more persons having a joint common interest, governmental agency, or other legal entity, including the City.

                (73) "Proposed abandonment of multi-channel service" or "Proposed withdrawal of multi-channel service" or "Proposed cessation of multi-channel service" means the anticipated, imminent, or expected (either voluntary or involuntary) disruption, discontinuance, desertion, or removal of an MCS provider's operation and provision of multi-channel service from all, or part, of the City for a projected period exceeding three (3) months in duration.

                (74) "Public, educational or governmental access facilities" means:

   (a) Channel capacity designated exclusively for public, educational or governmental use; and

   (b) facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.

                (75) "Public way" means any public street, public way, public place, or rights-of-way, now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the area served by the MCS provider.

                (76) "Rate" means the monthly, bi-monthly, quarterly, semi-annual, annual, or other periodic price paid by a subscriber in order to receive standard or basic, tiered, clustered, premium, or pay-per-view multi-channel service.

                (77) "Revocation," "Termination," or "Non-renewal," means an official act by the City whereby the Council/franchising authority removes, repeals, or rescinds previously approved authorization for a licensed or franchised MCS provider to conduct the running of a multi-channel system within the City.

                (78) Reserved

                (79) Reserved

                (80) Reserved

                (81) Reserved

                (82) Reserved

                (83) Reserved

                (84) Reserved

                (85) "Service cluster" means the grouping, aligning, or packaging of one (1) or more multi-channel programming services by category (such as sports and/or news), or by rate, or by some other identifiable method, and charging a separate price or rate for each service cluster.

                (86) "Service day" means any day, other than a Sunday or MCS provider holiday, in which employees of the MCS provider (including customer service representatives and service technicians) regularly respond to service requests, inquiries, and complaints.

                (87) "Service outage" means the loss of picture or sound on all standard or basic subscriber channels, or one (1) or more auxiliary programming channels (including tiers and clusters), and which is not caused by the subscriber's television receiver or by the subscriber.

                (88) "Service tier" means a category of multi-channel service or other programming service provided by an MCS provider, and for which a separate rate is charged by an MCS provider.

                (89) "SMATV" means Satellite Master Antenna Television.

                (90) "SMATV operator" or "Satellite Master Antenna Television operator" means any person or group of persons who:

   (a) provides multi-channel service over an SMATV system; or

   (b) otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management of an SMATV system.

                (91) "SMATV system" means a private multi-channel system not crossing any public rights-of-way and which is located on private property, and serving private dwellings. Multi-channel programming services are obtained via an earth station, amplification, and a distribution system.

                (92) "Standard multi-channel service" means the lowest priced or least comprehensive service cluster or service tier available to residential subscribers.

                (93) "State" means the State of Nebraska.

                (94) "Street" means the surface of, and the space above and below a public street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive, or other easement now or hereafter held by the City (including any street, as defined, which is acquired by eminent domain) for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way now or hereafter held by the City (including any easements or rights-of-way acquired by eminent domain) which shall, with their proper use and meaning, entitle the City and MCS provider to use thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting multi-channel system transmissions over poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, viaducts, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may ordinarily be necessary and pertinent to a multi-channel system.

                (95) "Subscriber" means a person lawfully receiving multi-channel service delivered by the MCS provider.

                (96) "USC" means United States Code.

                (97) "User" means a person or organization utilizing a multi-channel system and/or its equipment for purposes of production and/or transmission of material, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.

                (98) "Video programming" means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station.

 

§9-6.  Statement of Intent
                (A) The Council recognizes the United States Congress' intent in approving the CCPA (expressed in Section 601 -- codified at 47 USC 521). As such, the Council reaffirms and adopts those principles and ideals as part of the City's intent with respect to cable television and expands its intent to cover all MCS providers.

                (B) As expressed by Congress, and adopted by the Council, its intent is as follows:

   (1) establish a local policy concerning communications and technologies;

   (2) establish franchise procedures and standards which encourage the growth and development of cable systems which assure that cable systems are responsive to the needs and interests of the City;

   (3) establish guidelines for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of cable systems;

   (4) assure that cable communications provide, and are encouraged to provide, the widest diversity of information and services to the public;

   (5) establish an orderly process for franchise renewal which protects cable operators against unfair denials of renewal where an operator's past performance and proposal for future performance meet the standards set by the CCPA, and this ordinance; and

   (6) promote competition in cable communications and minimize unnecessary regulation that would impose an undue economic burden on cable systems.

                (C) In addition to principles and ideals listed in subsection (2), the Council also expresses that its intent covers the following:

   (1) to create a set of regulations, standards, and procedures for MCS providers;

   (2) to create a comprehensive customer service and consumer protection policy for MCS providers;

   (3) to provide for access and inspection of an MCS provider's books and records in order to monitor compliance of local, State, and Federal laws, and any franchise agreement (if one has been granted);

   (4) to create a thorough construction and installation policy for an MCS provider's system;

   (5) to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City in light of the MCS provider's construction, operation, and maintenance;

   (6) to provide for emergency override capability, so that citizens of the City may be warned of a potential, imminent, actual disaster or emergency situation that exists in the area;

   (7) to provide for the introduction and installation of an in-home signal or safety alert technology in order to notify both subscribers and non-subscribers to an MCS provider's service of imminent disaster emergencies;

   (8) to create a thorough procedure for collecting and monitoring franchise fees and alternative user charges;

   (9) to create a viable alternative to franchise fees in case such fees, or their collection, or method of computation are ruled invalid, unenforceable, or unconstitutional;

   (10) to create a thorough default and revocation procedure for licensed and franchised MCS providers;

   (11) to provide for continuity of services in the event of City acquisition, abandonment, withdrawal, cessation of service, revocation, termination, non-renewal, or expiration of an MCS provider; and

   (12) creating a performance review procedure in order to assist the City in its periodic evaluation of a franchised MCS provider's performance.

 

§9-7.  Administration; Delegation of Powers and Authority
                (A) The Council/franchising authority is hereby designated the officer of the City which is responsible for the continuing administration of this ordinance.

                (B) Unless prohibited by federal or State law, the Council/franchising authority may delegate its powers and authorities with respect to an MCS provider to a duly authorized representative of the City, including the Mayor, the City Manager, a City Cable Advisory Committee, or an outside consultant.

                (C) However, the City/franchising authority may never delegate its franchising or revocation power to another person.

 

§9-8.  Applicability of this Ordinance to an MCS Provider
                Unless exempted entirely from this ordinance, or exempted under one (1) or more provisions of this ordinance, or granted relief (by the Council/franchising authority) from one (1) or more provisions and/or requirements of this ordinance, then this ordinance shall be applicable to an MCS provider, and this ordinance shall have full effect and be enforceable in its entirety. Moreover, a non-exempt MCS provider shall be expected to comply with this ordinance no later than six (6) months after this ordinance becomes effective, except where a different compliance date is given or noted.

 

§9-9.  Exemption from this Ordinance for Certain MCS Providers
                (A) Recognizing the inherent technological differences between various types of MCS providers, and taking into account a number of financial, operational, and maintenance considerations, the Council/franchising authority exempts certain MCS providers from complying with the provisions contained in this ordinance.

                (B) MCS providers who are exempted from complying with the provisions of this ordinance are as follows:

   (1) an MCS provider who is exempted from this ordinance as a result of an applicable FCC ruling; or

   (2) an MCS provider who is exempted from this ordinance as a result of an applicable judicial ruling.

                (C) It is expressly understood that an exempted MCS provider remains exempted only as long as it meets one (1) or more of the specifications of this particular section.

                (D) It also is expressly noted that the extent of the exemption for a qualified MCS provider is only for this ordinance. Consequently, such an exempted MCS provider is expected to abide by, and comply with, any other applicable City, State, or Federal laws and regulations, including any applicable federal, or State consumer protection, or customer service laws and regulations.

 

§9-10.  Non-Exempt MCS Providers Seeking Relief from this Ordinance
                (A) Any MCS provider affected by this ordinance may file a written petition, at any time, with the Council/franchising authority seeking relief from one (1) or more provisions of this ordinance. The relief requested may specifically include the delay in implementation (as to the petitioning MCS provider only) of one (1) or more provisions of this ordinance.

                (B) In order to receive any relief from one (1) or more of the provisions of this ordinance, a non-exempt MCS provider must satisfactorily demonstrate to the Council/franchising authority that at least one (1) of the following facts exist:

   (1) the provision and/or requirement is expressly prohibited by Federal law, the FCC, or State law; or

   (2) where applicable, that the provision in question materially affects, and is in conflict with an expressed right that is specifically noted in an existing franchise agreement (but only for the term of the existing franchise); or

   (3) that the imposition of such provisions and/or requirements will create such an undue economic hardship on an MCS provider so as to imperil or eliminate an MCS provider's ability to provide multi-channel service to a majority of current subscribers; or

   (4) that the MCS provider has its own construction, maintenance, operation, or customer service policy, which the Council/franchising authority deems comparable to, or exceeding, any provision and/or requirement from which the MCS provider seeks relief.

                (C) Unless delegated to another authorized representative of the City, the Council/franchising authority shall have the responsibility of determining whether an MCS provider's construction, maintenance, operation, or customer service policy, is comparable to, or exceeds, a similar provision in this ordinance.

                (D) As an alternative to seeking an exemption, or requesting relief, an MCS provider may petition for clarification on the precise intent and effect that one (1) or more provisions or sections of this ordinance has on the petitioning MCS provider.

                (E) In accordance with this ordinance, the Council/franchising authority may charge the petitioning MCS provider with the actual costs for processing such a petition, including any costs incurred by outside consultants who are retained by the City to review an MCS provider's petition.

                (F) In those instances where the Council/franchising authority grants an exemption, or relief, or clarification, to a franchised MCS provider, or deems a franchised MCS provider's operational policy to be comparable to an ordinance provision, then the franchise agreement (initial, existing, or renewal) shall be amended within thirty (30) days to reflect the exact extent of such exemption and/or relief. It should be specifically noted that the benefit of such exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy extends only to the MCS provider granted such exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy.

 

§9-11.  Failure of the Council/Franchising Authority to Enforce this Ordinance
                A non-exempt MCS provider shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of this ordinance, or any subsequently adopted amendments to this ordinance, by any failure of the Council/franchising authority on any one (1) or more occasions to seek, or insist upon compliance with such requirements or provisions.

 

§9-12.  MCS Providers or their Assignees Subject to Present and Future Ordinances
                (A) Any non-exempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to, and expected to comply with, all ordinances now or hereafter adopted and in effect within the City, including this ordinance, to the extent that said MCS provider has not received an exemption or relief from said ordinance(s).

                (B) Any non-exempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to, and expected to comply with, all Federal and State Laws, and with all rules issued by all applicable regulatory agencies now or hereafter in existence.

                (C) Any non-exempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to all lawful exercise of the City's police power.

                (D) With respect to future ordinances noted in this Section, nothing contained herein prevents an MCS provider from exercising any, and all, of its administrative, and legal rights as to the constitutionality, applicability, and enforceability of said future ordinances.

 

§9-13.  Repeal of Prior Inconsistent Resolutions and Ordinances
                To the extent that there is any prior resolution or ordinance which in part, or in whole, is directly inconsistent with this ordinance, then such part, or such whole, of the prior resolution or ordinance shall be repealed to the extent of the inconsistency.

 

§9-14.  Resolution of Inconsistencies with Federal or State Rules, Regulations or Laws
                (A) In any case of an actual inconsistency between any provision or section of this ordinance, and any provision or section of a Federal or State rule, regulation, or law, then the Federal or State rule, regulation, or law shall not only supersede the effect of the ordinance, but also control in any local application.

                (B) The above subsection specifically includes any situation wherein an applicable Federal or State judicial decision creates an actual inconsistency with any provision or section of this ordinance. In such a situation, the Federal or State judicial decision shall not only supersede the effect of the ordinance, but also control in any local application.

 

§9-15.  Resolution of Conflicts Between this Ordinance and an Existing Franchise Agreement
                (A) Where there is a conflict (actual or apparent) between this ordinance and an existing and applicable franchise agreement, the ordinance shall control, and prevail, unless administratively, or judicially determined invalid, unenforceable, or unconstitutional.

                (B) In the case where a franchised MCS provider receives an exemption, relief, or clarification from one (1) or more provisions or Sections of this ordinance, or has one (1) or more of its policies deemed comparable to a provision contained in this ordinance, then the franchise should specifically note such exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy, and to the extent that such an exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy, is inconsistent with a provision contained in this ordinance, then the specifically noted exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy language contained in the franchise agreement controls.

 

§9-16.  Arbitration
                If the Council/franchising authority and a franchised MCS provider agree to such, and the federal or State law does not expressly prohibit such, then arbitration or settlement mediation may be used to resolve any dispute that arises out of this ordinance or franchise agreement. The terms and conditions relating to the arbitration or settlement mediation process (including possible cap on costs expended by both parties, composition of the hearing panel, and liability, if any for costs expended) shall be stated with specificity in the franchise agreement.

 

§9-17.  Penalties
                Any violation or failure to abide by, and comply with, any provision or requirement of this ordinance shall be a violation of this ordinance and shall be subject to any civil remedies provided by State law, including (where permissible) the imposition of monetary fines, but excluding incarceration.

 

§9-18.  The Council/Franchising Authority's Retained Rights and Authorities
                (A) Subject to preemption by, or other approval authority of, the FCC or any other Federal or State governmental entity or agency, the Council/franchising authority retains the authority to provide for:

   (1) the regulation and control of any multi-channel system within the geographical limits of City, and within the limits prescribed by applicable law

   (2) the award and grant of an MCS franchise (where required) subsequent to review of an application or proposal by the Council/franchising authority;

   (3) the periodic review and/or amendment or repeal of all, or part, of this ordinance; and

   (4) if mutually agreed to with a franchised MCS provider, the periodic review and/or amendment of any existing franchise agreement.

                (B) The Council/franchising authority, to the extent permitted by Section 623 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 543), retains the power to approve the rates or charges associated with the providing of multi-channel service classified as cable service by an MCS provider classified as a cable operator.

                (C) Subject to preemption by, or other approval authority of, the FCC, or any other Federal or State governmental entity or retains the jurisdiction to enforce all laws and regulations relating to multi-channel customer service practices and consumer protection.

 

§9-19.  MCS Provider May Promulgate Rules
                To the extent that they are consistent with the requirements and responsibilities detailed in this ordinance, an MCS provider is authorized to promulgate such rules and internal practices as shall be necessary to enable it to exercise its rights and perform its duties under this ordinance, the state, and the rules of any federal agency charged with the responsibility of regulating MCS providers.

 

§9-20.  Notices
                (A) Both the Council/franchising authority and each non-exempt MCS provider shall provide the other party with the name and address of the contact person designated to receive notices, filings, reports, records, documents, and other correspondence. All notices shall be delivered to each party's contact person by certified mail, return receipt requested, personal service with a signed receipt of delivery, or overnight with receipt verification. All other filings, reports, records, documents, and other correspondence may be delivered by any permissible means including, but not limited to: facsimile transmission ("faxing"); personal service; overnight mail or package delivery; or delivery via cable. The delivery of all notices, reports, records, and other correspondence shall be deemed to have occurred at the time of receipt (unless otherwise designated by State law).

                (B) If the non-exempt MCS is required to maintain a franchise, then the designation of such contact person for notice purposes, may be contained within a franchise agreement.

 

§9-21.  Subscriber Fees and Rates
                (A) It is the intention of the City, by the adoption of these provisions, to follow the regulations established by the Federal Communications Commission for the regulation of rates.

                (B) The initial fees to be charged to subscribers for all services, including installation fees and other one-time charges, shall be specified in any franchise agreement issued pursuant hereto.

                (C) Those fees and charges subject to regulation by the City pursuant to state and federal law shall not be increased without prior review by the City.

                (D) In order to obtain City review for rate increases, the franchisee shall file a revised schedule of rates with the City at least thirty days in advance of a proposed rate increase. This filing shall specify the rates or fees to be increased and associated regulations which may affect charges to the subscriber and the justification for said increases and charges. The franchisee shall promptly submit any additional supporting information requested by the City.

                (E) Within thirty days of the rate increase filing, the City shall schedule two public meetings before the Council to hear ratepayer and franchisee comment on the proposed increase. Following the public meeting, the Council may determine whether or not to grant the proposed increase or a portion thereof prior to the expiration of the thirty-day period, unless the thirty-day deadline is tolled by the City for an additional ninety days to consider the request.

                (F) At least thirty days prior to the proposed rate increase, each ratepayer or subscriber shall be notified in writing by the franchisee of the changes in rates proposed.

                (G) Rates and charges may be reduced at any time without prior City approval, provided that the reductions do not result in rates which are unreasonably discriminatory to any subscriber or class of subscribers. Where temporary reductions are put into effect for promotional purposes for a specified time period, the return to the permanent rates shall not be considered a rate increase for purposes of this chapter. The City shall be notified of all reductions in rates, whether permanent or temporary.

                (H) Rates and charges not subject to regulation by the City under state or federal law or regulation may be changed by the franchisee following a minimum thirty days prior notice to the City and the subscribers.

 

§9-22.  Reserved
§9-23.  Reserved
§9-24.  Reserved
§9-25.  Reserved

 

§9-26.  Indemnity
                (A) To the extent permitted by law, a non-exempt MCS provider shall at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save and hold harmless, and exempt the City, the Mayor, the City Administrator, the Council/franchising authority, their officers, agents, servants, and employees from any, and all, penalty, damage, or charges arising out of claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might be claimed now or in the future, which may arise out of, or be caused by, the construction, erection, location, products performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal or restoration of the multi-channel system within the City by a negligent act or omission of an MCS provider, its agents or employees, contractors, subcontractors, independent contractors, or implied or authorized representatives. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are included as those costs which may be recovered by the Council/franchising authority.

                (B) The City, Mayor, and the Council/franchising authority specifically reserve the right to retain counsel of their own choice, at their own expense.

                (C) If an MCS provider obtains counsel for the City, the Mayor, or the Council/franchising authority, then any one of them shall have the right to approve counsel.

                (D) Neither the City, the Mayor, nor the Council/franchising authority shall unreasonably withhold its approval of counsel.

                (E) With respect to an MCS provider's own defense of such actions, noted in this Section, it is understood, that such MCS provider reserves the right to select and retain, without the Council/franchising authority's approval, counsel of the MCS provider's choice, at such provider's expense.

                (F) Where arbitration is permitted in a franchise agreement, or agreed to in writing by the MCS provider and Council/franchising authority, the arbitration provisions shall specify to what extent costs are to be borne by either the Council/franchising authority, and the MCS provider.

 

§9-27.  Liability Insurance
                (A) An MCS provider shall secure and maintain, for as long as it provides multi-channel service to subscribers, public liability, property damage insurance, and umbrella coverage in at least the following amounts:

   (1) Public liability: $2,000,000.00 per person/per occurrence;

   (2) Property damage: $2,000,000.00 per any one (1) claim;

   (3) Umbrella liability: $4,000,000.00 with up to a $50,000.00 deductible and/or base insurance.

                (B) An MCS provider's public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy shall specifically include the City, the Mayor, the Council/franchising authority, their officials, agents, employees or representatives as additional insureds.

                (C) The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed to do business in the State, and which has one (1) of the three highest or best ratings from the Alfred M. Best Company, and which is acceptable to the City/franchising authority, or has been rated acceptable by the State.

                (D) Whenever needed to protect the interests of the citizens of the City, the Council/franchising authority may require an MCS provider to provide insurance for greater amounts than already listed.

                (E) The public liability and property damage insurance policy shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the Council/franchising authority with at least thirty (30) days written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance.

                (F) Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the Council/franchising authority at least fifteen (15) days before the expiration of the insurance which such policies are to renew or replace.

                (G) Before a multi-channel system provides multi-channel service to subscribers, the MCS provider shall deliver the policies or certificates representing the insurance to the Council/franchising authority, and each policy or certificate delivered shall be accompanied by evidence of payment of the premium thereon.

                (H) If the State permits an MCS provider to self-insure, then the MCS provider may exercise its right and self-insure as long as the minimal insurance amounts outlined in this section are met and maintained.

 

§9-28.  Performance and Construction/Completion Bond
                (A) An MCS provider shall furnish to the Council/franchising authority, in an amount totaling at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), a performance bond or security bond executed by a surety licensed to do business in this State. The purpose of the performance bond is to ensure performance of any requirements imposed by this ordinance on an MCS provider. Further, the purpose is to guarantee that should the MCS provider not fulfill any obligations imposed by this ordinance (or where applicable a franchise agreement), then the surety will make whole (to the extent of the policy) any monetary losses incurred by the City.

                (B) An MCS provider shall furnish to the Council/franchising authority, a construction/completion bond prior to the time it commences a construction, upgrade, rebuild, or repair/maintenance project that has a capital construction cost or outlay exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in value. The amount of the bond shall equal at least ninety percent (90%) of the projected capital construction cost or outlay. The construction/completion bond shall remain in force at all times, unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in an agreement between the Council/franchising authority, and the MCS provider.

                (C) The construction/completion bond or security bond shall specifically guarantee that an MCS provider will timely abide by its construction, upgrade, rebuild, or repair/maintenance schedule for the multi-channel system and/or any timetable for technical and service improvements or additions to the multi-channel system as may be committed to, or agreed upon, from time to time by the Council/franchising authority and MCS provider.

                (D) If the City draws on a performance or completion bond, or cash deposit, or letter of credit as a result of an MCS provider's failure to timely discharge its obligations, or failure to construct and activate the multi-channel system, or failure to complete a multi-channel system upgrade or rebuild or repair/maintenance, then the MCS provider shall be required, within thirty (30) days to replenish the completion and performance bond or security bond to the minimal level required by the Council/franchising authority.

                (E) Based upon such reasons as the Council/franchising authority might feel are necessary to protect the public interest, and welfare, the Council/franchising authority may raise the minimal amount of the performance bond.

                (F) The performance bond or security bond, shall be in force at all times unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in an agreement, between the MCS provider and the Council/franchising authority.

                (G) In lieu of a performance bond, and construction/completion bond, the Council/franchising authority may accept a written guarantee of an MCS provider pledging the full faith and credit of the affected MCS provider should there be a breach in a material franchise term, or failure to meet any construction schedule.

 

§9-29.  The Council/Franchising Authority's Policy With Respect to Reports and Records
                (A) The Council/franchising authority recognizes that advances in technology, and the adoption and application of multi-channel laws, rules, regulations, and court decisions may have a profound effect and impact on an MCS provider in any given year.

                (B) Consequently, it is incumbent that the Council/franchising authority take measures to reduce the risk that multi-channel service or the multi-channel system will be adversely affected in any given year.

                (C) Therefore, the evaluation of legal, technical, financial, and character qualifications of an MCS provider is viewed as a constant undertaking on the part of the City. As a result, the Council/franchising authority requires that the operator maintain and retain all records and reports necessary for a City/franchising authority to determine compliance with the obligations imposed on an MCS provider, and to determine the MCS provider's (legal, technical, financial, and character) qualifications. The information is primarily intended to assist the MCS provider to maximize service, rather than to identify incidents of non-compliance.

 

§9-30.  Furnishing of Reports
                (A) At any time the FCC or another Federal or State agency requires or requests the submission of reports, data, or other information by a non-exempt multi-channel service provider, then such MCS provider shall, at the same time, without a separate or specific request, submit those reports, data, or other information to the Council/franchising authority. However, unless specifically authorized by the State, an MCS provider shall not be required to submit state or federal tax returns, or any information exempted under federal privacy laws, including Section 631 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 551).

                (B) With respect to the reports required by this ordinance, it is noted that a non-exempted MCS provider shall timely submit any required report including, but not limited to the following:

   (1) an annual compliance statement in the manner set forth in this ordinance;

   (2) a periodic gross revenue report in the manner set forth in this ordinance;

   (3) preventative maintenance reports in the manner set forth in this ordinance;

   (4) copies, if applicable, of the MCS provider's FCC Form 395-A (or successor form), or any supplemental forms relating to equal employment opportunity, and fair contracting practices; and

   (5) any other reports or information required by another Section of this ordinance, or by the Council/franchising authority which are necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City.

 

§9-31.  Books and Records
                (A) An MCS provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts, and records of the business and operations under, and in connection with, the MCS system.

                (B) The Council/franchising authority shall have the right to review (either by mail or at the MCS provider's local office) all records (pertaining to an MCS provider's cable and/or multi-channel operations) on seven (7) days written notice, unless specifically exempted by the Council/franchising authority. Such review, unless mutually agreed upon, or judicially ordered, should occur within the MCS provider's regular office hours.

                (C) The Council/franchising authority shall have the right to hire, at its own expense, an independent certified public accountant, or other business or financial expert, to review the books and records of an MCS provider. If after a financial audit it is determined that the MCS provider has underpaid amounts owed to the City, then the City may require the MCS provider to reimburse the City for the actual cost of the audit.

                (D) A false entry into the books and/or records of an MCS provider, made by an MCS provider, of a material and substantial fact shall constitute a material violation of this ordinance.

                (E) An MCS provider, at the local office shall keep complete and accurate books and records of the key aspects of the multi-channel system's operation for at least the preceding three (3) years in such a manner that all matters pertaining to the City, can be easily produced and/or verified at the City's request. Also, the MCS provider shall keep, at its local office any other applicable records and information that may be required by any other Federal or State agency having jurisdiction over MCS providers.

 

§9-32.  Reserved
§9-33.  Reserved
§9-34.  Reserved
§9-35.  Reserved
§9-36.  Reserved

 

§9-37.  Annual Compliance Statement Required
                (A) Within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date that this ordinance becomes effective, the Council/franchising authority shall develop an MCS provider's compliance statement in an effort to determine whether such MCS provider is complying with the various provisions and/or requirements of this ordinance.

                (B) Prior to December 1, of each calendar year, the City shall furnish to each MCS provider, a compliance statement.

                (C) Prior to December 31, of each calendar year, each non-exempt MCS provider shall return to the Council/franchising authority a completed and executed (by owner or officer) compliance statement.

                (D) There shall be no charge or fee associated with returning the annual compliance statement. However, if the MCS provider supplies incomplete information which requires independent verification by the City or a consultant hired by the City, then the MCS provider may be required to reimburse the City for all costs associated with the independent verification. Moreover, failure to submit a statement by the deadline, or the provision of false information within a statement, may subject an affected MCS provider to any, and all, penalties and fines listed in this ordinance.

 

§9-38.  Notification of Customers and MCS Providers' Rights and Responsibilities; General Policy
                (A) The Council/franchising authority recognizes that it is critical that a customer of an MCS provider fully understands and realizes the rights and responsibilities of both the customer and MCS provider with respect to the provision, maintenance, and repair of multi-channel service.

                (B) Further, the Council/franchising authority believes that if sufficient information is provided to a customer on certain customer service practices such as rates, billing periods, number and types of services provided, and rules concerning equipment use and return, then that customer will have the information necessary to make an informed decision on what, if any, multi-channel services to subscribe to, and receive.

                (C) In order to provide customers with the variety of information needed to make an informed decision, and to ensure that customers are notified of their, and the MCS provider's rights and responsibilities with respect to the multi-channel system, an MCS provider must provide a customer with a written "Notice of a Customer's and MCS Provider's Rights and Responsibilities With Respect to the Provision of Multi-Channel Service."

                (D) The "Notice of a Customer's and MCS Provider's Rights and Responsibilities With Respect to the Provision of Multi-Channel Service" shall be provided at the time of initial installation. Thereafter, a subscriber shall be provided with a written "Notice" at least once every twelve (12) months. If, however, an MCS provider amends, repeals, adds, deletes, modifies, or makes other changes to any customer service practice that is required in this ordinance, then said MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with such written notification at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such amendment, repeal, addition, deletion, modification, or other change.

 

§9-39.  Notice of Customer's and MCS Provider's Rights and Responsibilities With Respect to the
Provision of Multi-Channel Service; Minimum Contents
                (A) At the time an MCS provider is required to furnish an initial or annual "Notice", such "Notice" shall contain, at a minimum, the following:

   (1) an up-to-date listing of the specific multi-channel services provided--clearly indicating and isolating the standard and/or basic, premium, and informational services offered, as well as the service tiers or service clusters offered;

   (2) notification of a subscriber's ability to purchase or lease, from the MCS provider, a lock box, parental control mechanism, or other device which will prohibit the viewing of a particular multi-channel service during a period selected by the subscriber;

   (3) pursuant to FCC regulations, a subscriber's ability of purchasing or using an A/B or input selector switch;

   (4) a comprehensive listing and explanation of all rates and charges (including rates for standard or basic and premium channels/services, particular service tiers or service clusters, current discount or promotional fees, installation charges, and security deposits, if any);

   (5) if service clustering is available, then a description and explanation of any penalties, credits, restrictions, upcoming (within sixty (60) days of the "Notice") service clustering changes or differing alignments, or other pertinent information;

   (6) a comprehensive listing and explanation of all billing options available;

   (7) the customer service office hours and telephone number(s) in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance;

   (8) the billing practices of an MCS provider in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance;

   (9) the specific customer complaint/inquiry resolution policy that is adopted and followed by an MCS provider and which is consistent with the parameters set forth in this ordinance;

   (10) if applicable, and permitted, the rules and regulations for using any facilities, including a studio or mobile van of an MCS provider;

   (11) the method of securing a voluntary disconnection in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance;

   (12) the extent of the credit/refund policy in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance;

   (13) the equipment use and return policy together with any required security deposits in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance; and

   (14) the additional rights of blind, hearing-impaired or ambulatory impaired customers in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance.

                (B) The "Notice" shall be written in plain, simple to understand English. The "Notice" shall contain no fine print, and any exclusions, limitations, or caveats shall be clearly indicated as such in the "Notice".

                (C) The "Notice" shall be delivered to a subscriber via an insert in the subscriber's periodic invoice or through a special mailing.

 

§9-40.  Billing Practices
                (A) Within the "Notice" that is required by this ordinance, subscribers shall be informed of at least the following practices of an MCS provider:

   (1) billing procedures (including payments necessary to avoid discontinuance of service);

   (2) payment due and delinquent dates;

   (3) amount or percentage of late charges, if any;

   (4) advance billing options;

   (5) resolution procedures for billing disputes, complaints, and inquiries;

   (6) refund policy for service interruptions, substandard signal quality, or uncontracted service;

   (7) current service rates in a detailed and understandable format;

   (8) procedure and amount of charges for installation or relocation of an MCS provider's facilities and/or equipment;

   (9) current schedule and explanation for any billed charges or other non-regularly occurring fees invoiced to subscribers; and

   (10) any lower-income or fixed-income rates together with any qualifications to obtain such rates.

                (B) All bills shall plainly state that service may be paid for on an individual monthly basis, by the end of the month for which the service was delivered, with no late penalty or charge assessed.

                (C) Existing subscribers shall be informed of the items listed in subsection (1) at least once every 12 months.

                (D) Whenever there is a change in an MCS provider's billing practices or payment requirements, all subscribers must be notified in writing at least thirty (30) days before such billing practices or payment requirements become effective.

                (E) In any case where a subscriber requests a cancellation or reduction of service within thirty (30) days after the notification of a scheduled rate or charge adjustment, then the subscriber's liability for the newly implemented rate or charge shall cease from the moment that the rate or charge adjustment becomes effective.

 

§9-41.  Billing Credit or Refunds for Service Outages, Interruptions; Substandard Signal or Picture
Quality or Unsolicited Service
                (A) An MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with credit or a rebate for a service outage or interruption exceeding eight (8) hours in duration, which credit, for purposes of determining the amount of the credit or rebate, shall be deemed to be equivalent to or the same as a twenty-four (24) hour service outage.

                (B) Where not expressly prohibited by the State, the Council/franchising authority may prescribe rules for giving credit to a subscriber in cases of substandard signal or picture quality.

                (C) In the case of a charge for unsolicited service, an MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with an adjustment or billing credit on the next available billing statement. Moreover, in such a case, an MCS provider shall not consider a subscriber delinquent for failure to pay a charge for unsolicited service.

 


§9-42.  Prohibition Against Multiple Changes of Service Tiers or Service Clusters Within a 365 Day
Period
                (A) To prevent "bait and switch" tactics, and to promote stability with respect to multi-channel services provided on a multi-channel system, an MCS provider may not switch any particular multi-channel service from one (1) service tier or service cluster more than twice during any three hundred sixty (365) day period.

                (B) Nothing contained in this Section should be construed as mandating any particular programming service being provided to a subscriber. Nor should this Section be construed as requiring any particular programming service be provided on a particular tier or cluster. Rather, this Section is designed to promote tier or cluster stability, so that a subscriber may choose a tier or cluster that best suits the subscriber's individual programming and informational needs.

 

§9-43.  Customer Service Hours; Capabilities of Customer Service Office; and Telephones
                (A) In order to facilitate the needs of the local customers, an MCS provider shall maintain a customer service office which is both within the City, and easily accessible to customers.

                (B) The customer service office shall be open at least forty (40) hours per week (exclusive of holidays).

                (C) Within the forty (40) hours per week that a customer service office must be open, an MCS provider must provide office hours either on at least two (2) evenings (after 5 p.m.), or on Saturdays and/or Sundays (if not prohibited by State law).

                (D) The customer service office should have an adequate and knowledgeable staff in order to handle the vast majority of customer service inquiries, specifically including, but not limited to: billing inquiries, refunds, service outages, equipment service and repair, payment of bills and other charges, and inquiries from disabled or physically-impaired customers.

                (E) MCS providers shall for a reasonable charge, provide customers with a monthly, bi-monthly, or weekly multi-channel programming service guide, listing and/or detailing the programs and services available during the time period. In lieu of providing a programming service guide via the mail, or a newspaper, or third party, the MCS provider may disseminate the information over a channel designated as a program preview or program listing channel.

                (F) At least annually, any MCS provider shall certify to the Council/franchising authority that each customer service representative (CSR) has taken and passed an MCS provider-implemented course designed to train CSRs to handle their jobs in a courteous, efficient, and responsive manner.

                (G) An MCS provider shall maintain at least one (1) toll-free and/or local telephone number to accommodate normal business inquiries.

                (H) An MCS provider shall maintain a separate twenty-four (24) hour toll-free telephone number to facilitate calls concerning repair of equipment and extended interruption of service. During any hours that the customer service office is open, the MCS provider must have or make available in-house personnel to address a customer's inquiries. During other hours, a telephone may be manned by an automatic answering device, provided that the use of an answering device or answering service still results in an initial phone call by the MCS provider within ninety (90) minutes, in order to at least determine the extent of the outage. The MCS provider shall not be required to make in-person telephone contacts to subscribers at a rate which exceeds sixty (60) calls per hour, and shall not be required to make such calls between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. for situations other than reports of service outages.

                (I) A non-exempt MCS provider shall have adequate staff and/or extension lines (except during special marketing promotion periods, peak billing cycles, and service outages) in order to handle call to the general information number to the following specifications:

   (1) Eighty-five percent (85%) of all customer calls received in a year shall be attended within three minutes by a representative of the MCS provider, or by a device that is capable of complaint or inquiry resolution; and

   (2) The rate of abandoned calls shall no be greater than fifteen percent (15%) over any consecutive six (6) month period of time. "Abandoned calls" shall in no event be deemed to include calls in which the caller hangs up within forty-five (45) seconds of making the call.

                (J) With respect to the specifications listed in subsection (I) of this Section, it shall be the MCS provider's responsibility to quarterly certify to the Council/franchising authority that the affected MCS provider is meeting the minimal specifications.

 

§9-44.  Special Service Requirements for Blind, Hearing-Impaired, or Ambulatory-Impaired
Customers
                In addition to any other requirements mandated by this ordinance, or by Federal or State law, an MCS provider shall comply with the following special service requirements for blind, hearing-impaired, or ambulatory-impaired customers:

   (1) provide wheelchair accessibility to an MCS provider's customer service office;

   (2) for any customer declared legally blind by the State, an MCS provider must provide, if requested by such customer, large type, braille, voice synthesized or functionally equivalent notices, bills, and other pertinent multi-channel system information;

   (3) provide at a non-discriminatory cost, a special closed-captioned converter for the hearing impaired;

   (4) provide at a non-discriminatory cost, a remote control device and/or converter for wheelchair subscribers or subscribers with a permanent medical or physical ambulatory impairment;

   (5) where applicable, provide modified or special instructions for use of equipment by individuals who have physical impairments; and

   (6) in times of a disaster emergency or other instances requiring an emergency alert, mandating an all channel video blanking capability, so that all channels would be blanked simultaneously with the audio alert signal, in order to increase the likelihood that hearing and sight-impaired customers would be alerted.

 

§9-45.  Preferential or Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
                (A) An MCS provider shall not, as to rules, regulations, rates, charges, provision of service, or use of a provider's facilities and equipment, make, allow, or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage on the basis of age, race, creed, color, sex, national origin, handicap, religious affiliation or location of residence.

                (B) Consistent with Section 621 (a) (3) of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 541 (a) (3)), MCS providers classified as cable operators shall not deny cable service, or the extension of cable service, to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides.

                (C) Consistent with subsections (A) and (B) of this Section, an MCS provider shall not provide multi-channel service in a "cherry-picking" or "cream-skimming" manner or fashion, to the exclusion of other residents based on the excluded residents' income.

                (D) Subsection (A) of this Section, however, does not prohibit an MCS provider from offering a promotional or incentive discount rate or charge as long as the rate or charge does not exceed three hundred seventy (370) days in length. This subsection does not prohibit an MCS provider from offering special incentive rates such as one (1) month basic service free, if twelve (12) months of basic service are paid in one payment or within a certain time-frame.

                (E) Subsection (A) of this Section, also does not prohibit an MCS provider from denying service based on location of residence, if that residence is outside the parameters for line extension as detailed in a franchise agreement (if applicable).

                (F) Subsection (A) of this Section also does not prohibit an MCS provider from implementing a carefully designed no-frills service tier or service cluster for "lower income", and/or fixed income individuals.

                (G) Subsection (1) of this Section also does not prohibit an MCS provider from making agreements or entering into multi-channel service agreements with multiple dwelling unit owners (including hotel, motel, and manufactured home park owners) to provide multi-channel service under a bulk billing or other type of arrangement.

 

§9-46.  Use of Equipment, Return of Equipment, Security Deposits, and their Return
                (A) Prior to formally delivering any equipment, including auxiliary equipment (such as a converter, input selector switch, or video control recorder) to a customer, an MCS provider shall have tested a representative sample (at least one percent (1%)) of such equipment to make sure that it is in proper working order.

                (B) If needed for proper operation, or requested by a customer, an MCS provider shall deliver to a customer, handwritten or typed instructions detailing the proper use of rented, loaned, or purchased equipment. Unless required by another Section of this ordinance, an MCS provider may comply with this Section by delivering the manufacturer's instructions to a customer.

                (C) An MCS provider is not required to seek a security deposit from a customer for use or rental of the MCS provider's equipment.

                (D) An MCS provider shall comply with any, and all, applicable State rules concerning security deposits.

                (E) If the State is silent on the security deposit for a particular piece of equipment, then the MCS provider shall be prohibited from charging any security deposit for equipment which exceeds the replacement cost to the MCS provider.

                (F) As a matter of consumer protection, an MCS provider shall be prohibited from charging any security deposit for multi-channel service which exceeds twice the basic monthly rate.

                (G) An MCS provider shall return a security deposit (together with any interest earned) after the equipment is satisfactorily returned, or the subscriber maintains a satisfactory payment history (which is determined as no payment delinquencies within the preceding twelve (12) month period).

                (H) A customer shall maintain any equipment rented or leased from an MCS provider in good working order, and operate such equipment only in the manner specified by the MCS provider or manufacturer of the equipment.

                (I) A customer shall totally and fully reimburse an MCS provider for any damage or loss to an MCS provider's equipment that is due to the customer's failure to properly maintain and operate such equipment.

                (J) A customer shall be relieved from any responsibility for reimbursing an MCS provider for equipment which malfunctions or does not operate due to a hidden or latent defect in the equipment, or for equipment which fails to operate, or improperly operates due to natural occurrences conditioned by the normal wear and tear of such equipment, or for equipment damaged or destroyed by an act of nature, and which is not covered by a customer's home or apartment insurance policy.

 

§9-47.  Service Inquiry Logs
                (A) An MCS provider shall be required to keep and maintain service inquiry logs, subject to any limitations imposed by State or Federal law, including (for MCS providers classified as cable operators) any subscriber privacy limitations imposed by the CCPA.

                (B) The purpose of the service inquiry logs is to assist the City in assessing the type, degree, and rate of resolution of customer service requests, inquiries, and complaints.

                (C) At a minimum, the service inquiry logs should contain the following:

   (1) the time and date of initial receipt of any service request, inquiry, or complaint, together with the time and date of initial response to that service request, inquiry or complaint;

   (2) the nature of the service request, inquiry, or complaint;

   (3) the precise action taken by an MCS provider in order to resolve the service inquiry, request, or complaint;

   (4) whether the service request, inquiry, or complaint was resolved by allowing a credit or refund of some sort; an

   (5) the area, location, or quadrant of the City where the service request, inquiry, or request was generated.

                (D) In addition to any other right of inspection that the Council/franchising authority may possess, it shall have the right to review and inspect a compilation of such logs. However, the Council/franchising authority shall not have the right of access, review, or inspection for any service inquiry logs or any information contained within service inquiry logs that are otherwise protected from access, review, or inspection by State or Federal law.

                (E) This Section does not require MCS providers to maintain service inquiry logs on scheduled installations.

 

§9-48.  Reserved
§9-49.  Reserved
§9-50.  Reserved

 

§9-51.  Restoration of a Subscriber's Property
                (A) At any time an MCS provider (in furtherance of its right to construct, operate, and maintain a multi-channel system), disturbs the yard, residence, or other real or personal property of a subscriber, such MCS provider shall ensure that the subscriber's yard, residence, or other personal property is returned, replaced, and/or restored to a condition that is sufficiently comparable to the condition that existed prior to the commencement of the work.

                (B) The costs associated with both the disturbance and the return, replacement, and/or restoration shall be borne by the MCS provider. This subsection also requires the MCS provider to reimburse a subscriber or private property owner, for any damage caused by the MCS provider, its subcontractor, or its independent contractor, in connection with the disturbance of a subscriber or private property owner's property.

                (C) The types of acts specifically included in this Section are the following:

   (1) removal of a subscriber's sod, lawn, plants, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveway, or fence to install, trench, repair, replace, remove, or locate cable or other equipment of an MCS provider;

   (2) installation or removal of cable or other equipment of an MCS provider within a subscriber's residence which requires drilling, excavating, plastering, or the like on the part of the MCS provider;

   (3) temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a fixture of a subscriber (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air conditioning or heating unit, or the like), in order to perform some sort of construction, maintenance, or repair on the multi-channel system; or

   (4) permanently removing an MCS provider's cable or equipment due to either the revocation, termination, or non-renewal of a franchise (if applicable), or the abandonment, withdrawal, or cessation, of multi-channel service to any portion of the City.

                (D) The requirements imposed upon the MCS provider extend to any subcontractor or independent contractor that the MCS provider might employ to perform the tasks outlined in this Section.

                (E) In light of the foregoing, an MCS provider has the authority and responsibility to diligently trim trees of a private property owner (including a subscriber), but only to the extent necessary to prevent the branches of the trees from coming in contact with the MCS provider's wires and cables.

 

§9-52.  Service Inquiries, Requests, Complaints, and Response Times, and New Installations or
Reconnections of Service
                (A) Except in times of a natural or man-made emergency, or an appointment scheduled with the mutual consent of a subscriber, an MCS provider shall respond to the service inquiries, requests, and complaints of subscribers, within such MCS provider's normal business or service hours, and within the time schedules detailed in subsections (B) through (I) of this Section. Moreover, except in emergency situations, an MCS provider shall inform the customer whether the service call is scheduled for the morning, afternoon, or evening hours. If the service call has to be canceled or rearranged, then the MCS provider shall make every effort to notify the customer as soon as possible, and if desired by the subscriber shall reschedule the service call for a time within twenty-four (24) hours of the cancellation.

                (B) In the case of a signal or service interruption, a non-exempt MCS provider shall respond to, and make repairs as are necessary to resume the signal or service to the subscriber within twenty-four hours (24) from the time the non-exempt MCS provider first received notification of the signal or service interruption.

                (C) In the case of a "blank" or "no-picture" situation of any given level of billing or service, a non-exempt MCS provider shall respond to, and make repairs as are necessary to return the multi-channel service system picture within twelve hours (12) from the time the non-exempt MCS provider first received notification of the "blank" or "no-picture" situation.

                (D) In the case of a defective, improperly operating, or non-operating piece of equipment, a non-exempt MCS provider shall respond to, and make repairs as are necessary to correct the problem within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the defective, improperly operating, or non-operating piece of equipment.

                (E) In the case of repair to a piece of equipment in a subscriber's residence, or repair to the cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent), the repair should be completed, and the situation resolved, at the conclusion of the first service visit. If the repair is not completed and resolved within three (3) visits, and if as a result of the insufficient repair, a situation remains wherein there is a visually or audibly detected degradation of a multi-channel signal by human eye or ear, then the MCS provider must immediately, and completely replace all drop cable (coaxial, fiber or its functional equivalent), and/or any necessary MCS provider equipment at no charge.

                (F) In no case shall a subscriber's service request or inquiry go unresponded or unattended to for more than twelve (12) hours from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the service inquiry or request. Moreover, except in emergency situations, all requests and inquiries shall be handled or corrected within thirty-six (36) hours from the time the MCS provider first received notification. If a cancellation of a service call occurs, then the MCS provider shall re-schedule the call in a manner consistent with the guidelines expressed in subsection (A) of this Section.

                (G) A complaint/inquiry regarding loss of all channels comprising a service level, cluster, or tier will be responded to, and corrected, within six hours (6) from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the loss of all channels comprising a service level, or service tier, or service cluster.

                (H) In case of a dispute concerning the precise time that the MCS provider received notification, or the precise circumstances surrounding the MCS provider receiving the notification, or whether notification was received at all, the Council/franchising authority shall reserve the right and authority to settle such a dispute.

                (I) New installations, upgrades, or reconnections of multi-channel service by an MCS provider shall be performed and completed within seven (7) days of a customer requesting such a new installation, upgrade, or reconnection.

 

§9-53.  MCS Providers Required to Maintain Sufficient Repair Parts and Sufficient Repair
Personnel
                (A) Except in times of natural or man-made emergency, an MCS provider shall, at all times, have access to, and be able to secure, sufficient maintenance and repair parts and equipment for the MCS system, so that the MCS provider can respond to, and correct, all subscriber service interruptions within the time periods specified in this ordinance.

                (B) Having access to, and being able to secure sufficient maintenance and repair parts and equipment, is necessary to promptly restore a subscriber's multi-channel service, and avoid delays caused by having to obtain needed parts and equipment.

                (C) Except in times of natural or man-made emergency, or strike (whose duration has been less than seventy-two (72) hours), an MCS provider shall have sufficient maintenance and repair personnel, so that the MCS provider can respond to, and correct, subscriber service interruptions within the time periods specified in this ordinance.

                (D) An MCS provider shall annually certify to the Council/franchising authority that each service technician has taken and passed an MCS provider-implemented course designed to train service technicians to handle their jobs in a courteous, efficient, and responsive manner. Also, the course should be designed to provide continuing education to service technicians in changes in technology, repair/maintenance procedures and related matters.

                (E) Notwithstanding the other requirements and provisions in this Section, an MCS provider shall maintain at least one (1) service technician on call twenty-four (24) hours per day.

 

§9-54.  Disconnection for Non-Payment
                (A) A subscriber shall not be considered delinquent in payment until at least forty-five (45) days after the posting of the bill to the subscriber, and payment has not been received by an MCS provider.

                (B) Before disconnection of a subscriber's multi-channel service (either physically or electronically) takes place, the following must occur:

   (1) the subscriber must in fact be delinquent in payment of multi-channel service; and

   (2) at least five (5) days have elapsed after a separate written notice of impending disconnection has been personally served upon the subscriber; or

   (3) at least eight (8) days have elapsed after mailing a separate written notice of impending disconnection to the subscriber; or

   (4) at least five (5) days have elapsed after the subscriber has either signed for or, refused to accept, a separate written notice of impending disconnection.

                (C) The written notice of disconnection must expressly and clearly state the amount that is owed by the subscriber to an MCS provider, the minimum amount required to be paid to avoid disconnection, and the date and place where such payment must be made.

                (D) An MCS provider who physically retrieves its equipment including converter, remote control unit, or digital audio tuner), from a subscriber, must do so within both a normal service day and normal service hours of an MCS provider.

                (E) Receipt of a "bad check" from a subscriber, in response to a written notice of disconnection, does not constitute payment, and the affected MCS provider need not give the subscriber further notice prior to disconnecting multi-channel service.

                (F) An MCS provider may add a reasonable collection charge to the subscriber's bill if the applicable provisions of this ordinance, and any applicable State regulations, are followed.

                (G) Any refund due a subscriber after such a disconnection shall be made within sixty (60) days of the disconnection for non-payment.

 

§9-55.  Voluntary Disconnections and Downgrades
                (A) At any time, a subscriber may request that a particular service tier, service cluster, pay channel, premium channel, informational service, or the entire multi-channel service be disconnected.

                (B) Where provided by an MCS provider, a subscriber may request a downgrade from a particular level of service to a less comprehensive level of service, or a less expensive level of service.

                (C) From the date that such a subscriber makes such a request for either a disconnection or downgrade, then the MCS provider shall have seventy-two (72) hours or three (3) service days, whichever is longer, to disconnect or downgrade the service tier, pay channel, premium channel, informational service, or entire multi-channel service. In the event that an MCS provider does not disconnect or downgrade service within seventy-two (72) hours, a subscriber's obligation to pay for such service shall cease, or in the case of a downgrade, a subscriber's obligation to pay for the more comprehensive and/or higher priced service shall cease.

                (D) For a service tier, service cluster, premium channel or informational service which is voluntarily disconnected, a subscriber shall pay a pro rata share of the monthly rate for such service tier, service cluster, premium channel or informational service.

                (E) No separate disconnect or downgrade charge may be passed on to a subscriber if it chooses to take advantage of a lower-priced service tier/cluster or an optional service tier/cluster. However, to prevent subscriber abuse of this voluntary disconnection, or downgrade policy, a subscriber shall be charged a minimum one (1) months full rate for any one service tier/cluster which is disconnected and/or downgraded at least three (3) times within a span of one hundred eighty (180) days.

                (F) If, however, an MCS provider's equipment is, or has been damaged by a subscriber, prior to such disconnection, then the MCS provider may charge the subscriber with the entire cost for such damage, provided that the MCS provider notifies the subscriber within ten (10) days of the disconnection. A subscriber shall not be required to pay for equipment failure, if the circumstances fall within the normal wear and tear guidelines established in this ordinance.

                (G) Any refund due a subscriber after disconnection (both for non-payment and voluntary) shall be made within sixty (60) days after such disconnection.

                (H) In no event will this Section be viewed as abridging or otherwise limiting the rights and remedies afforded by the subscriber complaint/inquiry resolution process outlined in this ordinance.

 

§9-56.  Reserved
§9-57.  Reserved
§9-58.  Reserved
§9-59.  Reserved
§9-60.  Reserved
§9-61.  Reserved

 

§9-62.  Protection of Subscriber Privacy
                (A) An MCS provider shall abide by any, and all, subscriber privacy rules or regulations of the Federal, or State governments.

                (B) For MCS providers classified as cable operators, such operators shall also abide by, and comply with, any subscriber privacy protection requirements and procedures listed in Section 631 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 551).

 

§9-63.  Resolution of Complaints/Inquiries
                (A) An MCS provider is required to develop a comprehensive complaint/inquiry resolution policy that is consistent with the rules and regulations outlined in this ordinance.

                (B) An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall be reduced to writing, and such policy shall be available upon request, to any person. In any event, a subscriber shall receive notice of such policy in the manner that is prescribed by this ordinance.

                (C) The Council/franchising authority shall establish a neutral, third-party appeal process, to handle complaints/inquiries that are not satisfactorily resolved at the MCS provider level.

                (D) An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall contain at least the following minimal standards:

   (1) the initial response to a complaint/inquiry shall occur no later than twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the complaint/inquiry;

   (2) every attempt will be made to resolve the complaint/inquiry within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the complaint/inquiry;

   (3) complaints/inquiries that fall into the category of service inquiries shall abide by the procedure set forth in this ordinance;

   (4) informing subscribers of the credit/refund policy which is consistent with this ordinance, and any applicable State regulations; and

   (5) informing subscribers of the billing disputes policy which is consistent with this ordinance, and any applicable State regulations.

 

§9-64.  Policy With Respect to Continuity of Multi-Channel Service Provisions
                (A) The Council/franchising authority declares that as part of its right to establish multi-channel customer service guidelines, it has the duty to ensure continuity of multi-channel service for all subscribers. In that light, the Council/franchising authority also determines that it may take appropriate measures in order to ensure that no portion of the City is threatened or faced with a disruption, interruption, or discontinuance of multi-channel service due to the actions of any MCS provider.

                (B) In addition to the principles and ideals enumerated in subsection (A), the Council/franchising authority also expresses that its policy covers the following:

   (1) to provide for continuity of multi-channel service in the event of acquisition by the City;

   (2) to provide for continuity of service in the event of a proposed abandonment, withdrawal, or cessation of multi-channel service by an MCS provider;

   (3) to provide for continuity of service in the event of revocation, termination, or non-renewal of a franchised MCS provider's franchise;

   (4) to provide for continuity of service in the event that a transaction occurs that affects the ownership or control of the MCS provider, such as an assignment, sale, transfer, or merger;

   (5) to provide for continuity of service in the event of an expiration of a franchise;

   (6) to prevent disruption of multi-channel service which would provide a hardship on those subscribers who rely on a multi-channel system as their primary or secondary source for information; and

   (7) to prevent the interruption or cessation of multi-channel service which would disrupt or eliminate the diversity of programming choices enjoyed by subscribers of a multi-channel system, and thereby restricting their ability to receive information.

                (C) In any situation (including those mentioned above) which threatens the City and subscribers with the loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-channel service, then the MCS provider shall provide the Council/franchising authority with at least forty-five (45) days notice (except in extreme circumstances) prior to the effective date of any action which would cause a loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-channel service. The purpose of the notice is to apprise the Council/franchising authority of the possibility of such loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-channel service, so that it might explore its options and take appropriate measures.

                (D) Whenever any situation occurs (including those mentioned above) which threatens the City and subscribers with the loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-channel service, then the Council/franchising authority may direct the MCS provider for a period of up to twenty-four (24) months to do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted multi-channel service of the same quality, mix, and level(s) regardless of the circumstances.

                (E) During the interim period, the Council/franchising authority shall work with the MCS provider in order to secure a new multi-channel system owner, or rectify the problem, so that the threat of loss of continuity is removed at the earliest possible instance.

                (F) During any interim period in which the MCS provider continues to provide multi-channel service to subscribers, the MCS provider is entitled to all revenues collected, except any sums owed (including franchise fees, alternative user charges, and taxes) to the City or to other persons.

                (G) In the event that the threat of loss of continuity is not resolved within twenty-four (24) months, then the Council/franchising authority may extend the interim period on a month-to-month basis until the situation is satisfactorily resolved. Also, in such a circumstance, the Council/franchising authority may adopt any emergency rules or procedures which will ensure that the subscribers will receive continuous, uninterrupted multi-channel service of the same quality, mix, and level(s).

 

§9-65.  Continued Use of Individual Antennas Protected
                (A) The Council/franchising authority does not intend to prohibit the erection or continued use of individual television antennas within the City so long as the individual television antennas conform to any and all applicable zoning and/or land use regulations. Consequently, no person shall be required to receive multi-channel service, or to physically connect to a multi-channel system.

                (B) It is also noted that no person shall be penalized or fined (through either a home sales contract, deed of restrictive covenants, or other type of agreement) for failing or refusing to receive multi-channel service, or physically connecting to a multi-channel system.

 

§9-66.  Periodic Multi-Channel Subscriber Surveys
                (A) At least every three (3) years after the adoption of this ordinance, the City and any affected MCS provider shall conduct a survey of current subscribers of that particular MCS provider in order to ascertain the degree of customer satisfaction/dissatisfaction with the subscriber sensitive aspects of the multi-channel system including (but not limited to) billing practices, response times, programming choices available and receivable, responsiveness to inquiries, and use, availability, and accessibility of any customer service office.

                (B) If the survey results indicate or demonstrate that the customer service practices set forth in this ordinance are not sufficient to meet reasonable or identified projected City needs, then the Council/franchising authority may take whatever measures are appropriate in order to rectify the deficiency or insufficiency in a particular customer service practice by one or more MCS providers.

 

§9-67.  Reserved
§9-68.  Reserved
§9-69.  Reserved
§9-70.  Reserved

 


§9-71.  Construction Schedule and Construction-Related Requirements
                (A) In order to establish minimum uniform standards, the Council/franchising authority requires any MCS provider to adopt the following minimal construction schedule and construction-related requirements:

   (1) construct, install, maintain, and repair the multi-channel system in accordance with the requirements noted in this ordinance;

   (2) use streets and public ways, as set forth in this ordinance;

   (3) where applicable, remove franchise property from public streets, as set forth in this ordinance;

   (4) adopt the construction standards, as set forth in this ordinance;

   (5) adopt the system expansion standards, as set forth in this ordinance;

   (6) adopt the construction schedule as referred to in this ordinance;

   (7) abide by, and act in strict accordance with, all current technical codes adopted by the City, or the State, or the United States, as noted in this ordinance; and

   (8) maintain all permits and licenses, as noted in this ordinance.

 

§9-72.  Construction of Good Quality
                During any phase of construction, installation, maintenance, and repair of the multi-channel system, the MCS provider shall use materials of good and durable quality and all such work shall be performed in a safe, thorough, and reliable manner.

 

§9-73.  Conditions on Use of Streets and Public Ways
                (A) All wires, conduits, cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent), and other property and facilities of an MCS provider shall be so located, constructed, installed, and maintained so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with usual and customary use, traffic and travel upon the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the City.

                (B) In the event an MCS provider's system creates a hazardous or unsafe condition or an unreasonable interference with property, then at its own expense such MCS provider shall voluntarily, or upon the request of the Council/franchising authority, remove that part of the system that creates the hazardous condition from the subject property.

                (C) An MCS provider shall not place equipment where it will interfere with the rights of property owners or with gas, electric or telephone fixtures, or with water hydrants or mains, or with wastewater lift stations, or any other service or facility that benefits the City's or its residents' health, safety, or welfare.

                (D) An MCS provider, at either its own expense or that of a private contractor, shall protect, rights-of-way, easements, and support or temporarily disconnect or relocate in the same street or other public way, any property of such MCS provider when necessitated by reason of:

   (1) traffic conditions;

   (2) public safety;

   (3) a street closing;

   (4) street construction or resurfacing;

   (5) change or establishment of street grade;

   (6) installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, storm drains, lift stations, force mains, power or signal lines; or

   (7) any improvement, construction or repair related to the City's or its residents health safety, or welfare.

                (E) It shall be the responsibility of an MCS provider (acting alone or in conjunction with another person) to locate and mark or otherwise visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its underground cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) before employees, agents, or independent contractors of such MCS provider, install cable in the marked-off area.

                (F) An MCS provider shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit, temporarily remove, raise or lower the cable wires to allow the moving of the building. The expense of temporary removal shall be paid by the person requesting it, and such MCS provider may require payment in advance. The affected MCS provider shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days notice of a contemplated move to arrange for temporary wire changes.

                (G) For any new installations occurring after the effective date of this ordinance, and at the time that an MCS provider rebuilds or upgrades the multi-channel system, all trunk or feeder cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent) shall be placed underground. Further, where both power and utilities are presently underground, multi-channel system cable shall be placed underground also.

 

§9-74.  Franchised MCS Provider's Duty to Remove Franchised Properties from the Public Streets
                (A) This Section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a franchise to operate within the City.

                (B) Whenever the following occurs:

   (1) a franchised MCS provider ceases to operate all, or part, of the multi-channel system for a continuous period of six (6) months;

   (2) a franchised MCS provider ceases and fails to construct the multi-channel system outlined in the application, or proposal for renewal, or renewal franchise agreement;

   (3) the Council/franchising authority elects not to renew the franchise pursuant to the provisions set forth, in this ordinance; or

   (4) the franchised MCS provider's franchise is revoked pursuant to the provisions set forth in this ordinance;

Then-unless the City or another MCS provider uses such multi-channel system, under the continuity provisions outlined in this ordinance, the affected franchised MCS provider shall promptly remove its multi-channel system property from the streets, public ways, and private property located within the City.

                (C) If not removed voluntarily by a franchised MCS provider, then the Council/franchising authority may notify such franchised MCS provider that if removal of the property is not accommodated within two hundred seventy (270) days, or substantial progress towards removal is not made within two hundred ten (210) days, then the Council/franchising authority may direct officials or representatives of the City to remove such franchised MCS provider's system property at that franchised MCS provider's expense. The performance and/or construction bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or full faith and credit guarantee required as set forth in this ordinance shall be available to pay for such work.

                (D) If officials or representatives of the City remove a franchised MCS provider's system property, and such franchised MCS provider does not claim the property within ninety (90) days of its removal, then the Council/franchising authority may take whatever steps are available under State law to declare the property surplus, and sell it, with the proceeds of such sale (if permitted by State law) going to the City.

                (E) When such franchised MCS provider removes its multi-channel system property from the streets, public ways, and private property located within the City, the franchised MCS provider shall, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the Council/franchising authority, replace and restore such public or private property in as good a condition as before the work causing the disturbance was done.

 

§9-75.  Construction Standards
                (A) Methods of construction, installation, maintenance repair of any multi-channel system shall comply with the most current editions of the National Electrical Safety Code, and the National Electric Code, as affects the construction, installation, and maintenance of electrical supply and communication lines and attachments and supports. To the extent that these are inconsistent with other provisions of a franchise, or State, or local law, then the more stringent shall govern in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

                (B) All installations shall treat the aesthetics of the property as a priority, shall not substantially affect the appearance of the structure, and shall not be installed on the bias across property or the face or side of a home or building without the owner's permission.

                (C) No home/building within 150 feet of the system shall be served by a drop with any pole span being longer than 150 feet without the owner's permission.

                (D) All underground drops shall follow property lines and cross property only at right angles, unless otherwise permitted by the owner.

 

§9-76.  System Construction Schedule For Franchised MCS Providers
                (A) This Section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a franchise to operate with the City.

                (B) A franchised MCS provider's construction schedule for the multi-channel system shall be detailed in the franchise agreement in a form and format determined by the Council/franchising authority.

                (C) A franchised MCS provider who does not abide by the system construction schedule shall be handled in the manner allowed under either this ordinance, or where applicable, a franchise agreement.

 

§9-77.  System Expansion for MCS Providers
                (A) The Council/franchising authority recognizes that one of its primary purposes in the franchising process is to ensure that the widest diversity of programming sources be available to the greatest number of City residents. The Council/franchising authority is also cognizant that an MCS provider may have some constitutionally protected rights with respect to when and what areas of the City are provided service.

                (B) In order to balance those interests, the Council/franchising authority sets the minimum guidelines for any system expansion on the part of a franchised MCS provider.

                (C) A franchised MCS provider shall submit, within six (6) months of the effective date of this ordinance, a detailed plan for multi-channel system expansion to any area not presently served within the City. Provided, however, no such plan shall be accepted by the Council/franchising authority as to any area less than the entire City limits if a non-exempt MCS provider has already submitted such a plan as part of a franchise. Such plan should not be construed as a requirement for universal service, but rather as a means for achieving the Council/franchising authority's goals, mentioned in Subsection (A). However, at a minimum, a franchised MCS provider shall extend multi-channel service to any area within the City that has a density of ten (10) homes or building passings per mile, or fractional equivalent thereof, as measured from the extremity of the system nearest the unserved area. Also, in such a case, a newly installed subscriber shall not be assessed or apportioned the cost for installation, except for the usual and normal connection fees paid by subscribers, so long as the system expansion is technically feasible.

                (D) The detailed plan must include criteria for:

   (1) extending the provision of service to isolated subscribers;

   (2) extending the provision of service to new or existing developments with overhead cable construction; and

   (3) new or existing developments with underground cable construction.

                (E) The detailed plan must be reviewed and approved by the Council/franchising authority.

                (F) For purposes of this Section, "isolated subscribers'" means any potential customer of a franchised MCS provider who dwells in a house more than one-half (1/2) mile from the nearest franchised MCS provider connection.

 

§9-78.  Permits and Licenses
                An MCS provider shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by law, rule, regulation, or ordinance, and maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required.

 

§9-79.  Reserved
§9-80.  Reserved
§9-81.  Reserved
§9-82.  Reserved
§9-83.  Reserved
§9-84.  Reserved
§9-85.  Reserved

 

§9-86.  Council/Franchising Authority's Policy With Respect to Safety Requirements
                (A) The Council/franchising authority requires that the MCS provider's construction, operation, and maintenance of the multi-channel system meet certain threshold safety levels which are designed to protect the public and lessen the likelihood of interruption of multi-channel service.

                (B) Consequently, the Council/franchising authority requires any non-exempt MCS provider to adopt the following safety requirements:

   (1) emergency alert override activation in the manner set forth in this ordinance;

   (2) minimum standby power as noted in this ordinance;

   (3) the provision of an indoor signal or safety alert technology in the manner noted in this ordinance;

   (4) implementing a periodic preventative maintenance program as set forth in this ordinance;

   (5) follow all FCC rules and regulations concerning maximum cumulative leakage index (CLI) limits; and

   (6) comply with, and abide by, any construction, safety or fire codes as noted in this ordinance.

 

§9-87.  Provisions to Alert Subscribers in the Event of an Emergency; Standby Power
                (A) In order that subscribers may be alerted in the event of an impending, imminent or actual, natural or man-made emergency, then all MCS providers shall ensure that the multi-channel system providing multi-channel service to all, or part, of the City is designed so as to permit an authorized official of the City to override the audio portion of all channels, by touch-tone phone (or functional equivalent) from any location.

                (B) In addition to any other requirements listed in this Section, an MCS provider shall:

   (1) designate a channel which will be used for emergency broadcasts of both audio and video;

   (2) inform subscribers of the designated emergency channel at least daily on at least one (1) channel of the multi-channel system;

   (3) maintain all channel video blanking capability to facilitate the needs of hearing and sight-impaired customers;

   (4) test the emergency override system not less than once a month;

   (5) cooperate with the City on the use and operation of the emergency alert override system; and

   (6) develop a plan (with the City's concurrence) in order to provide continuity of multi-channel service, and response to service calls in the event of a natural or man-made emergency.

                (C) As one method of providing continuity of multi-channel services in the event of a natural or man-made emergency, an MCS provider shall, unless exempted by the Council/franchising authority, have the capacity for four (4) hour automatically activated standby power on all trunk and feeder cable, and all headends, hubs, and receive sites associated with the distribution of cable service to, and throughout the City.

 

§9-88.  Provisions Concerning Safety Alert Technology
                (A) The Council/franchising authority considers the need for an indoor signal or safety alert technology, available to both subscribers and non-subscribers of an MCS provider's lowest level of programming service, of paramount interest and need, and as such should be an integral part of an MCS provider's system. Though in some ways similar to the concept of emergency alert override, signal alert technology is different and distinct in that it may be used by both subscribers to basic service and non-subscribers to the basic service of an MCS provider's system. Moreover, such safety alert technology is connected to the National Weather Service twenty-four (24) hour radio service including its new WRSAME/"Site Select" weather and warning system, which specifically allows for an indoor warning and notification via an audio alert voice path, regardless of whether an individual has a television receiver or monitor, or an FM receiver, and, moreover, can provide effectively instantaneous alert and warning, as well as needed instructions, in addition to allowing key community-oriented entities to communicate with both the general populace and selected (i.e. target) segments of the community.

                (B) In realization and recognition of the preceding, a non-exempt MCS provider shall offer for use throughout the City (within twelve (12) months of the effective date of this ordinance) a signal or safety alert monitoring technology for purposes of alerting both subscribers and non-subscribers of a multi-channel system to impending or occurring disaster emergencies, and allowing the City to communicate with both subscribers and the public as the need to do so may exist at any time.

                (C) A non-exempt MCS provider shall cooperate with the City and the provider of said technology in the marketing and distribution of the necessary on-premises alert receiving devices, including the installation, and replacement of such, as may be needed from time to time.

                (D) A non-exempt MCS provider shall install the necessary electronics, processing, and distribution equipment in the MCS provider's headend, and will ensure the maintenance, operating condition, and replacement of such equipment, as is necessary to protect its continued use.

                (E) Notwithstanding the preceding, a non-exempt MCS provider has no responsibility for repair of such equipment beyond obtaining (in a timely manner) replacement from the manufacturer for inoperable components.

                (F) It is explicitly understood that one need not be a subscriber to a multi-channel system to use the safety alert device, and receive the safety alert service, so long as a drop is installed into the address to which said device is attached. It is also understood that the user need not have a television receiver.

                (G) The Council/franchising authority recognizes the positive effect on the safety of the public in general, and the ability to save lives, and property, of those who would otherwise be prevented from receiving the most expeditious warning or alert possible without such a device and technology. Consequently, the Council/franchising authority requires that all non-exempt MCS providers shall participate in a periodic public awareness campaign as deemed appropriate by the Council/franchising authority, in cooperation with the Council/franchising authority and the manufacturer, to inform the citizenry and non-cable subscribers of the availability and capability of such safety alert technology.

                (H) An MCS provider shall assure that all subscribers to multi-channel service receive printed material, fully describing the technology and its benefits, at least annually and at the time of installation.

                (I) An MCS provider shall allow non-subscribers of Basic Cable Service the choice of purchasing or leasing the necessary equipment, which shall include the cost of installation on a non-discriminatory basis, and so inform such persons of both options.

                (J) Given the significant public safety and life and property saving benefits of this technology, and the resultant need of as much of the general public as possible to be protected from the otherwise unnecessary greater risk to life, limb and property associated with other alert/warning systems, an MCS provider shall assure that the service is placed on the same level of service and is priced commensurate with that for like technology/service in the Mid-Western United States.

                (K) Given the importance and critical nature of preventing the loss of life and property, and the need and ability of the Council/franchising authority to communicate directly with the public in any number of situations, including but not limited to those potentially involving matters of life and death, and as this technology is clearly not a programming service, the Council/franchising authority deems it appropriate to designate the use of the capability of such technology as a governmental use of the system, and it is the intent of the City that it be made available to all subscribers.

 

§9-89.  Implementation of a Preventative Maintenance Program
                (A) It shall be the duty of an MCS provider (that has more than three hundred fifty subscribers) to devise and implement a quarterly preventative maintenance program for the multi-channel system in order to ensure that there is no material degradation of the multi-channel system that would affect the citizens' health, safety, and welfare, or negatively affect the quality of multi-channel services being provided.

                (B) Before the MCS provider implements such a program, it shall be reviewed and approved by the Council/franchising authority. Within forty-five (45) days after the completion of the quarterly preventative maintenance program, the MCS provider shall prepare and submit a written report to the Council/franchising authority detailing the results of the tests conducted, and all items performed or addressed during the quarterly program. Although not exhaustive, the following areas should be included in a preventative maintenance program, and subsequent report:

   (1) inspection, and repair if needed, of the headend;

   (2) inspection, and repair if needed, of the antenna tower;

   (3) requiring weather-proofing and protection of the antenna lead connectors, and on any other exposed fittings;

   (4) requiring the conducting of signal leakage tests that are in accordance with FCC requirements;

   (5) removing tree roots, limbs, and branches that interfere with, or come in contact with, the MCS provider's cable;

   (6) requiring the periodic servicing, testing, and calibration of the MCS provider's equipment including equipment on service vehicles, and field test equipment;

   (7) employing a status monitoring system to identify problems or situations in which the multi-channel system electronics are operating outside pre-programmed parameters;

   (8) testing of the emergency alert system to ensure that it will function properly during an emergency situation; and

   (9) testing of the safety alert system or technology.

 

§9-90.  Construction, Fire, and Safety Codes
                (A) An MCS provider shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, remove, replace, or restore the multi-channel system in strict compliance with all current technical codes adopted by the Council/franchising authority, the State, or the United States.

                (B) The codes referred to specifically include, but are not limited to, construction, fire and safety, and zoning codes.

 

§9-91.  Reserved
§9-92.  Reserved
§9-93.  Reserved
§9-94.  Reserved
§9-95.  Reserved

 

§9-96.  Alternative User Charge
                (A) This Section is applicable to any unfranchised, but otherwise authorized MCS provider, and to any MCS provider who has had its franchise ruled unconstitutional, unenforceable, or invalid. For all franchised MCS providers the provisions concerning franchise fees shall be applicable.

                (B) Where not specifically prohibited by Federal or State law, and as an alternative to the imposition of a franchise fee as set forth in this ordinance, the Council/franchising authority may impose, extract, and collect, a charge from an affected MCS provider for the use by such provider of the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the City.

                (C) The alternative user charge shall be based on the following mathematical mode:

   (1) determine the present value of all public streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the City in which are located multi-channel system facilities and equipment of the affected MCS provider;

   (2) take the average percentage increase in land appraisals within the City (as determined by the Property Appraiser for the City, for the five preceding years);

   (3) take the average percentage increase for the five preceding years and use it to determine the dollar amount of property value increase for the remaining term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable, then use five years);

   (4) add the present value to the dollar amount of property value increase for the remaining term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable then use five years);

   (5) divide the adjusted value by the remaining number of years on the term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable then use five years);

   (6) multiply that figure by five percent (5%) to arrive at the annual user charge that is to be collected from the affected MCS provider.

For purposes of illustration only, the formula reads as follows:

present value = the dollar amount of the property value increase for remaining term of the franchise (based on average percentage increase of land appraisals for past years of franchise term; divide the adjusted present value by the remaining years on the term of the franchise;

multiply that figure by five percent (5%), = (equals) the annual alternative user charge.

                (D) The Council/franchising authority adopts such an alternative user charge in order to receive fair compensation for the affected MCS provider's use of the public streets and public ways if such compensation cannot be obtained by imposing a flat percentage fee on such MCS provider's annual gross revenues. However, an affected MCS provider may agree to an alternative charge that is based on a flat percentage of gross revenues, as long as that charge did not exceed the maximum amount previously allowed under law that was assessed as a franchise fee calculated as a percentage of an affected MCS provider's annual gross revenues.

                (E) It is expressly understood that a franchise fee and an alternative user charge will not be imposed on the same MCS provider at the same time, for the same period.

                (F) An affected MCS provider shall at no time be charged or obligated to pay an alternative user charge that exceeds the maximum amount previously allowed under law that was assessed as a franchise fee calculated as a percentage of such MCS provider's gross revenues (as defined by this ordinance) for any particular reporting period. In the event that the alternative user charge does exceed the maximum amount previously allowed under law that was assessed as a franchise fee and calculated as a percentage of gross revenues, then such alternative user charge should be reduced to reflect an amount not greater than the maximum amount previously allowed under law that was assessed as a franchise fee and calculated as a percentage of gross revenues.

                (G) An affected MCS provider shall pay twenty-five percent (25%) of the alternative user charge at the end of every three (3) months.

 

§9-97.  Franchise Required; Exception
                (A) Except as provided in subsections (B), (C), and (D) of this Section, no person, or MCS provider shall be permitted to construct, operate or maintain a multi-channel system which requires the laying or positioning of cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) across the rights-of-way of the City, without having first obtained a franchise, and then entering into a franchise agreement with the City.

                (B) Pursuant to the CCPA, a local government may own and operate a multi-channel system classified as a cable system. Consequently, should the Council/franchising authority directly, or indirectly, through any legal means available to the Council/franchising authority, decide to purchase, acquire, construct, lease, control, or otherwise own a cable system within the territorial limits of the City, then the Council/franchising authority shall not be required to submit a proposal for, or receive, a franchise in order to construct, operate, and maintain a cable system within the geographical limits of the City.

                (C) In the case of a person or MCS provider lawfully providing multi-channel service on July 1, 1984, then such person or MCS provider shall not be required to obtain a franchise, and enter into a franchise agreement unless the Council/franchising authority expressly requires the person or MCS provider to do so.

                (D) If, as a result of annexation (either previous to, or subsequent to, the effect date of this ordinance), an MCS provider comes under the jurisdiction of the City, then such MCS provider shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance, including (if applicable) obtaining a franchise. Any such franchise shall extend only to the territory comprising the annexed area. The provisions of Section 9-10 and 9-15 of this ordinance do not apply to this subsection.

                (E) Where a person or MCS provider is required by the Council/franchising authority to obtain a franchise, then the Council/franchising authority shall notify the person or MCS provider, in writing, within thirty (30) days of the Council/franchising authority's formal action.

                (F) After receipt of notification, the affected person or MCS provider has ninety (90) days to submit an application or proposal in substantially the same form and format as required by the Council/franchising authority. Then, the affected person or MCS provider's application will be handled as set forth by either State or local law.

 

§9-98.  Authority to Grant Non-Exclusive Franchises
                (A) Consistent with Section 621(a)(1) of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 541), the Council/franchising authority may award one (1) or more non-exclusive multi-channel service franchises within its geographical limits. With the exception of existing non-exempt MCS providers in an area annexed by the City and subject to Section 9-77 of this ordinance, the Council/franchising authority shall not award a franchise for a service area comprising less than the entire City limits. Note well, however, that existing non-exempt MCS providers as of the effective date of this ordinance may, but are not required to, serve any subsequently annexed area of the City in a manner consistent with line extension policies outlined in this ordinance, and which are specifically noted in the MCS provider's franchise agreement. The provisions of Section 9-10 and 9-15 of this ordinance do not apply to this subsection.

                (B) A franchised MCS provider shall be selected as part of a public proceeding and hearing which affords due process to both the City and the applicant, and after which, if the applicant is selected as a franchised MCS provider, then such applicant will enter into a franchise agreement with the City, pursuant to the provisions of federal, state, and local laws and regulations.

 

§9-99.  Franchise Agreement; Minimal Requirements
                (A) If the Council/franchising authority awards an applicant a franchise to construct, operate, or maintain a multi-channel system within the City, or approves a proposal for a renewal of a franchise, then within one hundred eighty (180) days, an applicant or a renewal franchised MCS provider and the City shall enter into a franchise agreement which details the rights, duties, responsibilities, and liabilities of both parties.

                (B) A newly franchised MCS provider may not lay any cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent) until the franchise agreement is executed by both the newly franchised MCS provider and the Council/franchising authority.

                (C) A franchise agreement shall be in sufficient detail in order to clearly delineate the rights and duties of the franchised MCS provider, and the Council/franchising authority.

                (D) At a minimum, a franchise agreement shall contain provisions for the following:

   (1) a detailed definition of "annual gross revenues" or "gross revenues" which specifically includes an explanation of what constitutes the revenue base for determining what revenues are subject to any franchise fee or alternative user charge;

   (2) the term or duration of the franchise;

   (3) indemnity and hold harmless clauses;

   (4) insurance;

   (5) performance and completion bonds or security deposits;

   (6) construction, upgrade or rebuild schedule;

   (7) franchise fees;

   (8) continuity of multi-channel programming service;

   (9) repeal of prior inconsistent franchise agreements; and

   (10) a severability clause.

 

§9-100.  Extent of Grant of Franchise
                (A) Upon an award of a franchise, and the subsequent execution of the franchise agreement, an MCS provider required to obtain and maintain a franchise may construct, erect, install, maintain, operate, repair, replace, remove, or restore a multi-channel system within the geographical limits set forth in the franchise agreement.

                (B) The franchised multi-channel system may be located in, upon, along, across, over, and under the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the City.

                (C) If necessary, the responsibility of obtaining easements for private property (including privately owned utility or street light poles) shall be that of a franchised MCS provider.

                (D) A franchised MCS provider, through a separate pole or utility easement agreement with an affected utility, may locate the multi-channel system on, or within, the property of such utility company. This provision specifically includes MCS providers classified as cable operators.

 

§9-101.  Term of Franchise
                (A) The term of an initial renewal franchise may be for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) years from the date that a franchise renewal agreement is approved by the Council/franchising authority.

                (B) If an initial franchise or renewal franchise is for a period of six (6) years or less, then the franchise agreement shall detail the reasons for granting the shorter franchise term.

                (C) The reasons for a franchise term of six (6) years or less, include, and are limited to, the following:

   (1) multiple or repeated violations of the prior franchise agreement;

   (2) multiple or repeated violations of this ordinance, or any mandated provisions of the CCPA;

   (3) a continuing and documented pattern of substandard or non-responsive service;

   (4) reckless disregard for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the City;

   (5) failure to comply with any construction, rebuild, or upgrade schedule; and

   (6) failure to timely pay in their entirety any franchise fees, or taxes, or other charges due to the City.

                (D) The Council/franchising authority reserves the right to grant a franchised MCS provider a variable franchise term wherein the initial or renewal term may be extended by up to two (2) years (not to exceed fifteen (15) years total) upon the franchised MCS provider attaining an "excellent" rating during the course of a periodic performance evaluation.

                (E) The Council/franchising authority reserves the right to grant a franchised MCS provider a variable franchise term (wherein the initial or renewal term may be extended by up to two (2) years (not to exceed fifteen (15) years total) should the franchised MCS provider consistently and continually meet the Council/franchising authority's objectives with respect to the provision of broad categories of video programming as noted in this ordinance.

                (F) The Council/franchising authority reserves the right to reduce the term of the franchise by one (1) year for each material, repeated occurrence of an uncured/unremedied violation of the franchise or this ordinance, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 9-105 of this ordinance, or when the MCS provider fails to attain a minimum rating of "adequate" (on a scale of "excellent", "adequate" and "poor") for any two (2) successive periodic performance reviews, as set forth in Section 9-106 of this ordinance.

                (G) Should the highest court of the nation, or State, invalidate, void as unenforceable or unconstitutional, the concept of a franchise or franchise duration, then the Council/franchising authority may adopt emergency rules and regulations in order to preserve and protect the rights and duties of both the Council/franchising authority and any franchised MCS provider. During the interim, the invalid franchise may be considered (unless prohibited by the State) and interpreted in the same manner and fashion as a business license or other comparable authorization. Upon the adoption of emergency rules, the Council/franchising authority should enter into a new agreement which describes which terms and conditions of the franchised MCS provider's system may be reviewed and examined, and under what circumstances may a franchised MCS provider forfeit its right to operate a multi-channel system within the City.

 

§9-102.  Application for Franchise; Application Fee
                (A) The Council/franchising authority may develop rules and regulations with respect to the submission and processing of applications for a franchise. Such rules and regulations shall primarily be aimed at determining the legal, financial, technical, and character qualifications of the applicant.

                (B) Unless prohibited, an applicant shall pay an application fee which shall be equal to the administrative and consulting costs associated with processing an application for a franchise. The total application fee must be paid, unless waived, regardless of whether the applicant receives, or does not receive a franchise. The total application fee must be paid (or waived) prior to the Council/franchising authority's formal action on the applicant's request for a franchise.

 

§9-103.  Franchise Fees
                (A) Any non-exempt franchised MCS provider (specifically including any MCS provider classified as a cable operator) awarded a franchise or renewal franchise after the date this ordinance becomes effective, shall pay to the City for the privilege and use of the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways, and other facilities of the City in the operation of the multi-channel system, and for the City's supervision thereof during the term of the franchise, a sum equal to five percent to (5%) of the annual gross revenues of such non-exempt franchised MCS provider. Such fee shall explicitly be separate from, and in addition to, any fees or charges for the use or occupancy of any municipally-owned poles, conduits or other facilities owned by a municipally-owned utility.

                (B) If the FCC, Congress or other governmental entity with authority over multi-channel service ever allows a governmental entity or Council/franchising authority to increase the franchise fee beyond five percent (5%), then the Council/franchising authority shall have the authority to increase the franchise fee to the maximum rate allowable.

                (C) It is intended that the franchise fees will promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City. Therefore, the five percent (5%) franchise fee shall be deposited into the general revenues of the City, unless specifically authorized elsewhere.

                (D) A non-exempt franchised MCS provider shall file with the Council/franchising authority, within forty-five (45) days after the expiration of each of the franchised MCS provider's fiscal quarters, a detailed financial and revenue report clearly showing the gross revenues received by such franchised MCS provider during the preceding quarter and certified by a certified public accountant or officer of a franchised MCS provider attesting to the accuracy, completeness, and veracity of the revenue figures. Such report shall be in the form and format determined by the Council/franchising authority. Such report shall include revenue from whatever source, directly or indirectly derived from, or allowed, or caused to be derived from, or applicable to the operation of the multi-channel system, or the provision of any multi-channel service by or to the multi-channel system. Revenue will be reported by service category, type, and level showing computations and using incremental billing rates for all sources, levels, tiers, and types of service and other revenue sources of all kinds and types.

                (E) Payment of the quarterly portion of the franchise fee shall be rendered to the City at the time the revenue report is filed.

                (F) In the event that payment is not made within forty-five (45) days after the date specified in this Section, then such franchised MCS provider may be declared in default of the franchise, and the franchise may be revoked, terminated, or canceled in the manner prescribed by this ordinance.

                (G) The Council/franchising authority reserves the right to audit a franchised MCS provider books, if the Council/franchising authority deems it necessary. If such audit discovers an underpayment of franchise fees that exceeds two percent (2%) of the total fee paid for any reporting quarter, then the affected franchised MCS provider shall reimburse the City for the cost of such an audit. It is specifically understood that the right of audit and recomputation of any, and all, amounts paid under a franchise fee, shall always be accorded to the Council/franchising authority.

                (H) All annual reports due and pertaining to the payment of franchise fees, will be certified by an officer of the franchised MCS provider, and such provider shall maintain records used in the preparation of said report, to be produced in their originality and totality upon request or demand by the Council/franchising authority.

                (I) No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release of, or an accord, or satisfaction of, any claim that the City might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this ordinance, or for any other performance or obligation of a franchised MCS provider hereunder.

                (J) Payments of compensation made by a franchised MCS provider to the City, pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, shall be considered in addition to, and exclusive of, any and all authorized taxes, business license fees, other fees, other levies or assessments presently in effect, or subsequently adopted.

                (K) A franchise fee does not include any items excluded by Section 622 (g) (2) (D) of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 542 (g) (2) (D)).

                (L) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the authority of the Council/franchising authority to impose a tax, fee or other assessment of any kind, on any person (other than a franchised MCS provider) with respect to multi-channel service or other programming or communications service provided by such person over a multi-channel system for which charges are assessed to subscribers, but not received by a franchised MCS provider. For purposes of illustration only, this subsection shall include the situation(s) where a premium service directly bills a subscriber, or the franchised MCS provider merely acts as collection agent for a premium service billing directly to a subscriber, or where a person leases a channel for commercial use and sells advertising or goods on that channel, and receives the money directly or through a third party.

                (M) For any twelve (12) month period, the fees paid by any person subject to subsection (L) who provides any such multi-channel service shall not exceed five percent (5%) of such person's gross revenues derived in such period from the provision of such service over the multi-channel system.

                (N) If at any time, the highest court of the nation, or the highest court of the State, invalidates, voids, or rules as unconstitutional the concept of franchise fees, then the Council/franchising authority may impose an alternative user charge on the franchised MCS provider, in the manner set forth in this ordinance.

 

§9-104.  Assignment or Transfer of Franchise
                (A) Where required for operation, an MCS provider's franchise may not be assigned or transferred in whole, or in part, by the affected MCS provider, without the prior express written approval by the Council/franchising authority.

                (B) Any attempted assignment or transfer without such prior written consent shall constitute a default of such franchise.

                (C) In the event of such a default, the Council/franchising authority shall proceed according to the procedure set forth in this ordinance, and any applicable State law.

                (D) At least ninety (90) days before a proposed assignment or transfer of an MCS provider's franchise is scheduled to become effective, such franchised MCS provider shall petition in writing for the Council/franchising authority's written consent for such a proposed assignment or transfer.

                (E) The Council/franchising authority will not unreasonably withhold its consent to such an assignment or transfer. However, in making such a determination, the Council/franchising authority may consider the following:

   (1) experience of proposed assignee or transferee (including conducting an investigation of proposed assignee or transferee's service record in other communities);

   (2) qualifications of proposed assignee or transferee;

   (3) legal integrity of proposed assignee or transferee;

   (4) financial ability and stability of the proposed assignee or transferee;

   (5) if requested by the Council/franchising authority, submittals from the proposed assignee or transferee, on what, if any, changes it intends to make in the operation and maintenance of the present multi-channel system;

   (6) the corporate connection, if any, between the franchised MCS provider, and proposed assignee or transferee;

   (7) the economic viability or non-viability of the multi-channel system in the future, based upon certain factors including the impact of the purchase price on the City and/or the proposed assignee or transferee; and

   (8) any other legitimate aspect of the proposed assignee's or transferee's background which could affect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry of City as it relates to the operation of the multi-channel system.

                (F) A copy of the completed sales agreement, or a functionally equivalent instrument, between the franchised MCS provider and proposed assignee or transferee shall be provided to the Council/franchising authority, so that the Council/franchising authority may discover the assumption of obligations by the franchised MCS provider and proposed assignee or transferee with respect to the multi-channel system. In lieu of the sales agreement, the Council/franchising authority may accept an attested summary of obligations assumed by the above referenced parties.

                (G) Before an assignment or transfer is approved by the Council/franchising authority, the proposed assignee or transferee shall execute an affidavit, acknowledging that it has read, understood, and intends to abide by both this ordinance, and the applicable franchise agreement.

                (H) In the event of any approved assignment or transfer, the assignee or transferee shall assume all obligations and liabilities of the former franchised MCS provider, except as noted in subsection (I).

                (I) An assignment or transfer shall not relieve the former franchised MCS provider of its liabilities under the franchise agreement until the assignment actually takes place, or unless specifically relieved by Federal, or State law, or unless specifically relieved by the Council/franchising authority at the time an assignment or transfer is approved.

 

§9-105.  Default of Franchise; Revocation, Termination or Cancellation of Franchise
                (A) When any event, act or omission (on the part of the franchised MCS provider) occurs which represents a violation of an integral provision of this ordinance, or compromises the corporate character, or legal, financial or technical integrity and/or stability of the multi-channel system or the franchised MCS provider to such a degree that the interests of the subscribers and users are negatively affected, then such event, act or omission may be considered a major breach of this ordinance. Under such circumstances, the Council/franchising authority shall notify the affected MCS provider in writing, of the specific breach, and direct such franchised MCS provider to comply with all such provisions of its proposal, franchise agreement, or this ordinance.

                (B) For illustrative purposes only, the events, acts and omissions include, but are not limited to: bankruptcy, insolvency, failure to pay taxes or franchise fees (including the alternative user charge if applicable), failure to receive written Council/franchising authority approval for an assignment or transfer, or failure to abide by the integral terms and conditions of the franchise agreement, or integral provisions of this ordinance.

                (C) Where a franchised MCS provider satisfactorily corrects any of the enumerated conditions, within sixty (60) days, then in no event shall the enumerated condition be weighed against such franchised MCS provider in any subsequent review of franchise performance.

                (D) A copy of such notice of material breach shall be mailed to the surety on the performance bond.

                (E) Within seventy-five (75) days, after such written notice is mailed to a franchised MCS provider, the Council/franchising authority shall conduct a public hearing on the matter.

                (F) The Council/franchising authority shall provide written notice to a franchised MCS provider, and the surety, of the time and place of said public hearing in a manner consistent with either State law, or approved by the Council/franchising authority.

                (G) At the time of the hearing, the affected franchised MCS provider may present information on the current status of the alleged breach of the franchise agreement. If the situation has been resolved, or steps are being taken to resolve the situation, then the franchised MCS provider should present the information at the hearing.

                (H) If the affected franchised MCS provider fails to attend the hearing, and has not requested a continuance of the hearing, then such franchised MCS provider shall be deemed to have waived its right to a further continuation of the matter, and may be declared in default of the franchise agreement.

                (I) After the public hearing, the Council/franchising authority may determine the franchised MCS provider to be in compliance and dismiss the matter, or may determine that the MCS provider has cured any non-compliance and thereby dismiss the matter. However the Council/franchising authority may determine that an ordinance violation exists and remains uncured. Consequently, upon a finding that the MCS provider violated an integral ordinance provision, or failed to cure an outstanding ordinance violation, the Council/franchising authority may direct the affected franchised MCS provider to take corrective action within a specified period of time, or may declare such franchised MCS provider in default of the franchise agreement, and thereafter may revoke, terminate, or cancel the franchise, unless the franchised MCS provider presents sufficient mitigating circumstances.

                (J) If the Council/franchising authority directs corrective action to take place within a specified time or declares such franchised MCS provider in default of the franchise agreement, then that declaration shall be reduced to writing, and the notice of corrective action or default shall be mailed to such franchised MCS provider, and surety, within fifteen (15) days of the Council/franchising authority's action.

                (K) If within forty-five (45) days, the affected franchised MCS provider, or surety does not take significant action to rectify the breach, or submit a plan detailing how the affected MCS provider will eliminate the breach, then the Council/franchising authority shall revoke such MCS provider's franchise, and shall notify the affected franchised MCS provider, and surety forthwith, unless there are mitigating circumstances.

 

§9-106.  Performance Evaluations
                The Council/franchising authority is authorized to design a performance evaluation procedure which periodically monitors compliance of the franchised MCS provider with the terms and conditions of both the franchise and this ordinance. Moreover, the Council/franchising authority may periodically review, and examine whether a franchised MCS provider's financial, technical, legal, and character qualifications continue to meet required operational, maintenance, and performance levels in order to ensure the uninterrupted provision of multi-channel services. Such performance evaluations may be conducted every three (3) years during the franchise term, and may done as part of any required survey.

 

§9-107.  Reserved
§9-108.  Reserved
§9-109.  Reserved
§9-110.  Reserved
§9-111.  Reserved
§9-112.  Reserved
§9-113.  Reserved
§9-114.  Reserved
§9-115.  Reserved

 

§9-116.  Specific Additional Rules for MCS Providers Classified as Cable Operators
                (A) In addition to any requirements contained within this ordinance, all non-exempt MCS providers that are classified as cable operators shall be expected to abide by, and comply with, all applicable provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.

                (B) The specific provisions of the CCPA include, but are not limited to, the following:

   (1) cable channels for public, educational, or governmental use (Section 611 CCPA--codified at 47 USC 531);

   (2) cable channels for commercial use (Section 612--47 USC 532);

   (3) general franchise requirements (Section 621--47 USC 541);

   (4) franchise fees (Section 622--47 USC 542);

   (5) regulation of rates (Section 623--47 USC 543);

   (6) regulation of services, facilities, and equipment (Section 624--47 USC 544);

   (7) modification of franchise obligations (Section 625--47 USC 545);

   (8) franchise renewal (Section 626--47 USC 546);

   (9) conditions of sale of a franchise (Section 627--47 USC 547);

   (10) subscriber privacy (Section 631--47 USC 551); and

   (11) equal employment opportunity (Section 634--47 USC 554).

                (C) Further, as an additional requirement, before the second anniversary of the effective date of this ordinance, any non-exempt MCS provider classified as a cable operator and providing cable service within the City shall have designed, built and activated a multi-channel system with a channel capacity of at least sixty (60) channels.

                (D) Further, the Council/franchising authority is committed that the goal of the CCPA, as set forth in Section 601(4) of the Act (codified at 47 USC 521(4)), is met at all times. As a result, the Council/franchising authority expressly requires that upon the advent, implementation, and transmission of high definition television (HDTV), its functional equivalent, or any subsequently developed technological advancement affecting channel capacity or needed bandwidth for any video programming source or service, the cable operator shall not lessen, dilute, or decrease the mix, level, quality, or quantity of programming services carried on the cable system for reasons of lack of adequate channel capacity.

                (E) Additionally, the Council/franchising authority, in the interests of minimizing on-going operating costs to the cable operator and the resultant increases in rates and charges paid by subscribers is committed to the introduction of technological advancements that could realize such benefits to both the cable operator and subscriber. Therefore, unless an operator can demonstrate that it is both technologically and economically unfeasible, the affected cable operator shall within eighteen (18) months of the effective date of a franchise renewal agreement, or at the time of initial construction under a new franchise agreement, introduce addressable technology allowing cable service levels to be changed without the expense (either to the operator or subscriber) of a separate trip or call.

 

§9-117.  Specific Additional Public, Educational, and Governmental Rules for MCS Providers
Classified as Cable Operators
                (A) The Council/franchising authority recognizes that under Section 611 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 531), the Council/franchising authority has certain power with respect to certain aspects for public, educational, or governmental (PEG) use that is provided by MCS providers classified as cable operators.

                (B) To the extent permitted by law, and in order to fulfill the Council/franchising authority's desired goal of a public, educational, and governmental (PEG) access policy that will facilitate the long-range needs of the City, the Council/franchising authority adopts the following:

   (1) At the time of an initial application for an MCS franchise for a cable system, and contained within any renewal franchise agreement, an MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall pledge to include the following guarantees:

   (a) An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at its own expense, one (1) twelve (12) hour educational channel; and

   (b) An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at its own expense, one (1) twelve hour (12) governmental channel that is available for providing coverage of Council meetings, and other related programming offered or designed by the City Manager, or designated official, including department heads; and

   (c) An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at its own expense, one (1) twelve (12) hour public access channel that is available for use by various community groups and organizations.

   (2) At such time as the Council/franchising authority determines the need for more channel time to exist on any given access channel, an MCS provider shall make any or all of the access channels available for more than twelve (12) hours per day upon thirty (30) days written notice.

   (3) Both the Council/franchising authority and the affected cable operator shall review use after every six (6) months, including the percentage of use of every PEG channel. At the end of each six (6) month period, the Council/franchising authority shall evaluate the response and actual use of such channels. If, after any six (6) month period, the percentage of use for any required PEG channel drops below twenty-five percent (25%) of the total time allocated, then the required number of hours shall be reduced to a number that most closely approximates the average hours of use per day. If the Council/franchising authority determines the average hours of use per day for any required PEG channel is less than one (1) hour, then the requirement for that channel's availability shall cease, and an affected cable operator may use such channel for any lawful purpose, unless and until the Council/franchising authority determines that need for the use of the channel again exists.

   (4) If, at any time, ninety percent (90%) of the total time allocated for any required PEG channel is consistently used five (5) days a week for a period of three (3) months, then the cable operator shall provide an additional PEG channel.

   (5) A cable operator shall provide mobile, portable, and stationary equipment to be used for PEG access, together with the aid of technical and production assistance provided by the cable operator. A cable operator shall provide equipment that can store programs for delayed cable-casting. There will be no cost for technical production assistance for PEG access use to any one user provided that such use does not exceed fifty (50) actual production man-hours. Moreover, the cost of maintenance of a PEG access studio, and equipment required to run the studio shall be borne by the cable operator.

  (6) The City Council/franchising authority may require a cable operator to provide live cable-casting of City Council meetings and School Board meetings, as the need may be determined by the respective bodies, and the operator shall comply with the request to do so within thirty (30) days of notification by the City Council/franchising authority.

 

§9-118.  The Council/Franchising Authority's Policy Regarding Local Production Facilities and 
Equipment
                (A) The Council/franchising authority recognizes the fact that certain needs of the City and the public regarding the transmission and receipt of information can be met by a local production facility. In order to meet those above-noted needs, the Council/franchising authority may require, after a public hearing, that any MCS provider:

   (1) provide and equip, a facility that will enable the City, the public, and non-profit organizations or agencies to produce and originate video and audio programming from a fixed studio location.

   (2) equip such facility so as to permit a complete and full array of production, editing, and program insertion capabilities and functions, as may be deemed necessary for maximizing the system's capabilities, taking into account the cost of such requirement.

   (3) activate the system in a bi-directional mode, so as to allow the live or taped insertion of programming from remote locations throughout the City for distribution to any and/or all locations within the City, in a time-frame determined by the City.

   (4) maintain and replace, as needed, any and all, production-related equipment provided or purchased by the operator in a timely manner, upon demonstration of the need for such and upon request by the City.

   (5) provide additional production-related equipment, from time-to-time, as may be deemed necessary for the City to fulfill its goal of maximizing the capabilities of a system in meeting identified community needs.

 

§9-119.  The Council/Franchising Authority's Objective With Respect to the Provision of Broad
Categories of Video Programming
                (A) The Council/franchising authority recognizes that under Section 624 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 544), the legal power of local government is severely restricted in requiring and/or demanding that particular video programming or other services be provided to subscribers over the multi-channel system.

                (B) Nevertheless, the Council/franchising authority recognizes that it should strive to ensure that its citizens receive the widest, and most diverse selection of video programming possible. Consequently, for those MCS providers required to maintain a franchise, the Council/franchising authority states as its objective to such franchised MCS providers, that the provision of services and video programming categories to subscribers should include at least the following broad categories:

   (1) local broadcast stations;

   (2) two (2) distant carriage signals, or satellite fed broadcast stations;

   (3) PEG programming on the lowest offered and/or available tier;

   (4) sports programming services (regional and/or national);

   (5) news, information, or public affairs/interest programming services;

   (6) financial/consumer-oriented programming services;

   (7) scientific and/or cultural programming services;

   (8) children's programming services; and

   (9) ethnically sensitive programming services.

 

§9-120.  The Council/Franchising Authority's Policy Regarding the Provision of Seamless or "See-through" Technology
                (A) The Council/franchising authority recognizes the fact that it is in the public's interest to be able to utilize the functions inherent in subscriber receiving equipment, without having to incur additional costs to obtain the same functions. Consequently, the Council/franchising authority may require that:

   (1) unless an MCS provider can demonstrate to the City that it is technically or economically unfeasible or commercially impracticable, then such MCS provider shall provide the ability to utilize the functions inherent in subscriber equipment in a seamless or "see-through" manner which allows:

   (a) the use of any built-in remote control capability of a subscriber's television for the control of any, and all, television channels provided by the MCS provider without the use or necessity of additional equipment; and

   (b) the ability to record video programming on any channel provided by the MCS provider, while watching programming on any different channel, without the use or necessity of any additional in-home equipment other than the television receiver/monitor and a recorder.

 

§9-121.  Reserved
§9-122.  Reserved
§9-123.  Reserved
§9-124.  Reserved
§9-125.  Reserved

 

§9-126.  Miscellaneous Provisions—Tampering and Unauthorized Reception of Certain Services
                (A) Consistent with Section 633 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 553), no person shall intercept or receive, or assist in intercepting or receiving any communications service offered over a multi-channel system, unless specifically authorized to do so by an MCS provider, or as may otherwise be specifically authorized by law.

                (B) For the purpose of this Section, the term "assist in intercepting or receiving" shall include the manufacture or distribution of equipment intended by the manufacturer or distributor (as the case may be) for the unauthorized reception of multi-channel service as noted in subsection (A) of this Section.

                (C) Without securing permission from an MCS provider, or making payment to an MCS provider, then no person shall be authorized to make any connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of an authorized or franchised multi-channel system for the purpose of receiving or intercepting, or assisting others to receive or intercept any cable service provided lawfully by the MCS provider.

                (D) No person shall be authorized to willfully tamper with, remove, or damage any cable, wires, equipment, or facilities used for the distribution of multi-channel services.

                (E) Any, and all, MCS providers are encouraged to work with the Council/franchising authority in developing and implementing a plan designed to control and eliminate the unauthorized reception of certain cable services within the City.

CHAPTER 10

CEMETERY

Article I. General

 

§10-1. Cemetery – Defined
                The city cemetery shall consist of all those certain tracts, lots, and parcels of land described as the Grand Island City Cemetery by Ordinance No. 3690, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, and all lands acquired after the passage of Ordinance No. 3690 and designated as cemetery grounds by the Mayor and City Council.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9197, effective 11-12-2008

 

§10-2.  Administration
                (A) The Parks and Recreation Director shall have the general care, management and supervision of the city cemetery.

(B)  The City may employ a cemetery superintendent under the direction of the Parks and Recreation Director.  The cemetery superintendent shall have such general supervisory authority over the daily operations of the cemetery as is delegated by the Parks and Recreation Director or granted by the Mayor and City Council.  The Parks and Recreation Director shall perform the duties of the cemetery superintendent during any period that the superintendent is absent or such position is vacant.

(C)  The city council shall have the power and authority to adopt such rules and regulations as may be required therefor, and may repeal or amend the same at pleasure; provided, however, that no such rule or regulation shall become operative until a copy thereof shall have been filed with the city clerk.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9197, effective 11-12-2008

 

§10-3.  Platting
                In laying out and platting any part of the cemetery grounds, the corners of the principal subdivisions shall be indicated by boundary markers, fixed permanently in the ground as starting points for future measurements and surveys, and such boundary markers shall be plainly indicated on such plat. Such plat, when completed, shall be certified by the surveyor or engineer who made same, subscribed by the mayor, acknowledged before any officer authorized by law to take acknowledgments of deeds, and shall be filed for record in the office of the county clerk and in the office of the county register of deeds, and the filing of such plat shall operate as a legal vacation of any former plat or subdivision of such grounds and of any streets, roads or avenues passing through such grounds.

 

§10-4.  Records; Duties of City Clerk
                All records, plats and papers, except as otherwise provided by this chapter, in regard to the cemetery, shall be kept in the city clerk's office, and the city clerk shall perform such duties in regard to the cemetery as may be prescribed by this chapter or under any rules and regulations adopted by the city council governing the cemetery.

 

§10-5.  Fees; Collection
                The city clerk-finance director shall collect all fees and charges provided for by this chapter.

 

§10-6.  Cemetery Fund – Established
                The proceeds described by §10-5, together with the amount provided by tax levy for cemetery purposes, shall constitute the "cemetery fund" of the City.

 

§10-7.  Cemetery Fund; Use
                The cemetery fund established pursuant to §10-6 shall be used to defray the expenses arising from the purchase, laying out, improvement, ornamentation and care of the city cemetery and to the payment of any liabilities and charges that may be incurred in carrying out the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the cemetery, and for no other purpose whatever.

 

§10-8.  Burial and Disinterment
                Application for permission to bury or disinter a body at the city cemetery shall be made at the cemetery office. Application for burial of a body, or for burial of ashes of a cremated body, must be accompanied by proper information to complete a burial permit. An application for disinterment must be accompanied by a proper certificate of authority. Upon proper application, the city clerk shall issue a burial permit, which permit shall indicate the lot upon which the burial or disinterment is done, and the city clerk shall, at the same time, collect the fees prescribed in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

                For the opening and preparation of a grave prior to interment, the cemetery shall be given a minimum of 24 hours notice in summer and 36 hours notice in winter when the ground is frozen. Also, a minimum of 48 hours shall be given on any Saturday or day preceding a legal city holiday.

                The lot owner or funeral home representative shall designate the location of the grave on the lot to the cemetery and any change of location made after the opening of the grave has begun shall not be at the expense of the cemetery. When definite information for locating a grave is not available in ample time for grave preparation as requested above, the cemetery will exercise its best judgment in order to meet the requested interment time. The City assumes no responsibility for any error in such location and an additional charge will be made for any change requested.

 

§10-9.  Burial and Disinterment; Fees
                The fee for opening graves shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§10-10.  Vaults; Standards
                All cemetery vaults, except those used for children under the age of six years, or for ashes of a cremated body, shall be made of cement composition or metal and of a type now in common use or of such materials and construction to meet the following minimum standards:

                (1)           0.05 inch maximum deflection under normal burial conditions;

                (2)           5000 pound per square inch minimum tolerance on cross section of container;

                (3)           125 foot-pound minimum impact force tolerance at 20 degrees Fahrenheit without failure.

 

§10-11.  Burial Equipment
                The fee for the use of the City's tents and burial equipment for cemetery services shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§10-12.  Reserved

 

§10-13.  Burial; In Church Yards, Etc.
                No burial of a human body shall be made in any church yard or in any other place within the city except in the city cemetery or other authorized cemetery.

 

§10-14.  Burial; Limitations
                No burial of other than a human body or parts thereof shall be made in the city cemetery.

 

§10-15.  Surface Burial Vaults
                No person shall construct any surface burial vault upon any burial lot in the city cemetery, but nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the use of cement or concrete burial vaults which shall be completely covered with earth and at the required depth below the surface of the ground.

 

§10-16.  Mausoleums
                No mausoleum shall be constructed in the city cemetery until an application therefor has first been presented to and approved by the Parks and Recreation Director with the concurrence of the Building Department Director of the structural integrity of such mausoleum. Such application shall be accompanied by detailed plans and specifications of the proposed mausoleum and shall designate the kind of natural stone to be used in the construction thereof. Any mausoleum hereafter erected shall be constructed above the ground and shall be properly ventilated.

Amended by Ord. No. 8804, eff. 4-23-2003

 

§10-17.  Tombstones, Monuments, Copings, etc.
                No tombstone, monument, gravemarker or vases shall be erected in the city cemetery except those that meet the approval of the cemetery and the following provisions:

        (1)  All markers in the South Block of Section J shall be set flush with the turf with the exception of tows 170-339, 169-340, 168-341, and 167-342..

        (2)  A minimum five-inch wash shall be used on all new or reset stone or monument work, and all spaces of 30 inches or less between stones or monuments shall be filled with concrete on new or reset work.

        (3)  No stone or monument shall extend beyond the property boundary of the lot owner.

        (4)  No lot or grave copings, curbs, or above-ground corner stones shall be constructed within the cemetery.

        (5)  All new foot stones shall be set flush with the turf, except to match existing above-ground foot stones on the same lot.

        (6)  Permanent vases shall not be allowed in alleys in front of stones or monuments, nor shall they be allowed on the grave side of an individual pre-need marker. Permanent vases shall only be allowed on the ends of stones or monuments in Sections M, N and P of the cemetery.

        (7)  It shall be the responsibility of the lot owner to reset any stones, monuments, or vases removed by the cemetery to allow room for a burial.

        (8)  The maximum width of any stone or monument, including the wash, shall be 26 inches. No stone or monument requiring more than 26 inches for width shall be delivered to the cemetery without the prior written approval of the cemetery superintendent.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9197, effective 11-12-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9491, effective 06-17-2014

 

§10-18.  Trees, Shrubbery and Fences
                No trees or shrubbery shall be planted and no fences shall be erected upon any lot or upon any part of a lot, nor upon or along any street, avenue or alley in the city cemetery, by any private party or lot owner, except such plantings and fences as shall be made or approved in advance by the City cemetery superintendent.

 

§10-19.  Miscellaneous Offenses
                (A)  No person shall drive any vehicle, automobile or motorcycle within the limits of the city cemetery at a higher rate of speed than ten miles per hour.

                (B)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to be in the city cemetery between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.

 

§10-20.  Destruction of Cemetery Property
                No person shall willfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tombstone, monument, grave stone, fence, building, or other structure placed in the city cemetery. No person, except City personnel in the discharge of their normal duties, shall take, carry away, destroy, or injure, without the consent of the owner thereof, any flowers, shrubbery or trees in the cemetery, and no person shall knowingly trespass upon or drive across any lot in the cemetery with any vehicle.

                The City reserves the right for its workmen, equipment, and those persons necessary in the performance of normal cemetery operations to enter upon or cross over any lot in the cemetery in the performance of such duties.

 

§10-21.  Penalties
                Any person violating any of the provisions of any section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. If such misdemeanor is occasioned by a violation of the provisions of §§10-14 to 10-18, the person committing such misdemeanor shall be ordered to remove any human body, animal carcass, surface burial vault, mausoleum, tombstone, monument, grave marker, coping, curb, vase, or corner stone, tree, shrubbery or fence constructed, erected, planted or placed in violation of the provisions of such sections.

 

Article II. Cemetery Lots
 

§10-22.  Conveyances, Transfers, and Titles
                The city clerk is hereby authorized to convey lots in the city cemetery, by certificate, signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk, specifying that the person to whom the same is issued is the owner of the lot or lots described therein by number as laid down on the plat adopted by the city council, for the purpose of interment of human bodies and the ashes of cremated human bodies, and such certificate shall vest in the purchaser, and purchaser's heirs or assigns, a right to such lot or lots, for the sole purpose of such interment, under the rules and regulations governing such cemetery, and for no other purpose. Transfers of such lots may be made by surrendering such certificate thereof to the city clerk, who shall cancel the same, and note such cancellation on the permanent cemetery records, and issue a new certificate to the assignee in lieu thereof. For each of such new certificates and services the clerk shall receive, for the use of the city a fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§10-23.  Lot Ownership; Restrictions
                Burial lots in the city cemetery shall not be held or used for purposes of speculation, and no individual shall be permitted to hold more than two lots at any one time, and no lot owner shall permit interment for compensation in or upon any lot owned; provided, however, that any fraternal or religious organization may purchase, at any one time, or hold, not to exceed seventy-two lots, which, however, must be in one body. The certificate to be issued by the city clerk for such lots shall specifically state that such fraternal or religious organization shall not sell such lots for more than the scheduled price thereof as shown by the records in the city clerk's office.

 

§10-24.  Abandonment
                The ownership or right in or to an unoccupied cemetery lot, part of a lot, lots, or parts of lots, in the city cemetery shall, upon abandonment, revert to the city. The continued failure to maintain or pay for the permanent care for a cemetery lot, part of a lot, lots, or parts of lots, in the city cemetery for a period of ten years shall create and establish a presumption that the same has been abandoned.

                Abandonment shall not be deemed complete unless, after such ten year period, there shall have been given by the city to the recorded owner, or if the owner be deceased or whereabouts unknown, to the heirs of such deceased person, notice declaring the lot, part of a lot, lots, or parts of lots to be abandoned. The notice may be served personally upon the owner or heirs or may be served by the mailing of the notice by registered or certified mail to the owner or heirs, as the case may be, to their last known address. In the event that the address of neither the owner nor the owner's heirs can be established, then notice of such abandonment shall be given by publishing the same one time in a legal newspaper published in and of general circulation in the county.

                If, within one year from the time of serving or publishing such notice, the record owner or heirs shall give notice in writing to the city that in fact there has been no such abandonment, then a presumption of abandonment shall no longer exist. In case abandonment has been complete as hereinbefore provided, the city may sell and convey title to any such abandoned lot, part of a lot, lots, or parts of lots. Any funds realized from the sale of such lot, part of a lot, lots, or parts of lots, shall be handled as provided by this chapter, and shall be accounted for accordingly.

 

§10-25.  Lots; Certificate of Ownership
                The prices of lots in the city cemetery shall be fixed by the city council, and a schedule of prices shall at all times be publicly exhibited in the city clerk's office giving the prices in full, and no certificate of ownership for any lot shall be issued until the price for each lot selected shall be paid in full to the city clerk. No change in such schedule of prices shall be made except upon a majority vote of the council.

 

§10-26.  Burial Spaces; Prices
                The prices for burial spaces in the city cemetery includes the price of permanent care. The city clerk is hereby ordered to collect amounts for such burial spaces in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

                The fees for burial spaces set forth in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule shall be waived, with title retained by the City, for any burial spaces designated by the cemetery superintendent for the burial of paupers by Hall County.

 

§10-27.  Fractional Lots; Prices
                Any fractional or partial lots in the city cemetery shall be sold at the same proportional price as full lots based upon the number of square feet contained in such fractional or partial lots.

 

§10-28.  Permanent Care
                Permanent care shall include the care of cemetery lots for all time to come, by providing maintenance found necessary in the judgment of the City to keep the lots in a neat and presentable condition. No lot, lots, or parts of lots shall be sold without payment for permanent care.

 

§10-29.  Permanent Care Fund
                Forty (40) percent of the amount collected for a burial space or spaces shall be deposited in the city cemetery permanent care fund.

 

§10-30.  "A" Lots
                All twelve foot streets and alleys running from north to south and extending through the city cemetery grounds in Section 29 and Fractional Section 30 in Township 11 North, Range 9 West of the Sixth P.M., known as the "Old Cemetery," shall be vacated as driveways. Such streets and alleys, so vacated, shall hereafter be known as "A" lots, and shall be designated by the number of the lot lying east thereof, with the addition of the letter "A", thus, lot number "1A", and so on, and for pricing purposes shall be considered as half lots in size.


 
CHAPTER 11

RESERVED

 

Chapter 11 Repealed by Ordinance No. 9053, effective 7-26-2006.

CHAPTER 12

CIVIL SERVICE

 

§12-1.  Terms; Defined
               "Civil Service Act" shall mean the Civil Service Act of the State of Nebraska, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-1825, et seq., as amended.

               "Commission" shall mean the Civil Service Commission of the City of Grand Island.

               "Mayor" shall mean the Mayor of the City of Grand Island and shall include any person acting in the capacity of the office.

 

§12-2.  Appointing Authority
               The appointing authority of the City of Grand Island for the positions of Police Chief and Fire Chief is the Mayor of the City of Grand Island with the approval of the City Council.  The appointing authority for all other positions is the Mayor of the City of Grand Island.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9389, effective 07-17-2012

 

§12-3.  Civil Service Commission Created
               There is hereby created a Civil Service Commission of the City of Grand Island pursuant to the Civil Service Act. Said Commission shall have three (3) members who shall qualify, be appointed, and serve as provided by the Civil Service Act.

 

§12-4.  Commission's Powers and Duties
               The Commission shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations, exercise powers, and perform duties as provided by the Civil Service Act.

 

§12-5.  Civil Service Positions
               The following official job classification titles are designated for employment positions subject to the Civil Service Act:

Police Department:

Police Chief
Police Captain

Police Lieutenant

Police Sergeant
Police Officer

Fire Department:

Fire Chief
Fire Division Chief

Fire Shift Commander
Fire Captain
Fire Fighter EMT-P
Fire Fighter EMT-B

               The number of employment positions within each job classification shall be as from time to time determined by the Mayor. The Mayor shall have the authority to create additional employment positions and to eliminate any or all employment positions in each said job classification except Police Chief and Fire Chief.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9253, effective 03-24-10

Amended by Ordinance No. 9429, effective 06-04-13

Amended by Ordinance No. 9741, effective 07-24-19

 

§12-6.  Compensation
               The salary and compensation range of all civil service job classifications shall be established by the general salary ordinance of the City. The salary and compensation of each employee shall be within the applicable range of the employee's job classification. Movement of an employee's salary and compensation upward or downward within the applicable range shall not be considered an appointment, promotion, removal, suspension, demotion, or discharge.

 

§12-7.  Disciplinary Actions; Defined
            The various disciplinary actions shall be divided into classes as follows:

               (A)  Class I - Termination; suspension without pay for more than thirty (30) days; demotion of more than one (1) job classification rank.

               (B)  Class II - Suspension without pay for thirty (30) days or less; demotion of one (1) job classification rank.

               (C)  Class III - Reduction of salary or compensation not exceeding one (1) pay step within the applicable salary or compensation range established for the employee's job classification.

               (D)  Class IV - Written reprimand filed in employee's permanent personnel file.

               Disciplinary actions do not include: layoffs; denial of leave requests, promotions or pay increases; changes in shifts, work hours, or work schedules; decreases in pay or benefits made pursuant to collective bargaining; terminations or demotions during an employee's probationary period; temporary duty assignments to a different job classification.

 

§12-8.  Disciplinary Actions; Procedure
               (1)  The Mayor is authorized to impose disciplinary actions of all classes.

               (2)  The chief of the department and/or the police captain, the fire operation division chief, the fire training division chief, or the fire prevention division chief are authorized to impose Class IV disciplinary actions upon employees of the department.

§12-9.  Disciplinary Actions; Reasons
               (1)  Class I and Class II disciplinary actions may be based upon any of the reasons set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-1832, as amended.

               (2)  Class III disciplinary actions may be based upon any of the reasons set forth in subparagraphs one (1) through five (5) inclusive of Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-1832, as amended.

               (3)  Class IV disciplinary actions may be based upon departmental, Commission, or City rules, regulations, policies or procedures, as determined necessary and appropriate by the chief of the department, and/or the police captain, the fire operation division chief, the fire training division chief, or the fire prevention division chief.

§12-10.  Disciplinary Actions; Classes I and II
               Prior to imposition of a Class I or Class II disciplinary action, an Accusation shall be prepared and signed by the chief of the department, the Mayor, or any citizen or taxpayer, stating the act, duty, conduct or situation causing consideration of disciplinary action and the reason or reasons which authorize the disciplinary action under the Civil Service Act. A copy of the Accusation shall be delivered to the employee either personally or by delivery to the employee's last known place of residence at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to imposition of the disciplinary action. The time and date of delivery shall be stated on the copy of the Accusation.

 

§12-11.  Disciplinary Actions; Election
               Upon receipt of an Accusation for disciplinary action the employee may elect to waive further Civil Service Act rights and proceed under the Personnel Rules of the City of Grand Island. Such election shall be made in writing within 72 hours after delivery of the Accusation.

 

§12-12.  Disciplinary Actions; Class II Response
               When the Accusation states a proposed Class II disciplinary action, the employee shall have seventy-two (72) hours after delivery of the Accusation to file a written response thereto in the office of the Mayor. After the 72 hour period, the Mayor shall review the investigation, the Accusation, and the response, and shall make a determination to dismiss the Accusation, modify the disciplinary action, impose the disciplinary action or order preparation of a new Accusation. Notice of the determination shall be given to the employee in writing, either personally or by United States mail.

 

§12-13.  Disciplinary Actions; Class I; Hearing
               Upon delivery of an Accusation stating a proposed Class I disciplinary action, the employee shall be placed on administrative leave with pay. Such administrative leave with pay shall continue until a final determination of the Accusation is made by the Mayor, not to exceed twenty (20) days. This provision for automatic leave with pay shall not apply to an Accusation which has not been signed by the chief of the department or the Mayor.

               The employee shall have seventy-two (72) hours after delivery of an Accusation to request a hearing before the Mayor. Such request shall be in writing and delivered to the office of the Mayor.

               Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the Mayor shall within five (5) days cause to be set a time and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the request for hearing. The hearing shall be conducted informally. The supervisory official, department head, city attorney, or city administrator shall present an oral or written statement or statements of the information and reasons supporting disciplinary action. Such statements shall be limited to a total time of one (1) hour or less. The accused employee, the employee's representative, or other persons on the employee's behalf, may present an oral or written statement or statements in response to the proposed disciplinary action. Oral statements shall be limited to a total time of one (1) hour or less.

               After 72 hours, if no hearing is requested, or upon conclusion of the hearing, the Mayor shall make a determination to dismiss the Accusation, modify the disciplinary action, impose the disciplinary action, or order preparation of a new Accusation. Notice of the determination shall be given to the employee in writing, either personally or by United States mail.

 

§12-14.  Disciplinary Actions; Review
               (1)  Class I and Class II disciplinary actions may be investigated and heard by the Commission pursuant to the Civil Service Act.

               (2)  Class III and Class IV disciplinary actions shall not be subject to investigation or hearing before the Commission. The procedures governing notice, response, and review of Class III and Class IV disciplinary actions shall be as provided in the Personnel Rules of the City of Grand Island.

 

§12-15.  Commission Investigation; Demand
               Upon issuance of a determination by the Mayor imposing a Class I or Class II disciplinary action, the Mayor shall cause a copy of the Accusation and the determination to be filed with the Commission's secretary. Upon filing of a timely demand for investigation of the action, which demand shall be made within ten (10) days after being notified by the appointing authority of such discipline, the Commission's secretary shall cause copies of the Accusation, determination, and demand for investigation to be delivered to each Commission member.

 

§12-16.  Commission Investigation; Time
               Upon receipt of the demand for investigation, the chairperson of the Commission shall set a time and date for filing investigation documents which shall be within ten days after filing of the demand for investigation. Notice shall be delivered to the City Attorney and the subject employee.

 

§12-17.  Commission Investigation; Documents
               All investigation documents shall be filed with the Commission's secretary at or before the time stated, with copies to the opposing party.

               The investigation documents shall include a list of all witnesses to be called by the party with a summary of the witnesses' pertinent testimony, a copy of all documents, correspondence, records, files, and other materials to be offered at the hearing, a list of all statutes, cases, ordinances, rules and regulations to be offered in support of a position and subpoenas for all persons requiring subpoena for attendance at the Commission hearing.

               The Commission secretary shall deliver to each Commission member a copy of all investigation documents. The investigation of the Commission shall be completed by delivery of the investigation documents. No additional documents or witnesses shall be offered at the hearing by either party except for good cause shown.

 

§12-18.  Commission Hearing; Notice
               After receipt of a demand for investigation, the chairperson of the Commission shall set a time, date, and place for hearing. Such date shall be subsequent to the date for completion of the investigation and shall be in accordance with the Civil Service Act. Notice shall be delivered to the City Attorney and the subject employee at least five (5) days prior to the hearing.

 

§12-19.  Commission Hearing; Procedure
               The hearing before the Commission shall be conducted in accordance with the Civil Service Act. The parties to the hearing shall be the City of Grand Island and the employee subject to disciplinary action. All evidence shall be submitted under oath and subject to cross-examination. The hearing shall be transcribed by a qualified court reporter.

CHAPTER 13

DOWNTOWN AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS

Article I. Downtown Improvement and Parking District

 

§13-1.  Creation of District
               There is hereby created and established a Downtown Improvement and Parking District in the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, with the following boundaries, to wit:

Beginning at the intersection of Sycamore Street and First Street; thence westerly on First Street to Pine Street; thence southerly on Pine Street to the southerly boundary of Courthouse Addition; thence westerly along the southerly boundary of Courthouse Addition to Locust Street; thence westerly on Division Street to Walnut Street; thence northerly on Walnut Street to the alley between Division Street and First Street; thence westerly on said alley to Cedar Street; thence northerly on Cedar Street to the alley between Second Street and Third Street; thence westerly on said alley to Elm Street; thence northerly on Elm Street to a point 40 feet north of the southerly right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad; thence easterly parallel to and 40 feet from said right-of-way line to Walnut Street; thence northerly on Walnut Street to a point 100 feet north of the northerly right-of-way line of South Front Street; thence easterly parallel to and 100 feet from said right-of-way line to Kimball Avenue extended; thence southerly on Kimball Avenue extended and Kimball Avenue to the alley between Third Street and Second Street; thence southerly on Sycamore Street to the point of beginning.

 

§13-2.  Tax
               Business and professional offices located within the boundaries of the Downtown Improvement and Parking District shall be subject to the additional tax as provided herein.

 

§13-3.  Tax Rate
               The annual rate of the general license and occupation tax and classification of businesses shall be as follows:

(1)  $0.1702 per square foot floor space upon all space used for business and professional offices in the district; provided,

(2)  $61.65 minimum annual tax for any single business or professional office should the tax rate under (1) above be less than $61.65.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8839, effective 10-1-2003
Amended by Ordinance No. 8934, effective 10-1-2004
Amended by Ordinance No. 9004, effective 10-1-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9139, effective 10-1-2007

Amended by Ordinance No. 9185, effective 10-1-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9234, effective 10-1-2009

Amended by Ordinance No. 9270, effective 10-1-2010

Amended by Ordinance No. 9319, effective 10-1-2011

Amended by Ordinance No. 9398, effective 10-1-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9445, effective 10-1-2013

Amended by Ordinance No. 9496, effective 10-1-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9603, effective 10-1-2016

Amended by Ordinance No. 9650, effective 10-1-2017

 

§13-4.  Use of Revenue
               The proposed uses to this additional revenue derived from the imposition of a general business license and occupation tax on businesses and users of the space within the district, are as follows:

        (1) The acquisition, construction, maintenance, administration, and operation of public off-street parking facilities for the benefit of the district area.

        (2) Improvement and decoration of any public place in the district area.

        (3) Promotion of public events which are to take place on or in public places in the district area.

        (4) Creation and implementing of a plan for improving the general architectural design of public areas in the district area.

        (5) The development of any public activities in the district area.

        (6) Any other project or undertaking for the betterment of the public facilities in the district area, whether the project be capital or noncapital in nature.

 

§13-5.  Occupations Taxed
               The license and occupation tax shall be fair, equitable, and uniform as to class and shall be based primarily on the square footage of the owner's or user's place of business or professional office space. License and occupation tax shall be collected from each user of space within the district based upon the square foot space wherein customers, patients, or clients, or other invitees, are received, and space from time to time used or available for use in connection with the business or profession of the user. Rooms or floor space not open to and not used by customers, patients, clients, or other invitees, shall be excluded from computation of floor space, to wit:

        (1) Hallways used by the public to gain access to more than one user of space within a building.

        (2) Elevators.

        (3) Stairways.

        (4) Employees lounges and coffee rooms.

        (5) Warehouse and storage areas, including used car lots.

        (6) Private parking spaces and driveways.

        (7) Furnace rooms.

        (8) Religious organization property excluded from paying general real estate taxes by Hall County Board of Equalization.

        (9) Space owned or used by political subdivisions.

        (10) Residences used for residential purposes for more than 30 days prior to the date of any taxes due under this ordinance.

        (11) Private kitchens.

        (12) Utilities areas.

        (13) Maintenance closets.

        (14) Shipping and receiving areas.

        (15) Restrooms.

        (16) Restricted manufacturing areas.

        (17) Restricted equipment areas.

 

§13-6.  Tax Computation
               The city treasurer is authorized and directed, with the advice and recommendations of the Downtown Improvement Board, to determine and compute the tax in accordance herewith.

 

§13-7.  Objection to Taxes
               Objections to the determination of amount of additional tax may be made in writing to the city clerk, specifying the basis of such objection. All such objections shall be made within 30 days after due date thereof, or shall be deemed waived. All timely objections shall be submitted to the Downtown Improvement Board for its consideration, review, and recommendations. The mayor and city council shall make the final determination of all such objections, at any regular or special meeting, after notice thereof to said objector.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8793, effective 2-12-2003

 

§13-8.  Annual Tax
               The license and occupation tax imposed by the preceding sections is a non-refundable annual tax and shall be due and payable on the first day of October each year, commencing October 1, 1996, for the year in advance. The license and occupation tax shall be based on businesses and professional offices located within the Business Improvement and Parking District No. 1 as shown in the records of the City of Grand Island Utility Department as of the first day of June of each year. Upon payment thereof to the city treasurer, the treasurer shall give a receipt therefor, properly dated and specifying the person paying, the name of the business or profession on whose behalf the tax is being paid, the amount thereof, and for what period the tax is paid. It is hereby made the duty of every person, partnership, firm, or corporation, engaged in carrying on any business or occupation within the limits of the district as provided on which a license and occupation tax is levied by this ordinance, to pay said tax at the times provided for its payment herein.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8793, effective 2-12-2003

 

§13-9.  Segregation of Funds
               The city treasurer shall place all taxes collected hereunder in a special fund to be used exclusively for the purposes described in this Article.

 

§13-10.  Penalty
               Any person who shall refuse or neglect to pay the general license or occupation tax levied by this chapter, or who transacts or engages in any profession within the district herein established without having complied with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and may be punished as provided in this Code. Any person, partnership, or corporation whose duty is made by this chapter to pay any license tax and who does not pay the same shall be liable for an action for the recovery of the amount of such license tax; provided, such remedy shall not be deemed as being concurrent with other remedies herein provided.

 

 

Article II. Metered Parking System

 

§13-11.  Metered Parking System
               The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to establish a system of parking meters as herein defined, and to take all actions necessary or appropriate for the acquisition, establishment, erection, maintenance, and operation of such system. The metered parking system shall be operated under the supervision of the Police Department.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8956, effective 3-9-2005

 

§13-12.  Parking Fee - Metered Zone
               The metered zone parking fees set forth in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule are found and determined to be a reasonable fee for those who park vehicles for the specified periods of time in parking spaces designated to be within a Metered Zone between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., on any day except Sunday, or a holiday designated by the mayor.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8777, effective 10-9-2002

 

§13-13.  Parking Fee - Express Zone
               The express zone parking fees set forth in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule are found and determined to be a reasonable fee for those who park vehicles for the specified periods of time in parking spaces designated to be within an Express Zone between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., on any day except Sunday, or a holiday designated by the mayor.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8777, effective 10-9-2002

 

§13-14.  Time Metering and Billing
               A City parking attendant shall monitor the parking of vehicles within designated Metered Zones and Express Zones and shall meter the time a vehicle is parked within a space in such zones. If a vehicle is parked for a period of time which incurs a parking fee, the parking attendant shall place a deposit envelope upon the vehicle stating the amount of the fee due.

 

§13-15.  Responsibility of Vehicle Owner
               The registered owner of any vehicle parked within a Metered Zone or Express Zone shall be responsible for the payment of all parking fees incurred by such vehicle.

 

§13-16.  Fees Payment; Delinquent; Collection
               Fees may be paid by placing the amount of the fee due in the deposit envelope and depositing the envelope in a City parking fee deposit box, or by delivering or mailing same to the city treasurer. All parking fees shall be due immediately as accrued and shall become delinquent seven (7) days thereafter. Fees not paid within thirty (30) days shall be referred to the city attorney for collection.

 

§13-17.  Congested Parking Area
               The following areas of the City are found and determined to be areas where congestion of vehicular traffic is such that the public convenience and safety require regulation of parking by a parking meter system:

        (A) Third Street between Elm Street and Sycamore Street;

        (B) Second Street between Elm Street and Pine Street;

        (C) Cedar Street between Second Street and Third Street;

        (D) Walnut Street between First Street and South Front Street;

        (E) Wheeler Street between First Street and Third Street;

        (F) Locust Street between First Street and South Front Street;

        (G) Pine Street between Second Street and South Front Street;

        (H) The southern most row of parking stalls in the public parking lot on the south side of South Front Street and east of vacated Wheeler Street;

        (I) The public parking lot on the north side of Second Street and Walnut Street;

        (J) The western most row of parking stalls in the public parking lot on the east side of Pine Street, south of South Front Street; and

        (K) The north side of First Street between Wheeler Avenue and Sycamore Street.

All city-owned parking spaces located within said congested parking area shall be designated Metered Zone or Express Zone and subject to the parking meter system except those parking spaces reserved for handicapped parking only. One or more Express Zone spaces shall be located on each side of each block of on-street parking within the congested area and shall be designated by posted signs and/or pavement markings.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8777, effective 10-9-2002

 

§13-17.1.  Special Employer/Employee and Residential Parking Permit
               A special parking permit may be issued to employers and employees of certain businesses and for residents of the downtown area for use at the 2-hour parking lot located on the north side of the 300 block of West Second Street, commonly known as the "Chamber Lot" under the following conditions:

        (A) Employers must have a business, and employees must be employed by a business whose street addresses are in the following blocks:  the 100 and 200 blocks of North Wheeler Street; the 100 and 200 block of North Walnut Street; the 200, 300 and 400 blocks of West Second Street, and the south side of the 300 block of West Third Street.

        (B) Residents of the downtown area must have a residential address with a street address in the following blocks: the 100 and 200 blocks of North Wheeler Street; the 100 and 200 blocks of North Walnut Street; the 200, 300 and 400 blocks of West Second Street, and the south side of the 300 block of West Third Street.

        (C) Applicants requesting an Employer/Employee Parking permit must pay a nonrefundable fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule for each parking permit. Each parking permit commences upon issuance and expires on December 31 of each year. Application for or renewal of each parking permit requires the completion of an application form, the approval of such application, and payment of the fee set forth in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. Applications for renewal of the parking permit shall be made with the Grand Island Police Department.

        (D) The parking permit provided by the Downtown Improvement Board must be placed on the rearview mirror and must be visible at all times while the vehicle is parked in the "Chamber Lot".

        (E) The parking permit is valid in the "Chamber Lot" only.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8956, effective 3-9-2005

 

§13-18.  Traffic and Safety Fund
               There is hereby established a Traffic and Safety Fund. All parking fees collected shall be deposited by the city treasurer into said fund. The Traffic and Safety Fund shall be appropriated and expended as follows: first, for the purpose of the acquisition, establishment, erection, maintenance, and operation of the parking meter system; second, for the purpose of making the system effective; and third, for the expenses incurred by and throughout the City in the regulation and limitation of vehicular parking, traffic relating to parking, traffic safety devices, signs, signals, markings, policing, lights, traffic surveys, and safety programs.

 

§13-19.  Immobilization Authorized
               Any vehicle which has incurred parking fees which remain unpaid thirty-one (31) or more days after becoming due may be subject to immobilization and impoundment in the manner and form provided in this Article and Chapter 22, Article VII, Division 3 of this Code. Immobilization of an offending vehicle shall be accomplished by the Police Department applying a device to one or more of the vehicles wheels. The vehicle shall be released upon payment of all parking fees incurred by such vehicle and due prior to immobilization.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8956, effective 3-9-2005

 

§13-20.  Impoundment After 24 Hours
               In the event a vehicle has been immobilized for 24 hours or more and the parking fees remain unpaid, the vehicle shall be removed and impounded by the Police Department in accordance with Chapter 22, Article VII, Division 3 of this Code. The vehicle shall be discharged or removed from impoundment upon payment by the owner, operator, or driver of such impounded vehicle of the parking fees, plus impoundment fees and towing and storage charges. Further, no vehicle shall be released from impoundment unless the vehicle is in compliance with the motor vehicle registration statutes of the State of Nebraska.

 

§13-21.  Policies and Procedures
               The Downtown Improvement Board is authorized to promulgate and adopt such polices as are reasonable and are prudent to carry out the purposes of this Code, including but not limited to establishing a minimum amount of delinquent parking fees which may be incurred by a vehicle prior to enforcement action, as well as immobilization, impoundment, and receipt of payment procedures.

 


 

Article III. Reserved

 

§13-22.  Reserved
§13-23.  Reserved
§13-24.  Reserved
§13-25.  Reserved
§13-26.  Reserved
§13-27.  Reserved
§13-28.  Reserved
§13-29.  Reserved

 

Article IV.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 9180, effective 09-16-2008

RESERVED

§13-30.  Reserved
§13-31.  Reserved
§13-32.  Reserved
§13-33.  Reserved
§13-34.  Reserved
§13-35.  Reserved

§13-36.  Reserved
§13-37.  Reserved
§13-38.  Reserved
§13-39.  Reserved

 

Article V.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 9187, effective 10-01-2008

RESERVED

 

§13-40.  Reserved.
§13-41.  Reserved
§13-42.  Reserved
§13-43.  Reserved
§13-44.  Reserved
§13-45.  Reserved
§13-46.  Reserved
§13-47.  Reserved
§13-48.  Reserved
§13-49.  Reserved

 

Article VI.  Right-of-Way Usage Regulations
 

§13-50.  Sidewalk Usage; Regulations
               All sidewalk displays, sandwich board signs, vending carts, and sidewalk cafes located within or directly abutting Business Improvement District No. 2 shall comply with Public Right-of-Way Usage Regulations to be promulgated and adopted by the Downtown Business Improvement District Board. Copies of the Public Right-of-Way Usage Regulations shall be on file with the City Clerk, and shall be available for public inspection.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8956, effective 3-9-2005

 

§13-51.  Reserved
§13-52.  Reserved
§13-53.  Reserved
§13-54.  Reserved

 

 

Article VII.  Parking Ramp Regulations
 

§13-55.  Parking Ramp Regulations
               The Downtown Improvement Board is authorized to promulgate, subject to the approval and adoption by the City Council, such regulations and rates as are necessary and convenient to lease to the public the parking spaces in the public parking ramp on the east side of Locust Street, north of First Street. Said regulations and rates shall be enacted by resolution. The rates shall be set forth in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§13-56.  Reserved
§13-57.  Reserved
§13-58.  Reserved
§13-59.  Reserved

 

 

Article VIII. Business Improvement District No. 4

 

§13-60.  Creation of District
               There is hereby created and established a business improvement district pursuant to Chapter 19, Article 40, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as amended to be known as Business Improvement District No. 4 of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

 

§13-61.  Purpose
The purpose, public improvements and facilities to be included in said district shall be:

               (A) Improvement of any public place or facility in the district area, including landscaping, physical improvements for decoration or security purposes, and plantings and maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of any improvements or facilities authorized by the Business Improvement District Act, including, but not limited to, maintenance and improvement of the landscaped greenway; maintenance, repair, improvement and replacement of the sprinkler system in the greenway; regular mowing and trimming of the greenway; all facets of the purchase, care and replacement of trees, shrubs and grass and other decorative improvements; snow removal from the sidewalks parallel to S. Locust; purchase of equipment, materials, supplies or other expenses to accomplish the purposes of the district, and other incidental or ongoing expense as needed for the maintenance, improvement and beautification of the green belt area.

               (B) Employing or contracting for personnel, including administrators for any improvement program under the act, and providing for any service as may be necessary or proper to carry out the purposes of the act, including, but not limited to, employment of or contracting for personnel to accomplish the purposes of the district and to accomplish the goals and objectives of the Business Improvement Board of the district.

 

§13-62.  District Boundaries
The outer boundaries of Business Improvement District No. 4 are described as follows:

Beginning at the southeast corner of Section Twenty One (21), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P.M. in Grand Island, Hall County, Nebraska; thence west on the south line of Section 21-11-9 for a distance of One Hundred (100.0) feet; thence north on a line One Hundred (100.0) feet west of and parallel with the line common to Section 21-11-9 and Section 22-11-9 to the north line of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of Section 21-11-9; thence east on the north line of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of Section 21-11-9 and the north line of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of Section 22-11-9 for a distance of Two Hundred (200.0) feet; thence south on a line One Hundred (100.0) feet east of and parallel to the line common to Section 21-11-9 and Section 22-11-9 to the south line of Section 22-11-9; thence west on the south line of Section 22-11-9 for a distance of One Hundred (100.0) feet to the point of beginning.

 

 

§13-63.  Special Assessments
The real property located within the boundaries of Business Improvement District No. 4 shall be subject to special assessment as authorized by Chapter 19, Article 40, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as amended, also known as the Business Improvement District Act.

 

§13-64.  Assessment Method
The method of assessment to be imposed within said district shall be as follows:

        (A) On or before the first day of July in each year, a proposed budget shall be prepared for Business Improvement District No. 4 for the ensuing fiscal year to commence on the first day of October and end on the following last day of September.

        (B) Said proposed budget shall be considered by the city council during open session at the second regularly scheduled city council meeting in July. Following such consideration, a proposed assessment schedule shall be prepared.

        (C) The amount of the special assessment for each property shall be calculated in accordance with the following formula:

   (i) The front footage of the individual real property adjacent to South Locust Street within the district divided by the total front footage of all assessable property in the district times the total special assessment equals individual special assessment.

   (ii) The record owners of the front footages to be used in the above formula shall be the owners, as shown in the office of the Hall County Register of Deeds, in effect on the first day of January of the current year.

        (D) Notice of the proposed assessment shall be published as required by Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-4030, as amended.

        (E) The city council, sitting as a Board of Equalization, shall levy the special assessments on all properties at one time, in accordance with the method of assessment provided above. If the city council finds that the proposed method of assessment does not provide a fair and equitable method of apportioning costs, then it may  assess the costs under such method as the city council finds to be fair and equitable.

        (F) Said assessments shall be payable in one installment to become delinquent fifty (50) days after the date of such levy. Delinquent payments shall draw interest at the rate specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. §45-104.01, as amended. All special assessments shall be liens upon the property assessed.

 

§13-65.  Disestablishment; Procedure
In the event requests to disestablish this business improvement district are filed with the city clerk within any thirty (30) day period by record owners over fifty percent (50%) of the assessable units in the district, as shown in the office of the Hall County Register of Deeds on the first day of January of the current year, the city council may disestablish the district by ordinance after a hearing before the city council. The city council shall adopt a resolution of intention to disestablish the area at least fifteen days prior to the hearing. The resolution shall give the time and place of the hearing. After the hearing, the city council may disestablish the district as provided in the Business Improvement District Act.

 

§13-66.  Reserved

§13-67.  Reserved

§13-68.  Reserved

§13-69.  Reserved

§13-70.  Reserved

 

 

Article IX.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 9180, effective 09-16-2008

RESERVED

 

Article X. Business Improvement District No. 6

 

§13-71. Creation of District

               There is hereby created and established a business improvement district pursuant to Chapter 19, Article 40, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as amended, to be known as Business Improvement District No. 6 of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

 

§13-72.  Purpose

               The purpose, public improvements and facilities to be included in said district shall be:

               (A) Improvement of any public place or facility in the district area, including landscaping, physical improvements for decoration or security purposes, and plantings and maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of any improvements or facilities authorized by the Business Improvement District Act, including, but not limited to: maintenance and improvement of the landscaped greenway; maintenance, repair, improvement and replacement of the sprinkler system in the greenway; regular mowing and trimming of the greenway; all facets of the purchase, care and replacement of trash receptacles, benches, welcome signs, streetscape improvements, trees, shrubs and grass and other decorative improvements; snow removal from the sidewalks parallel to Second Street; employment of or contracting for personnel, purchase of equipment, materials, supplies or other expenses to accomplish the purposes of the district; other incidental or ongoing expenses as needed for the maintenance, improvement and beautification of the green belt area and to accomplish the goals and objectives of the Business Improvement Board of the district.

               (B) The district may employ or contract for personnel for any improvement program under the act, and providing for any service as may be necessary or proper to carry out the purposes of the act, including, but not limited to, activities, projects, staff, consulting services, materials, equipment, supplies, and services necessary or convenient for the management of the affairs of the business improvement district, to include budget development and supervision, representation of the interests of the district to public and private entities, research, development, travel, training, development and implementation of business and residential recruitment and retention projects, downtown beautification projects and activities which contribute to regaining, sustaining or improving the economic health and viability of the district and the implementation of the goals and objectives of the Business Improvement Board.

               (C) Any other project or undertaking for the betterment of the public facilities in the district area, whether the project be capital or noncapital in nature.

 

§13-73.  District Boundaries

               The outer boundaries of Business Improvement District No. 6 are described as follows:

 

Beginning at a point on the Westerly line of Eddy Street, said point being One Hundred Thirty- Two Feet (132') Southeast of the Intersection of the Southerly line of Second Street and the Westerly line of Eddy Street; thence Westerly on a line One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132') Southeast and parallel to the Southerly line of Second Street to a point Sixty-Six Feet (66') Northeast of the Easterly line of Greenwich Street; thence Southerly on a line Sixty-Six Feet (66') Northeast of and parallel to the Easterly line of Greenwich Street to the Northerly line of First Street; thence Westerly on the Northerly line of First Street to a point Sixty-Six Feet (66') Southwest of the Westerly line of Greenwich Street; thence Northerly on a line Sixty-Six Feet (66') Southwest of and parallel to the Westerly line of Greenwich Street to a point One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132') Southeast of the Southerly line of Second Street; thence Westerly on a line One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132') Southeast of and parallel to the Southerly line of Second Street to a point Sixty-Six Feet (66') Northeast of Broadwell Avenue; thence Southerly on a line Sixty-Six Feet (66') Northeast of and parallel to the Easterly line of Broadwell Avenue to the Northerly line of First Street; thence Westerly on the Northerly line of First Street to a point One hundred thirty- five and sixty-nine hundredths Feet (135.69') Southwest of the Westerly line of Broadwell Avenue; thence Northerly on a line One hundred thirty-five and sixty-nine hundredths Feet (135.69') Southwest of and parallel to the Westerly line of Broadwell Avenue Sixty-five and seventy-six hundredths feet (65.76’); thence Westerly on a line parallel to the Northerly line of First Street twenty-three Feet (23’); thence Northerly on a line parallel to the Westerly line of Broadwell Avenue to a point One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132') Southeast of the South line of Second Street; thence Westerly on a line One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132') Southeast of and parallel to the Southerly line of Second Street to the Easterly line of Garfield Avenue; thence Northerly on the Easterly line of Garfield Avenue to a point One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132') Northwest of the Northerly line of Second Street; thence Easterly on a line One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132') Northwest of and parallel to the Northerly line of Second Street to a point Sixty-Six Feet (66') Southwest of the Westerly line of Broadwell Avenue; thence Northerly on a line Sixty-Six Feet (66') Southwest of and parallel to the Westerly line of Broadwell Avenue to the Southerly line of Union Pacific Railroad Right-of-Way; thence Easterly on the Southerly line of Union Pacific Railroad to a point Sixty-Six Feet (66') Northeast of the Easterly line of Broadwell Avenue; thence Southerly on a line Sixty-Six Feet (66') Northeast of and parallel to the Easterly line of Broadwell Avenue to a point One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132') Northwest of the Northerly line of Second Street; thence Easterly on a line One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132') Northwest of and parallel to the Northerly line of Second Street to the Westerly line of Eddy Street; thence Southeast on the Westerly line of Eddy Street to the point of beginning.

 

Commonly owned properties that are intersected by a boundary line establishing the district shall be considered as entirely within the district unless otherwise determined by the City Council when sitting as a Board of Equalization.

 

§13-74.  Special Assessments

               The real property located within the boundaries of Business Improvement District No. 6 shall be subject to special assessment as authorized by Chapter 19, Article 40, Sections 19-4015 through 19-4038, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as amended, also known as the Business Improvement District Act.


 

§13-75.  Assessment Method

               The method of assessment to be imposed within said district shall be as follows:

               (A) In a timely fashion each year, except the initial creating year, a proposed budget shall be prepared for Business Improvement District No. 6 for the ensuing fiscal year to commence on the first day of October and end on the following last day of September.

               (B) Said proposed budget shall be considered by the city council during open session at a regularly scheduled city council meeting. Following such consideration, a proposed assessment schedule shall be prepared.

               (C) The amount of the special assessment for each property shall be based upon the special benefits to the property as fairly and equitably assessed by the City Council and calculated in accordance with the following formula: 

               The assessments shall be levied annually as the front footage of the individual real property within the district calculated as the distance between the furthest east line and the furthest west line of each parcel divided by total front footage calculated in the same fashion of all assessable property in the district times the total special assessment equals individual special assessment. The record owners of the front footages to be used in the above formula shall be the owners, as shown in the office of the Hall County Register of Deeds, in effect on the first day of

January of the current year. Based upon the recommendation of the Business Improvement District Board, properties within the district not immediately adjacent to Second Street will be assessed at 0% of front footage in the first year but may receive special benefit is subsequent years for projects along side streets. Owners of property exempt from ad valorem taxes are encouraged to support District activities, promotions, and improvements but property exempt

from ad valorem taxes will not be subject to special assessment for this Business Improvement District. Property owned by the Federal Government, the State of Nebraska and political subdivisions thereof shall not be subject to special assessment for this Business Improvement District.

               (D) The proposed district shall become effective on October 1, 2008 for a period of five years to terminate on September 30, 2013. The estimated total annual budget for costs and expenses of the work to be performed within such district during the first year totals $43,800. The estimated total first-year budget by area of work is as follows:

                              Beautification $38,500

                              Administration and maintenance $ 5,300

In the subsequent four years, the maximum amount of annual assessment and annual budget for the district may be more or less than the first year assessment and budget amounts but the total budgeted assessment and expenditures will not exceed $183,600 during the 5 year term of the District, the same being the estimated costs of all projects and maintenance requirements. The assessments levied for the first year shall not exceed $43,800. The specific  improvements for the first year are listed for purposes of estimating the costs and expenses of performing the proposed work and improvements. Although the district is proposed for a five- year period, the City council, after public hearing, shall approve an annual budget for specific improvements in each succeeding year consistent with the ordinance creating the district. The City Council retains the authority to change, modify and remove proposed improvements; however, the proposed improvements cannot exceed the scope of improvements and the annual assessment cannot exceed the maximum amounts of the annual assessment as provided by the ordinance creating

the district.

               (E) Notice of the proposed assessment shall be published as required by NE. Rev. Statutes Section 19-4030, as amended.

               (F) The city council, sitting as a Board of Equalization, shall levy the special assessments on all properties at one time, in accordance with the method of assessment provided above. If the city council finds that the proposed method of assessment does not provide a fair and equitable method of apportioning costs, then it may assess the costs under such method as the city council finds to be fair and equitable.

               (G) Said assessments shall be payable in one installment to be come delinquent fifty (50) days after the date of such levy. Delinquent payments shall draw interest at the rate specified in NE. Rev. Statutes Section 45-104.01, as amended. All special assessments provided herein shall be a lien on the property assessed superior and prior to all other liens except general taxes and other special assessments which shall be of equal priority. Liens for special assessments may be foreclosed and are subject to interest at the statutory rate when payment of the assessment is delinquent as provided by law. No special assessment made hereunder shall be void for any irregularity, defect, error or informality in procedure, in levy or equalization thereof.

 

§13-76.  Disestablishment Procedure

               In the event requests to disestablish this business improvement district are made and filed with the city clerk within any (30) day period by owners of real property representing fifty percent (50%) or more of the total value of the real property within the district as shown in the office of the Hall County Assessor on the first day of January of the current year, the city council may disestablish the district by ordinance after a hearing before the city council. The city council shall adopt a resolution of intention to disestablish the area at least fifteen days prior to the hearing.  The resolution shall give the time and place of the hearing. After hearing, the city council may disestablish the district as provided in the Business Improvement District Act.

Added by Ordinance No. 9186, effective 09-24-2008

 

§13-77.  Reserved
§13-78.  Reserved
§13-79.  Reserved
§13-80.  Reserved

 

ARTICLE XI. Business Improvement District No. 7

 

§13-81.  Creation of District

               There is hereby created and established a business improvement district pursuant to Chapter 19, Article 40, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as amended, to be known as Business Improvement District No. 7 of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

 

§13-82.  Purpose

               The purpose, public improvements and facilities to be included in said district shall be:

               (A) Improvement of any public place or facility in the district area, including landscaping, physical improvements for decoration or security purposes, and plantings and maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of any improvements or facilities authorized by the Business Improvement District Act, including, but not limited to: maintenance and improvement of the landscaped greenway; maintenance, repair, improvement and replacement of the sprinkler system in the greenway; regular mowing and trimming of the greenway; all facets of the purchase, care and replacement of trash receptacles, benches, welcome signs, streetscape improvements, trees, shrubs and grass and other decorative improvements; snow removal from the sidewalks parallel to S. Locust; employment of or contracting for personnel, purchase of equipment, materials, supplies or other expenses to accomplish the purposes of the district; other incidental or ongoing expenses as needed for the maintenance, improvement and beautification of the green belt area and to accomplish the goals and objectives of the Business Improvement Board of the district.

               (B) The district may employ or contract for personnel for any improvement program under the act, and providing for any service as may be necessary or proper to carry out the purposes of the act, including, but not limited to, activities, projects, staff, consulting services, materials, equipment, supplies, and services necessary or convenient for the management of the affairs of the business improvement district, to include budget development and supervision, representation of the interests of the district to public and private entities, research, development, travel, training, development and implementation of business and residential recruitment and retention projects, downtown beautification projects and activities which contribute to regaining, sustaining or improving the economic health and viability of the district and the implementation of the goals and objectives of the Business Improvement Board.

               (C) Any other project or undertaking for the betterment of the public facilities in the district area, whether the project be capital or noncapital in nature.

 

§13-83.  District Boundaries

               The outer boundaries of Business Improvement District No. 7 are described as follows:

 

Beginning at the Southeast corner of Section Twenty-Eight (28), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P.M., Hall County, Nebraska; thence West on the South line of Section Twenty-Eight (28), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P.M. for a distance of Two Hundred Feet (200'); thence Northerly on a line Two Hundred Feet (200') West of and parallel to the East line of Section Twenty-Eight (28), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P.M. to the North line of Section Twenty-Eight (28), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P.M.; thence East on the North line of Section Twenty-Eight (28), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P.M. to the Northeast corner of Section Twenty-Eight (28), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P.M.; thence continuing East on the North line of Section Twenty-Seven (27), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P.M. for a distance of Three Hundred Seventy-Five Feet (375'); thence South on a line Three Hundred Seventy-Five Feet (375') East of and parallel to the West line of Section Twenty-Seven (27), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P.M. to the South line of Section Twenty-Seven (27), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P.M.; thence West on the South line of Section Twenty-Seven (27), Township Eleven (11) North, Range Nine (9) West of the 6th P.M. for a distance of Three Hundred Seventy-Five Feet (375') to the point of beginning.

 

Commonly owned properties that are intersected by a boundary line establishing the district shall be considered as entirely within the district unless otherwise determined by the City Council when sitting as a Board of Equalization.

 

§13-84.  Special Assessments

               The real property located within the boundaries of Business Improvement District No. 7 shall be subject to special assessment as authorized by Chapter 19, Article 40, Sections 19-4015 through 19-4038, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as amended, also known as the Business Improvement District Act.

 

§13-85.  Assessment Method

               The method of assessment to be imposed within said district shall be as follows:

               (A) In a timely fashion each year, except the initial creating year, a proposed budget shall be prepared for Business Improvement District No. 7 for the ensuing fiscal year to commence on the first day of October and end on the following last day of September.

               (B) Said proposed budget shall be considered by the city council during open session at a regularly scheduled city council meeting. Following such consideration, a proposed assessment schedule shall be prepared.

               (C) The amount of the special assessment for each property shall be based upon the special benefits to the property as fairly and equitably assessed by the City Council and calculated in accordance with the following formula:

               The assessments shall be levied annually as the front footage of the individual real property adjacent to S. Locust Street within the district divided by total front footage of all assessable property in the district times the total special assessment equals individual special assessment. The record owners of the front footages to be used in the above formula shall be the owners, as shown in the office of the Hall County Register of Deeds, in effect on the first day of January of the current year. Owners of property exempt from ad valorem taxes are encouraged to support District activities, promotions, and improvements but property exempt from ad valorem taxes will not be subject to special assessment for this Business Improvement District. Property owned by the Federal Government, the State of Nebraska and political subdivisions thereof shall not be subject to special assessment for this Business Improvement District.

               (D) The proposed district shall become effective on October 1, 2008 for a period of five years to terminate on September 30, 2013. The estimated total annual budget for costs and expenses of the work to be performed within such district during the first year totals $45,000. The estimated total first-year budget by area of work is as follows:

                              Beautification $ 4,100

                              Implementation and maintenance $40,900

In the subsequent four years, the maximum amount of annual assessment and annual budget for the district may exceed the first year assessment and budget amounts but the total budgeted assessment and expenditures will not exceed $250,000 during the 5 year term of the District, the same being the estimated costs of all projects and maintenance requirements. The assessments levied for the first year shall not exceed $45,000. The specific improvements for the first year are listed for purposes of estimating the costs and expenses of performing the proposed work and improvements. Although the district is proposed for a five-year period, the City council, after

public hearing, shall approve an annual budget for specific improvements in each succeeding year consistent with the ordinance creating the district. The City Council retains the authority to change, modify and remove proposed improvements; however, the proposed improvements cannot exceed the scope of improvements and the annual assessment cannot exceed the maximum amounts of the annual assessment as provided by the ordinance creating the district.

               (E) Notice of the proposed assessment shall be published as required by NE. Rev. Statutes Section 19-4030, as amended.

               (F) The city council, sitting as a Board of Equalization, shall levy the special assessments on all properties at one time, in accordance with the method of assessment provided above. If the city council finds that the proposed method of assessment does not provide a fair and equitable method of apportioning costs, then it may assess the costs under such method as the city council finds to be fair and equitable.

               (G) Said assessments shall be payable in one installment to be come delinquent fifty (50) days after the date of such levy. Delinquent payments shall draw interest at the rate specified in NE. Rev. Statutes Section 45-104.01, as amended. All special assessments provided herein shall be a lien on the property assessed superior and prior to all other liens except general taxes and other special assessments which shall be of equal priority. Liens for special assessments may be foreclosed and are subject to interest at the statutory rate when payment of the assessment is delinquent as provided by law. No special assessment made hereunder shall be void for any irregularity, defect, error or informality in procedure, in levy or equalization thereof.

 

§13-86.  Disestablishment Procedure

               In the event requests to disestablish this business improvement district are made and filed with the city clerk within any (30) day period by owners of real property representing fifty percent (50%) or more of the total value of the real property within the district as shown in the office of the Hall County Assessor on the first day of January of the current year, the city council may disestablish the district by ordinance after a hearing before the city council. The city council shall adopt a resolution of intention to disestablish the area at least fifteen days prior to the hearing.  The resolution shall give the time and place of the hearing. After hearing, the city council may disestablish the district as provided in the Business Improvement District Act.

               Added by Ordinance No. 9187, effective 09-24-2008

 

§13-87.  Reserved

§13-88.  Reserved

§13-89.  Reserved

§13-90.  Reserved 

 

ARTICLE XII. Business Improvement District No. 8

 

§13-91.  Creation of District

               There is hereby created and established a business improvement district pursuant to Chapter 19, Article 40, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as amended, to be known as Business Improvement District No. 8 of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

 

§13-92.  Purpose

               The purpose, public improvements and facilities to be included in said district shall be:

               (A) Retention and Recruitment. Business Improvement District No. 8 will encourage business retention and recruitment through the planning and implementation of Downtown promotions, continued Main Street commitments and downtown investments to attract the attention of people looking for vibrant and welcoming

places to dine, shop, live, work and play.

               Funds have been allocated for each of the five years for Retention and Recruitment, Main Street Promotions, the Grand Theatre, Main Street Contract; and funding in years 1-3 for the research and development of a Revolving Loan Fund.

               (i) Creation and implementation of a plan for improving the general architectural design of public areas in the district;

               (ii) The development of any public activities and promotion of public events, including the management and promotion and advocacy of retail trade activities or other promotional activities, in the district area, including, but not limited to, plans, creation, development, equipment, supplies, materials, services, management, staff, maintenance and improvement of communication and image building events and activities, such as holiday events, community events, media activities, newsletters, seasonal and special events and parades and other activities for the benefit of the district.

               (B) Downtown Beautification. The beautification component of the Business Improvement District #8 budget is comprised of physical improvements to the District. The Board, through a series of informal and formal discussion with elements in the downtown. By increasing artistic elements, it is believed the personality of the downtown will be strengthened and a sense of place developed.  A consistent approach to adding these artistic elements will enhance the uniqueness of downtown and, at the same time, create a pleasant setting to complement the various activities held in the downtown. These physical improvements include, but are not limited to, Kaufmann Cummings Park, planters, murals, sculptures, trees and grates, signs and banners, benches, streetscape, and trash containers.

                              (i) Improvement of any public place or facility in the district area, including

landscaping, physical improvements for decoration or security purposes, and plantings, including but not limited to, plans, creation, development, equipment, supplies, materials, services, management, staff, maintenance, improvement and associated activities of streetscape and alleyway improvement;

               (ii) Construction or installation of sidewalks, parks, meeting and display facilities, lighting, benches or other seating furniture, sculptures, trash receptacles, shelters, fountains, and any useful or necessary public improvements, including, but not limited to plans, creation, development, equipment, supplies, materials, services, management, staff, maintenance, improvement, and associated activities of streetside and other public area projects;

               (iii) Maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of any improvement's or facilities authorized by the Business Improvement District Act.

               (C) Implementation and Maintenance: The talent and resources vested in this district rely upon the successful completion of each project and careful maintenance of the downtown area to ensure the best possible results from the investments of downtown stakeholders, including this District. To accomplish the duties incumbent upon this District in all areas of work described herein, the district may recruit volunteers or secure labor and services for hire:

               (i) The district may employ or contract for personnel for any improvement program under the act, and providing for any service as may be necessary or proper to carry out the purposes of the act, including, but not limited to, activities, projects, staff, consulting services, materials, equipment, supplies, and services necessary or convenient for the management of the affairs of the business improvement district, to include budget development and supervision, representation of the interests of the district to public and private entities, research, development, travel, training, development and implementation of business and residential recruitment and retention projects, downtown beautification projects and activities which contribute to regaining, sustaining or improving the economic health and viability of the district and the implementation of the goals and objectives of the Business Improvement Board.

               (ii) Any other project or undertaking for the betterment of the public facilities in the district area, whether the project be capital or noncapital in nature.

               (D) Improvements Encroaching Public Right-of-Way: Physical improvements as described in this section that occupy public right-of-way are maintained solely at the sufferance of the City. The City reserves the right and power to require the removal of any such improvement at its sole discretion.

               (i) The Public Works Director shall have the authority to order items removed from the public right of way that compromise the use, construction or maintenance of the public sidewalk, alley or street.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9391, effective 08/14/2012

 

 

§13-93.  District Boundaries

               The outer boundaries of Business Improvement District No. 8 are described as follows:

 

Beginning at a point being the intersection of the South line of Third Street and the West line of Kimball Avenue; thence South on the West line of Kimball Avenue to a point One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132’) South of the South line of First Street; thence West on a line One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132’) South of and parallel to the South line of First Street to the West line of Sycamore Street; thence Southerly on the Westerly line of Sycamore Street to the North line of Court Street; thence Westerly on the North line of Court Street to the West line of Pine Street; thence Southerly on the West line of Pine Street to the North line of Charles Street; thence Westerly on the North line of Charles Street and an extension thereof to the East line of Walnut Street; thence Northerly on the East line of Walnut Street to a point One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132’) North of the North line of Division Street; thence West on a line One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132’) North of and parallel to the North line of Division Street and an extension thereof to the East line of Cedar Street; thence Northerly on the East line of Cedar Street to the South line of First Street; thence West on the South line of First Street to the West line of Elm Street; thence Southerly on the West line of Elm Street for a distance of One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132’); thence Westerly on a line One Hundred Thirty-Two Feet (132’) South of and parallel to the South line of First Street to the East line of Eddy Street; thence Northerly on the East line of Eddy Street to the South line of South Front Street; thence Easterly on the South line of South Front Street to the West line of Oak Street; thence Southerly on the West line of Oak Street to the South line of Third Street; thence Westerly on the South line of Third Street and an extension thereof to the point of beginning.

 

Commonly owned properties that are intersected by a boundary line establishing the district shall be considered as entirely within the district unless otherwise determined by the City Council when sitting as a Board of Equalization.

 

§13-94.  Special Assessments

               The real property located within the boundaries of Business Improvement District No. 5 shall be subject to special assessment as authorized by Chapter 19, Article 40, Sections 19-4015 through 19-4038, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as amended, also known as the Business Improvement District Act.

 

§13-95.  Assessment Method

               The method of assessment to be imposed within said district shall be as follows:

               (A) In a timely fashion each year, except the initial creating year, a proposed budget shall be prepared for Business Improvement District No. 8 for the ensuing fiscal year to commence on the first day of October and end on the following last day of September.

               (B) Said proposed budget shall be considered by the city council during open session at a regularly scheduled city council meeting. Following such consideration, a proposed assessment schedule shall be prepared.

               (C) The amount of the special assessment for each property shall be based upon the special benefits to the property as fairly and equitably assessed by the City Council and calculated in accordance with the following formula:

               Assessed value of individual property divided by total assessed value of all taxable property in the district times total special assessment equals individual special assessment. Based upon the recommendation of the Business Improvement District Board, owner-occupied residential properties within the district will be assessed at 70% of assessed valuation based on their primary benefit from the downtown beautification and maintenance programs. Owners of property exempt from ad valorem taxes are encouraged to support District activities, promotions, and improvements but property exempt from ad valorem taxes will not be subject to special assessment for this Business Improvement District. Property owned by the Federal Government, the State of Nebraska and political subdivisions thereof shall not be subject to special assessment for this Business Improvement District. For mixed use properties that combine owner-occupied residential and other uses, the property owner may submit evidence supporting a pro-rated split of the assessed value (between owner-occupied residential and other uses) for the City Council to consider when sitting as a board of equalization. The assessed values to be used in the above formula shall be the values, as shown in the office of the Hall County Assessor, in effect on the first day of January of the current year.

               (D) The proposed district shall become effective on October 1, 2008 for a period of five years to terminate on September 30, 2013. The estimated total annual budget for costs and expenses of the work to be performed within such district during the first year totals $137,500; provided that the maximum amount of the first year’s annual assessment for the district shall not exceed $90,000. The estimated total first- year budget by area of work is as follows:

                              Retention and Recruitment $41,500

                              Downtown Beautification $53,500

                              Implementation and Maintenance $42,500

In the subsequent four years, the maximum amount of annual assessment and annual budget for the district will not exceed the first year maximum assessment and budget amounts plus an annual increase equal to the amount of the Consumer Price Index or 3%, whichever is less. The assessments levied for the first year shall not exceed $90,000. The district may pursue additional funding (without increasing the district assessments) to complete the amounts for costs and expenses included in the budget. The specific improvements for the first year are listed for purposes of estimating the costs and expenses of performing the proposed work and improvements. Although the district is proposed for a five-year period, the City council, after public hearing, shall approve an annual budget for specific improvements in each succeeding year consistent with the ordinance creating the district. The City Council retains the authority to change, modify and remove proposed improvements; however, the proposed improvements cannot exceed the scope of improvements and the annual assessment cannot exceed the maximum amounts of the annual assessment as provided by the ordinance creating the district.

               (E) Notice of the proposed assessment shall be published as required by NE. Rev. Statutes Section 19-4030, as amended.

               (F) The city council, sitting as a Board of Equalization, shall levy the special assessments on all properties at one time, in accordance with the method of assessment provided above. If the city council finds that the proposed method of assessment does not provide a fair and equitable method of apportioning costs, then it may assess the costs under such method as the city council finds to be fair and equitable.

               (G) Said assessments shall be payable in one installment to be come delinquent fifty (50) days after the date of such levy. Delinquent payments shall draw interest at the rate specified in NE. Rev. Statutes Section 45-104.01, as amended. All special assessments provided herein shall be a lien on the property assessed superior and prior to all other liens except general taxes and other special assessments which shall be of equal priority. Liens for special assessments may be foreclosed and are subject to interest at the statutory rate when payment of the assessment is delinquent as provided by law. No special assessment made hereunder shall be void for any irregularity, defect, error or informality in procedure, in levy or equalization thereof.

 

§13-96.  Disestablishment Procedure

               In the event requests to disestablish this business improvement district are made and filed with the city clerk within any (30) day period by owners of real property representing fifty percent (50%) or more of the total value of the real property within the district as shown in the office of the Hall County Assessor on the first day of January of the current year, the city council may disestablish the district by ordinance after a hearing before the city council. The city council shall adopt a resolution of intention to disestablish the area at least fifteen days prior to the hearing. The resolution shall give the time and place of the hearing. After hearing, the city council may disestablish the district as provided in the Business Improvement District Act.

Added by Ordinance No. 9180, effective 09-10-2008

 

§13-97.  Creation of Vehicle Offstreet Parking District No. 3. 

There is hereby created within the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, Vehicle Offstreet Parking District No. 3 of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska. 

               Added by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019

 

§13-98.  District Boundaries. 

Vehicle Offstreet Parking District No. 3 shall include all property within the following boundaries, all of which is hereby deemed to be specially benefited by the maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of offstreet parking facilities within the District, to wit:  Beginning at the intersection of Sycamore Street and First Street; thence westerly on First Street to Pine Street; thence southerly on Pine Street to the southerly boundary of Courthouse Addition; thence westerly along the southerly boundary of Courthouse Addition to Locust Street; thence westerly on Division Street to Walnut Street; thence northerly on Walnut Street to the alley between Division Street and First Street; thence westerly on said alley to Cedar Street; thence northerly on Cedar Street to the alley between Second Street and Third Street; thence westerly on said alley to Elm Street; thence northerly on Elm Street to a point 40 feet north of the southerly right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad; thence easterly parallel to and 40 feet from said right-of-way line to Walnut Street; thence northerly on Walnut Street to a point 100 feet north of the northerly right-of-way line of South Front Street; thence easterly parallel to and 100 feet from said right-of-way line to Kimball Avenue extended; thence southerly on Kimball Avenue extended and Kimball Avenue to the alley between Third Street and Second Street; thence southerly on Sycamore Street to the point of beginning.

Added by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019

§13-98.  Purpose. 

The acquisition of new parking lots is not contemplated by the creation of Vehicle Offstreet Parking District No. 3.  No money is to be expended in the acquisition of property and construction of such offstreet parking facilities. The purpose of the District is to provide for the maintenance, repair, reconstruction and operation of the City-owned offstreet public parking facilities located within the District excepting and excluding parking facilities located upon Block Seventy-eight (78), Original Town of Grand Island, and Lots One (1), Two (2), and Three (3), Parking Ramp Subdivision, a replat of Lots 5, 6, and 7, Block 79, Original Town of Grand Island,  all located in Hall County, Nebraska.

Added by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019

§13-99.  Special Assessments. 

All or a portion of the cost of maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of any offstreet parking facilities designated herein may be paid for by annual special assessments against the real estate located in such district in proportion to the special benefit of each parcel of real estate. The amounts of such special assessments shall be determined by the mayor and city council sitting as a board of equalization.

Added by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019

§13-100.  Credits. 

The Grand Island City Council sitting as a Board of Equalization may by resolution establish privately owned parking space credits or offsets to be applied toward any special assessments levied for Vehicle Offstreet Parking District No. 3, and provide necessary rules and procedures applicable to such credits or offsets.

Added by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019

§13-101.  Disestablishment of Downtown Improvement and Parking District. 

Concurrent with the establishment of Vehicle Offstreet Parking District No. 3 as provided herein, the Downtown Improvement and Parking District of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, created and established by Ordinance No. 5854, is hereby disestablished and dissolved, and Grand Island City Code Chapter 13, Article I, Sections 13-1 through 13-10, inclusive, are repealed.  Any remaining occupation taxes assessed and collected or to be collected for purposes of the Downtown Improvement and Parking District shall be set aside and utilized for the purposes for which said District was established.  The disestablishment and dissolution of the Downtown Improvement and Parking District shall not operate as a nullification of any occupation tax previously assessed for purposes of said District.

Added by Ordinance No. 9718, effective 01-23-2019

CHAPTER 14

ELECTIONS

 

§14-1.  Elections; Date; Procedure

                The City of Grand Island, Nebraska, shall hold its municipal election on the date of the statewide primary election for the State of Nebraska. Such elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 32 of the Statutes of Nebraska.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9030, effective 03-01-2006

 

§14-2.  Officers of the City

                There shall be elected a mayor at large and two council members from each of the five wards as established by §14-3 of the Grand Island City Code, thereby forming a council of ten members and one mayor.

 

§14-3.  Wards; Boundaries

                The City of Grand Island, Nebraska, is hereby divided into five wards, numbered 1 through 5, the boundaries of such wards defined as shown on the drawing entitled, "Election Ward Map of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska." The Election Ward Map of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, shall be kept current and on file in the office of the city clerk.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9030, effective 03-01-2006

Amended by Ordinance No. 9345, effective 11-23-2011

 
CHAPTER 15

ELECTRICITY

 

Article I. Licenses; Installations; Inspections

Division 1. Generally

 

§15-1.  Applicability of Article
               This article shall apply to all structures, constructed, assembled or placed within the City zoning jurisdiction, and provides standards for electrical wiring as identified in the Nebraska State Electrical Act.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9366, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-2.  National Electrical Code Adopted
               (A) There is hereby adopted by the City of Grand Island for the purpose of safeguarding persons and buildings from hazards arising from the use of electricity for light, heat, power, radio, signaling, and other purposes, that certain code known as the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, except as modified by this section.

               (B) The National Electrical Code is modified by deleting Article 210-52C Subsection 2 and 3.  Articles 320 and 330 are amended by §15-3 of the Grand Island City Code.

               (C) One copy of the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, shall be on file in the City Clerk's office for public use and inspection as provided by law.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8990, effective 08-10-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9194, effective 11-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9366, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9508, effective 12-31-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

Amended by Ordinance No. 9667, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§15-3.  Amendments to National Electrical Code,  2017 Edition
The following sections are adopted as amendments to the same numbered sections of the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition:

  Article 210.11(C)(3) Shall be limited to two bathrooms.

  Article 320 – Armored cable (type AC)

               Anti short bushings shall be used.

  Article 330 - Metal-Clad Cable (Type MC)

Anti short bushings shall be used.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8990, effective 08-10-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9194, effective 11-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9366, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9508, effective 12-31-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

Amended by Ordinance No. 9667, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§15-4.  Electrical Plans
               Wherever the Building Code of the City requires that plans be filed with the Building Department for the construction and alteration of dwellings and all other buildings and structures in the City, there shall also be filed a detailed plan of the electrical work to be done on such structures which plan shall show the outlets, connections, and all fixtures and appliances to be installed. If deviations are made from an approved set of plans, then the changes shall be submitted for approval. When the electrical work to be done is for additional wiring only, the Electrical Inspector may approve the same without plans therefor.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-5.  Installation of Service Conductors
               All electrical service conductors shall be installed according to the National Electrical Code with the following additional requirements.  The point of entrance in all cases shall be determined by the Grand Island Utilities Department:

Overhead Service

Where the service mast is used for the sole support of the service drop, the minimum size shall be two-inch intermediate or galvanized rigid metal conduit. The service mast shall be continuous with no interruptions.  The point of attachment shall be a minimum height of twelve (12) feet. 

Underground Service

The service conductors shall be installed in a continuous approved conduit system from the service head, transformer or secondary tap box to the main meter socket or service disconnect. The first ten feet of conduit out of the ground attaching to a utility pole shall be schedule 40 G.R.C. conduit. 

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-6.  Service Entrances
Each service entrance with 2,000 amperes capacity or less shall be provided with a readily accessible main disconnecting device with appropriate overcurrent protection; provided, each service entrance larger than 2,000 amperes capacity shall comply with the provisions of the National Electric Code. The device shall disconnect all ungrounded conductors from the source of supply in one motion or operation of the hand. For overhead services, said overcurrent protection shall be installed within twenty-five (25) feet from the weatherhead, and within ten (10) feet from where the conductors enter the building. For underground services, said overcurrent protection shall be installed within ten (10) feet from where the conductors enter the building.

               (A) Provisions for Metering.  The meter socket shall be the “ring type” meter socket for 200 amp services and below.  Meter sockets shall be mounted on the outside of a principal building with the centerline located between five (5) and six (6) feet above finished grade. With prior approval given by the Utilities Department and Building Department, meter sockets may be located on UL listed pedestals, accessory buildings greater than 625 square feet constructed on perimeter foundations extended below frost depth, or alternate locations approved by the Departments. Additional provisions for metering can be found in the Metering Standards set out by the Grand Island Utilities Department.

               (B) Single family switches shall be grouped to disconnect them with one motion of the hand.

(C) Multiple Family Units.  New multiple family units constructed in compliance with Chapter 8 of the Grand Island Code may be allowed up to 6 switches, one switch per unit.  All switches shall be grouped together in one listed and approved assembly.

               (D) Number of Services.  One electrical service shall be provided for each tract or parcel of land, except upon written request and approval by the Utilities Director and Building Department Director, and/or their respective designee, and in conformance with this Code.

               (E) Electric Meter Location.  The electric meter shall be located on the property that it is supplying power to, unless prior approval by the Utilities Department and Building Department.

               (F) Meter Tampering.  Pursuant to Nebraska Revised Statute 25-21,275, tampering or bypassing a meter is strictly prohibited and will result in immediate disconnection.

               (G) Grade Changes.  The property owner shall be responsible for any repairs or modifications to City owned equipment damaged or deemed unsafe due to grade changes, settlement or erosion.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8990, effective 08-10-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9194, effective 11-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9366, effective 03-30-2012

               Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

Amended by Ordinance No. 9712, effective 11-13-2018

§15-7.  Wiring In Commercial Buildings
               (A) Nonmetallic cable shall not be used for the installation of wiring for lights, heat, air conditioning power, or power in all commercial buildings. These include, but are not limited to, asylums, hospitals, hotels, motels, theaters, schools, factories, churches, warehouses, mills, grain elevators, food stores, office buildings, retail sales, stables, garages, meeting halls, buildings of fireproof or mill construction.

               Exception: Tray cable systems installed in accordance with Article 392 NEC and permission of the Electrical Inspector.

               (B) All dwelling units located within any commercial type building shall be wired to the same commercial standard.

               (C)  Wiring above suspended ceilings – all permanent raceways, boxes, cabinets, and fittings shall be securely fastened to the building structure.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8990, effective 08-10-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9194, effective 11-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-8.  Wiring In Single and Multiple-Family Units

               (A) Multiple family units may have branch circuits in individual units wired with nonmetallic sheathed cable if construction complies with Chapter 8 of the Grand Island City Code.

               (B) Existing residential buildings containing more than six family units not having a two-hour fire wall rating separation as provided in Chapter 8 of the Grand Island City Code shall not be wired with nonmetallic cable.

               (C) No wiring in basements below the floor joist on exterior walls shall be wired with unprotected nonmetallic cable. 

               (D) Smoke alarms shall be installed to comply with Section R314 of the 2015 International Residential Code.

               (E) Carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed to comply with Section R315 of the 2015 International Residential Code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9366, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9508, effective 12-31-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

Amended by Ordinance No. 9667, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§15-9.  Repairs In Building Damaged by Fire
               Whenever the wiring of any building in the City has been damaged by fire, the Electrical Inspector shall be notified before permanent repairs to this wiring are started. In replacing such wiring, all the rules of this article shall be observed.

 

§15-10.  Existing Electrical Installations
               (A) Extensions to Existing Installations.  Extensions to existing installations shall not be made, attached or connected to any existing wiring where the existing wiring does not conform to the minimum requirements as set forth by this article.

               (B) Removal of Unused Electrical Wiring.  All unused and abandoned electrical equipment, wiring, conduits, and devices shall be removed from all buildings and structures.

               (C) Existing Electrical Wiring.  All existing electrical wiring, conduits, equipment, and devices in existing buildings shall be compliant with the code at the time of installation.  Remodeled areas of buildings shall comply with the current code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-11.   Requirements for Electrical Installations
               (A)  Aluminum Conductors – aluminum conductors may be used for service entrance and feeders only.

               (B)  Equipment grounding conductors – an equipment grounding conductor will be required in all conduit systems except for rigid metal conduit systems with threaded hubs, couplings or fittings.

               (C)  CSST gas piping shall be bonded to comply with section 1312.2 of the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code.

               (D)  Non-grounding receptacles shall not be installed, either in new work or for replacement, after December 31, 2014.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9194, effective 11-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9508, effective 12-31-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9667, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§15-12.  Reserved.

§15-13.  Reserved.

 

 

Division 2.  Permits

 

§15-14.  Permit for Work; Required
               No electrical wiring work, unless excepted in this section, shall be undertaken prior to the issuance of a permit therefor by the Building Department.  Such permit shall be issued only to a registered contracting electrician.

               No permit shall be required for minor repair work such as repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bare wires and joints, and repairing drop cords.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-15.  Permit; Application
               (A) No permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any work regulated by this Code, except to a person holding a valid unexpired and unrevoked registration as required by this chapter, except when and as otherwise hereinafter provided in this section.

               (B) A permit may be issued to a properly registered person not acting in violation of any current contractor licensing law.

               (C) Any permit by this Code may be issued to any person to do any work regulated by this Code in a single family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings in the event that any such person is the bona fide owner of any such dwelling and accessory buildings and quarters, and that the same is currently occupied by said owner, provided, that said owner shall personally purchase all material and shall personally perform all labor in connection therein. No permit shall be issued to said owner for the installation of a new electrical service and panel.

               (D) If work is done by other than said owner the permit will be voided and said owner will be subject to possible legal action.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8990, effective 08-10-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-16.  Permit Fees
               Upon the granting of a permit for electrical work requiring an inspection, the applicant shall pay a fee to the City in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§15-17.  Electrical Work; Permit Required; Fee
               The person to whom such registration is issued under this division shall be required to first secure permits to do any electrical work on the premises of such registration as required by ordinances of the City. Fees for the issuance of such permit shall be the same as now in force and required by ordinance.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-18.  Investigation Fees; Work Without a Permit
               (A) Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this Code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.

               (B) An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this Code, nor from penalty prescribed by law.

               (C) This provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be proven to the satisfaction of the Building Department Director that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit before the commencement of the work. In such cases, a permit must be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-19.  Reinspection; Fees
               A reinspection fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule may be assessed for each inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when required corrections have not been made.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9194, effective 11-1-2008

 

§15-20.  Reserved.

§15-21.  Reserved.

 

 

Division 3.  Electrical Inspections; Electrical Board

 

§15-22.  Inspections; Required
               All electric apparatus, wires or conduits that are to be hidden from view shall be inspected before concealment, and any person installing such wires shall notify the Electrical Inspector, giving him twenty-four hours in which to make the required inspection before such wires are concealed.  For residential installations not exceeding four units per structure, power shall be permitted to be connected under the terms of a Temporary Electrical Hookup Agreement.  This permit shall be obtained from the Building Department before a request is made to connect power.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8990, effective 08-10-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

 

§15-23.  Inspection of Electrical Work
               Any electrical work performed under the provisions of this division shall be inspected by the Electrical Inspector if the ordinances of the City provide for inspections.

 

§15-24.  Violations
               Any electrician, agent, or owner who shall construct, or cause to be constructed, wiring in any building, or part of such building or structure or device, in violation of any of the provisions of this article, and any architect, or other person, designing, drawing plans for, or having charge of such building, or part of such building or structure or device, who shall permit it to be so constructed, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

§15-25.  Designation of Electrical Inspector
               Electrical inspections shall be under the supervision of the Building Department Director. The inspector in charge of these inspections shall be referred to in this article as the Electrical Inspector.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-26.  Records
               The Electrical Inspector shall keep complete records of all permits issued and inspections made and other official work performed under the provisions of this article.

 

§15-27.  Review of Decisions; Electrical Board
               When the Electrical Inspector condemns all or part of any electrical installation, the owner may, within five days after receiving written notice from the electrical inspector, file a petition for review of such action of the Electrical Inspector with the City Electrical Board, on receipt of which the Board shall at once proceed to determine whether such electrical installation complies with this article, and within three days shall make a decision in accordance with its findings.

 

§15-28.  Right of Entry; Inspections; Disconnection

               The Electrical Inspector shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building in the discharge of official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation of electric wiring, electric device, or electric material contained therein, and the electrical inspector shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical currents and to cut or disconnect, in case of emergency, any wire where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property.

               If electrical wiring is found to be hazardous, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to have the needed repair work started as soon as possible or within forty-eight (48) hours. Extended time may be given by the Electrical Inspector.

               If the service is disconnected for six (6) months or longer, an inspection shall be performed prior to reconnection.  The City of Grand Island shall not be responsible for any damage to customer’s property as a result of disconnection or reconnection.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-29.  Disconnection or Removal During Fire
               The Chief of the Fire Department or the Electrical Inspector, or a competent person delegated by them, or either of them, shall have the power to at once cause the removal of all wires or the turning off of all electrical currents where such wires or current interfere with the work of the Fire Department during the progress of a fire.  Any reconnection of a disconnected service shall be inspected by the Electrical Inspector prior to reconnection.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-30.  Electrical Board; Appointment
               The Electrical Board shall be appointed by the Mayor annually, with the approval of the City Council, and shall consist of a master electrician, a journeyman electrician, a representative of the Grand Island Utilities Department, a representative of the public at large, and the Building Department Director or delegated Electrical Inspector, who shall act as ex officio chairman of such Board. Three members of the Electrical Board shall constitute a quorum.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-31.  Electrical Board; Duties
               The Electrical Board shall establish standards and procedures for the qualification and registration of master electricians and journeyman electricians and shall issue an appropriate registration to each person who meets the qualifications therefor.  The Board shall keep an official record of all its transactions and registrations.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-32.  Reserved.
§15-33.  Reserved.

 

 

Division 4.  Electrical Contractors; Licenses, Registration

 

§15-34.  Intent of Division
               It is the intent of this division that no person shall engage in the business of installing, repairing or altering electrical wiring unless the work performed in the course of such business is under the direct supervision of a contracting or master electrician licensed by the State of Nebraska and registered with the City of Grand Island.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-35.  Registration Required
          No person shall engage in the business of installing, altering, or repairing any electrical wiring, fixtures, or apparatus for any purpose whatsoever in the City of Grand Island without first obtaining a Certificate of Registration as an electrical contractor.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010

 

 

§15-36.  Registration and Insurance Required
  (1)  Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska, with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:

(a) Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.

(b) A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.

(c) The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Building Department a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance coverage.

(d) Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy herein required to expire or lapse.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9144, effective 01-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010

 

 

§15-37.  Reserved

Deleted by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-38.  Use of Name; Change of Address
               No person or concern who has obtained a contracting electrician's registration shall allow his name to be used by another person or concern, either for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing business or work under such registration. Every person registered pursuant to this article shall notify the Electrical Board of any change to their street address.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-39.  Reserved
§15-40.  Reserved

 

 

Division 5.  Master, Journeyman, Apprentice; Electricians

 

§15-41.  Registration; Required
               No person shall be engaged in the installation of any electrical wiring, fixtures, equipment, or devices for any purpose whatsoever in the City without having registered in the office of the Building Department.

  (A)  Required.  Any applicant for a registration certificate shall be the holder of a valid State of Nebraska Electricians License.

  (B) Renewal.  All journeyman electrician's and master electrician's certificates of registration issued by the Electrical Board shall expire on December 31 of the year in which such certificates are issued, but such certificates may be renewed within thirty days thereafter upon application and payment of fees in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

               Any master electrician or journeyman electrician who does not renew his or her certificate of registration pursuant to this article within the thirty day grace period provided by this section shall automatically forfeit such certificate.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9366, effective 03-30-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-42.  Reserved

Deleted by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-43.  Apprentice Electrician
               Apprentice electricians shall be required to have a valid State of Nebraska registration and work under the direct supervision of a contracting, master, or journeyman electrician.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

§15-44.  Reserved.
§15-45.  Reserved.

 

 

Division 6.  Registration Certificate Revocation

 

§15-46.  Registration Certificate; Revocation
               (A) Registration Certificate; Revocation.  The City Council, by a majority vote, shall have the power to revoke the certificate of any contracting, master, or journeyman electrician issued pursuant to this article, upon the recommendation of the Electrical Board, if such registration was obtained through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is shown to be grossly incompetent, or has a second time willfully violated any of the provisions of this article. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to the penalties prescribed for the violation of the provisions of this article.

               (B)   Registration; Revocation.  If any person's qualifications for a registration certificate under this article shall fail at any time during the term thereof, such certificate shall be revoked and canceled immediately by the Building Department Director, who shall serve notice of such action by registered mail to the holder of the certificate.

               (C) Registration Certificate; Notice and Hearing.  Before a registration issued pursuant to this article may be revoked, the registrant shall have notice in writing, enumerating the reasons for revocation, and shall be entitled to a hearing before the City Council not sooner than five days from the date of receipt of the notice. The registrant shall be given an opportunity to present testimony, oral or written, and shall have the right of cross-examination. All such testimony before the City Council shall be given under oath. The City Council shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and compel the attendance of witnesses in such cases.

               (D) Decision of Council Final; Reapplication.  The decision of the City Council relative to the revocation of a registration issued pursuant to this article shall be based upon the evidence produced at the hearing, and such decision shall be final. A person whose registration has been revoked shall not be permitted to reapply for another such registration within one year from the date of such revocation.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-47.  Reserved
§15-48.  Reserved

 

 

Article II. Municipal Service

Division 1. Generally

 

§15-49.  Interconnection Devices
               Any energy conservation device generating electricity to be used for domestic purposes shall be interconnected with the electrical supply of the household, business, or industry finished by the Grand Island Utilities Department in accordance with plans, specifications, rules and regulations approved by the Utilities Director or his designated representative and subject to the inspection of the Grand Island Utilities Department prior to the conservation device being energized and put into operation.

A customer that has a generation facility (or facilities) that uses as its energy source methane, wind, solar, biomass, hydropower, or geothermal resources and is interconnected behind their service meter with and aggregate nameplate of 25 kW or less may be considered as a Qualified Facility (QF) and eligible for participation in a net metering program.  The program will be available for QF customers until the aggregate nameplate capacity of the participating QF customers meets one percent (1%) of the peak annual demand of the Utilities Department.  The installation of equipment by the QF customer must meet all applicable safety, interconnection, and reliability standards established by the National Electrical Code filed with the Secretary of State and adopted by the State Electrical Board under subdivision (5) of section 81-2104, the National Electrical safety Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and the Underwriters Laboratories; and must be equipped to automatically isolate the QF from the electrical system in the event of an electrical power outage or other conditions where the line is de-energized.  An outside-mounted visible device shall be installed on the customer’s side of the point of delivery/receipt that must be capable of preventing energizing the Utilities Department’s service line and provide for a means for the Department to operate and lock in place.  The Utilities Department will provide a bi-directional meter for measurement of the flow of electricity in both directions.  Energy produced by the QF during the billing period will be credited at the applicable retail rate for the customer, not including the customer charge.  Energy produced by the QF in excess of the customer’s usage will applied as a credit to the customer’s account at the current month cost of energy per kilowatt-hour as defined in Division 6.  At the end of the calendar year, any excess credits may be paid to the customer.

               It shall be unlawful for any person to connect an electric generating source to a system supplied electricity by the Grand Island Utilities Department without obtaining the aforesaid approval and inspection.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-50.  Deposit Requirements
               (A) Except as provided below, all electric service accounts established under the commercial rate structure shall be required to maintain a deposit in an amount to be determined by the Utilities Department as set forth in this section.

               (B) Deposits for accounts in existence before September 1, 1983, shall be maintained in the amount established under the ordinances in effect at the time of the initial deposit, unless said deposit has been distributed under the provisions of this section.

               (C) Deposits for any account created on or after September 1, 1983, and deposits for all accounts for which service has been reinstated after being disconnected for nonpayment shall be maintained in an amount of not less than Two Hundred Dollars ($200), nor more than Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000), as determined by the Utilities Department. The amount of the deposit required shall be equal to two times the highest billed period of the last 12 billing periods, not to exceed Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000).  For new construction or properties that have been unoccupied for the last 12 billing periods, a similar property from an identically zoned business shall be used in establishing the required deposit amount.

               (D) From and after October 1, 2010, all deposits required herein shall accrue interest at the annually adjusted interest rate based on the 3 month LIBOR as of October 1, or the next business day.  Interest shall be payable to the customer only at the time the deposit is refundable as provided in subsection E below.

               (E) The deposit required herein shall be refunded to the customer as follows:

  (1) When the electric service has been disconnected, whether at the request of the customer or for nonpayment of the customer's electric bill, or a new account has been created for said service with a different customer, and a final reading has been taken, any deposit on hand plus the accrued interest thereon, and minus the amount of any unpaid billing statement and other charges, shall be refunded to the customer; or

  (2) After at least two years of continuous service to the customer, if the monthly payments for the account have been made promptly, with no more than two delinquent payments during the twenty-four (24) month period immediately preceding the request, the customer may request the Utilities Department in writing to refund the deposit. Upon receipt of the request, and if the above conditions of prompt payment have been met, the Utilities Department shall refund any deposit on hand, plus the accrued interest to the customer. For the purposes of this subsection, a payment shall be deemed delinquent if made more than fifteen (15) days after the date set forth on the monthly billing statement.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9275, effective 09-29-2010

Amended by Ordinance No. 9523, effective 03-17-2015

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-51.  Payment Conditions
  (1) All bills are due when received.

  (2) If full payment is not received by the due date stated on the bill, a late payment charge shall be assessed in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

  (3) A service charge shall be collected before reconnection, in each instance of disconnection for nonpayment of billing. If reconnection is demanded after business hours, an additional fee shall apply. The charges for reconnection shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

  (4) A service charge in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule will be assessed for each check returned for insufficient funds. This charge is in addition to any other charges.

  (5) A service charge in accordance to the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule shall be collected, before all new connections are made by the Utilities Department.

  (6) A service charge in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule shall be collected, to transfer service from one occupant to another occupant at the same location.

  (7) Service periods are normally for periods of one year or longer. If it appears that services are being disconnected and reconnected within a twelve-month period, in order to avoid minimum billing charges; an amount equivalent to the minimum billings for the disconnected period (not to exceed eleven months) must be paid before the service is reconnected. This is in addition to the normal connection charges.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9523, effective 3-17-2015

 

§15-52.  Rate Assignment
               The Grand Island Utilities Department will attempt to assign customers to the lowest applicable rate. It is the customer's responsibility to inform the Utilities Department of any changes that may affect the assignment or billing conditions within a given rate.

               The customer is in a better position than the Utilities Department to analyze electric usage. When more than one rate assignment is applicable, the customer may select the rate considered the most beneficial. Customer-requested rate re-assignments will not be made more frequently than once every twelve months. In no event will the Utilities Department be responsible for losses incurred due to improper rate assignment.

               At customer request, demand metering will be installed by the Utilities Department. The Utilities Department may, at its option, assess a one-time charge of $200.00 to pay the additional metering facilities.

 

§15-53.  Power Factor
               The customer shall install power-factor correction equipment, if necessary, to ensure a power factor of no less than 90%, lagging or leading.

 

§15-54.  Arc Welders and X-Ray Units
               Electric transformer type arc welders or x-ray units shall not be used on Residential or Single Phase Commercial Services. When used on Three Phase Services, the welder or x-ray unit KVA may be converted to horsepower for determination of connected horsepower at the rate of 746 watts per horsepower, minimum connection five horsepower.

 

Division 2. Residential Service

 

§15-55.  010 Residential Service
               Applicable in urban and rural distribution areas.  Available at single phase, through a single meter, to residential consumers for domestic use in a single-family dwelling unit; but is not available for commercial or non-domestic use.

 

               Individual single-phase motors, not to exceed 10 HP each, may be connected; however, the City Utilities Department must be notified in writing, if a motor over 5 HP is installed.

 

               This schedule has two sets of rates:  one for the summer period of five months, beginning with the June billing; and the second for the winter season of seven months, beginning with the November billing.

 

Rate:

 

Effective Date:

October 1, 2018

 

Summer

(June-October)

Winter

(November-May)

Customer Charge, per month

$8.00

$8.00

Energy Charge

 

 

               First 300 kWh, per kWh

$0.105

$0.105

               Next 700 kWh, per kWh

0.083

0.064

               All additional kWh, per kWh

0.083

0.057

 

               Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge. 

 

Minimum Bill:  The minimum monthly bill shall be the monthly customer charge.

 

Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005
Amended by Ord. No. 8946, effective 1-5-2005

Amended by Ord. No. 9133, effective 09-18-2007

Amended by Ord. No. 9523, effective 03-17-2015

Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018

 

 

 

§15-56.  Service Specifications
               Residential Service shall be supplied at a nominal voltage of 120/240 Volts or 120/208 Volts single phase.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

 

Division 3. Commercial Service

 

§15-57.  030 Single-Phase Commercial Service
               Applicable in urban and rural distribution areas. Available for commercial customers, for lighting and small appliances.  Available for single meter apartment units, and combined residential-commercial use, where the Residential Rate is not applicable.  Service shall be through a single meter.

 

               Individual single-phase motors, not to exceed 10 HP each, may be connected; however, the City Utilities Department must be notified in writing if a motor over 5 HP is installed.

 

Rate:

 

Effective Date:

October 1, 2018

Customer Charge, per month

$12.00

Energy Charge

 

First 1,000 kWh, per kWh

$0.107

All additional kWh, per kWh

0.080

 

               Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge. 

 

Minimum Bill:  The minimum monthly bill shall be the monthly customer charge.

Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005

Amended by Ord. No. 9133, effective 09-18-2007

Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018

 

 

§15-58.  Service Specifications
               Single-Phase Commercial service shall be supplied at a nominal voltage of 120/240 Volts or 120/208 Volts single phase.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-59.  Discounts for Primary Service
               If the Single-Phase Commercial user owns and maintains all necessary transformation equipment and structures, a 3% reduction will be made in the energy billed. If energy is metered on the primary side (7.2 KV or above) of the service, a 2% reduction will be made in the energy billed. These discounts, however, do not apply to the minimum stated.

 

§15-60.  050 Three-Phase Commercial Service
               Applicable in the territory served by the City of Grand Island; and is available through a single meter at three phase, for any electric service uses where three-phase service is available.

               This schedule has two sets of rates: one for the summer period of five months, beginning with the June meter reading; and the second for the winter season of seven months, beginning with the November meter reading.

Rate:

 

Effective Date:

October 1, 2018

 

Summer

(June-October)

Winter

(November-May)

Customer Charge, per month

$16.00

$16.00

Energy Charge

 

 

               First 1,000 kWh, per kWh

$0.107

 

               Next 4,000 kWh, per kWh

0.095

 

               All additional kWh, per kWh

0.087

 

               First 500 kWh, per kWh

 

$ 0.107

               Next 1,000 kWh, per kWh

 

0.095

               All additional kWh, per kWh

 

0.082

 

               Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge. 

 

Minimum Bill:  The minimum monthly bill shall be the larger of the following: 

 

1.      Customer Charge, or

 

2.      Total connected HP x $0.70

 

If questions arise as to the actual billing HP, the City Utilities Department may, at its option, install demand meters.  The kilowatt reading shall determine the HP on the basis of 0.75 kilowatt = 1.0 HP.

 

               It is the responsibility of the customer to inform the City Utilities Department of changes that may affect minimum billings.

Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005
Amended by Ord. No. 8946, effective 1-5-2005

Amended by Ord. No. 9133, effective 09-18-2007

Amended by Ord. No. 9523, effective 03-17-2015

Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018

 

 

§15-61.  Service Specifications
               New Three-Phase Commercial Services are supplied at three phase, four wire wye, at 120/208 Volts or 277/480 Volts.  Delta services must operate ungrounded, unless prior written approval is obtained by the customer from the City Utilities Department.

Current unbalance between phases should not exceed 15%.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

§15-62.  Discounts for Primary Service

               If the Three-Phase Commercial user owns and maintains all necessary transformation equipment and structures, a 3% reduction will be made in the energy billed. If energy is metered on the primary side (7.2 KV or above) of the service, a 2% reduction will be made in the energy billed. These discounts, however, do not apply to the minimum stated.

 

 

Division 4. Power Service

 

§15-63.  100 Three-Phase Power Service
               Applicable in the territory served by the City of Grand Island, available through a single meter at three phase. Available for any commercial or industrial use of energy.

 

Rate:

 

Effective Date:

October 1, 2018

 

Summer

(June-October)

Winter

(November-May)

Customer Charge, per month

$300.00

$300.00

Demand Charge, per kW

14.30

9.70

Energy Charge, per kWh

 

 

        First 450 kWh per kW of demand

$0.051

$0.047

        All additional energy

0.042

0.039

              

               Plus the applicable Power Cost Adjustment charge (applied to energy consumption only). 

 

Minimum Bill:  The minimum monthly bill shall be no less than $700.

Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005
Amended by Ord. No. 8946, effective 1-5-2005

Amended by Ord. No. 9133, effective 09-18-2007

Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018

 

 

§15-64.  Billing Demand
The Monthly Demand shall be the highest integrated demand (in kW) during a 15-minute time interval in the billing period.  For purposes of this section, Summer Months shall be June through October.  Winter Months shall be November through May.  The Billing Demand shall be the greater of:

 

1.  The Monthly Demand

 

2.  65% of the Monthly Demand in the five (5) most recent Summer Months

Amended by Ord. No. 9523, effective 03-17-2015

Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018

 

 

§15-65.  Service Specifications
               Any standard, nationally recognized, three-phase voltage will be supplied if transformation is available.

 

§15-66.  Discounts for Primary Service
               If Three-Phase Power energy is metered on the primary side (7.2 KV or above) of the service, a 3% reduction will be made in the energy billed. In addition, if the user owns and maintains all necessary transformation equipment and structures, a 5% reduction will be made in the demand billed. These discounts, however, do not apply to the minimum stated.

 

§15-67.  Waiver of Demand Charge
               For customers developing a new site or significantly expanding an existing facility, the Utilities Department may waive the charge on the incremental demand for the first twelve months of service. Customers developing a new site must have an anticipated load of at least 500 KW; these customers will have the entire demand charge waived for the twelve month period.

               An expansion must result in at least 300 KW additional load, based on largest historical Summer Demand at the facility. During the months from June through October, the demand charge in excess of this historical Summer Demand will be waived. During the months from November through May, the Billing Demand for the corresponding month of the previous year will be used as the Billing Demand.

               Customers applying for this waiver must remain on Rate 100 for at least twelve months after resumption of full demand billing. For the twelve months after resumption of full demand billing, the Summer Demand will reflect the waived demand. The Summer Demand for new customers will be not less than 500 KW. The Summer Demand for plant expansions will be not less than 300 KW above the historical Summer Demand.

               Written application for waiver of demand charge must be made prior to connection of such new load to the City electric system, and shall be subject to the approval of the Utilities Director.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

 

 

Division 5. Area Flood Lighting

 

§15-68.  114 Area Floodlighting
                              Applicable in the territory served by the City of Grand Island; and is available for any outdoor area floodlighting of consumer’s property from dusk to dawn, where such service can be rendered directly from existing secondary distribution lines of the City.

 

               Luminaire will be selected by Utilities Department and provided from Utilities Department stock. Installation will be on an existing wood pole and connected to existing secondary conductors on such pole. If installed lamp is not listed on the rate schedule, the rate for the nearest sized lamp of the same type shall be charged.

 

Monthly Rate per Lamp:

 

Effective Date:

October 1, 2018

        Mercury Vapor:

 

 

175 watt lamp

$8.41

 

400 watt lamp

$14.32

       

1,000 watt lamp

$28.19

        High Pressure Sodium:

 

 

100 watt lamp

$7.50

 

250 watt lamp

$10.03

 

400 watt lamp

$11.10

        Metal Halide:

 

 

100 watt lamp

$9.33

 

400 watt lamp

$16.98

 

1,000 watt lamp

$31.26

        LED:

 

 

25 watt lamp

$4.60

 

50 watt lamp

$5.70

 

100 watt lamp

$7.37

        Halogen:

 

 

500 watt lamp

$19.26

Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005
Amended by Ord. No. 8946, effective 1-5-2005

                  Amended by Ord. No. 9064, effective 9-6-2006

Amended by Ordinance No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

Amended by Ordinance No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018

§15-69.  Contract Period and Conditions

               Service under Rate 114 is available for a minimum period of 24 months and thereafter until terminated by thirty (30) days notice in writing.

               The City of Grand Island will install, own, and operate and maintain all area lighting equipment under this schedule. If underground service is desired, approval of the City must be obtained and the additional cost therefor shall be paid in advance to the City by the consumer on a nonrefundable basis.

               The burning of the lamps shall be controlled by automatic control equipment installed by the City and burning time shall be approximately thirty minutes after sunset to approximately thirty minutes before sunrise.

               The City shall be notified by the consumer of any operational failure of lamps. Lamp replacement or repairs will be performed only during regular working hours.

               Non-Standard Installations: If underground service is desired or extension of overhead secondary facilities is required or special materials are requested, approval of the City must be obtained. All additional cost for materials and labor shall be paid in advance to the City, by the consumer, on a nonrefundable basis.

Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005

 

Division 6. Power Cost Adjustment

 

§15-70.  Power Cost Adjustment
               The rates set out are predicated upon a base power cost of 35.00 mills per kilowatt-hour.  When the City’s cost of energy per kilowatt-hour shall temporarily be greater than 35.00 mills per kilowatt-hour, there shall be added to the consumer’s monthly charge for electricity used an amount equal to the number of kilowatt-hours used during the month to which the consumer’s charge applies, multiplied by the amount by which the cost of energy for kilowatt-hour shall be greater than 35.00 mills per kilowatt-hour.

 

            Cost of energy per kilowatt-hour as determined for any month shall be applicable to all charges rendered to consumers after the last day of the following month, without any City Council action.

 

            The cost of energy per kilowatt-hour applied to the consumer’s monthly charge shall be an average of the previous six-months cost of energy per kilowatt-hour.

 

            For purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings:

 

            Cost of Energy shall mean the power cost for the generating plants owned by the City, consisting of the monthly natural gas cost and the cost of any fuel oil consumed; the cost of coal and air quality reagents consumed, including freight and handling charges; plus costs of payments by the City for power, energy, and transmission purchased from other power suppliers, less receipts from energy sold to other electric utilities.

           

Cost of Energy per Kilowatt-Hour shall mean “Cost of Energy” as above defined, divided by 95 percent (95%) of the total kilowatt-hours; consisting of the kilowatt-hour output of the City’s electric generating plants, plus the kilowatt-hours purchased from other power suppliers, less the kilowatt hours of energy sold to other electric utilities.

Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005
Amended by Ord. No. 8946, effective 1-5-2005

Amended by Ord No. 9578, effective 03-29-2016

Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 9-12-2018

 

Division 7. Interdepartmental Rates

 

§15-71.  Interdepartmental Rates
               Municipal accounts shall be assigned to standard retail Rate 30 or Rate 50 as appropriate. An Interdepartmental discount shall be assigned to non-enterprise accounts. The discount for calendar year 2005 is $0.01 per kWh for Rate 50 Interdepartmental accounts and $0.03 per kWh for Rate 30 Interdepartmental accounts. The discount beginning calendar year 2006 is $0.003 per kWh for both Rate 50 and Rate 30 Interdepartmental accounts.

Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005
Amended by Ord. No. 8946, effective 1-5-2005

 

§15-72.  Reserved

Deleted by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005


§15-73.  Reserved

Deleted by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005


§15-74.  Rate 116; Interdepartmental; Streetlights
Applicable for various size lights used for public street lighting and public parks lighting, whether City or privately-owned. If installed lamp is not listed on the rate schedule, the rate for the nearest sized lamp of the same type shall be charged.

 

Monthly Rate per Lamp:

 

Effective Date:

October 1, 2018

      Mercury Vapor:

 

 

175 watt lamp

$5.00

 

400 watt lamp

$9.39

     

1,000 watt lamp

$18.55

      High Pressure Sodium:

 

 

100 watt lamp

$3.75

 

250 watt lamp

$6.19

 

400 watt lamp

$7.34

      Metal Halide:

 

 

100 watt lamp

$4.50

 

400 watt lamp

$12.05

 

1,000 watt lamp

$21.63

      LED:

 

 

50 watt lamp

$3.50

 

100 watt lamp

$4.78

 

            Power Cost Adjustment is not applicable to the Interdepartmental Streetlights rate.

 

Amended by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005
Amended by Ord. No. 8946, effective 1-5-2005

Amended by Ord. No. 9133, effective 09-18-2007

Amended by Ord. No. 9704, effective 09-12-2018

 

 

§15-75.  Reserved

Deleted by Ord. No. 8940, effective 1-1-2005

§15-76.  Reserved

 
CHAPTER 16

FIRE PROTECTION

 

Article I. General 

§16-1.  International Fire Code (IFC) Adopted
               The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, except for such portions as heretofore or hereafter have been deleted, modified, or amended by ordinance and set forth in this Code. The following sections of the Appendix shall also be adopted:

               Appendix B – Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings

               Appendix C – Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution

               Appendix D – Fire Apparatus Access Roads

               Appendix E – Hazard Categories

               Appendix F – Hazard Rankings

Appendix I – Fire Protection Systems-Noncompliant Conditions

One copy of said Code shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk as provided by law.

Amended by Ordinance 8957, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9670, effective 01-01-2018

 

§16-2.  Bureau of Fire Prevention

The Fire Prevention Division for the City of Grand Island is hereby established and shall consist of the non-sworn inspectors of the City of Grand Island Fire Department and shall include and be operated under the supervision of the Fire Prevention Division Chief. The provisions of Chapter 16 of the Grand Island City Code shall be enforced by the Fire Prevention Division. All permits required by this chapter, unless otherwise specified, shall be issued only upon application to the Fire Prevention Division in such form and detail as it shall prescribe. All permits issued by the Fire Prevention Division shall be issued with the name of the applicant and the prevention stated thereon.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9670, effective 01-01-2018

 

§16-2.1.  Building Plans; Fees

               In addition to the building permit fee in Chapter 8, there shall be a fire department plan review fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule for the review of said plans as required by state statutes. Such fee shall be paid to the Fire Department.

 

§16-3.  [Reserved.]

Amended by Ordinance No. 8957, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9670, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§16-3.1.  Repealed

Repealed by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

 

§16-3.2.  IFC – Amendment of  Chapter 2 Definitions
               Definition of Residential Group R-3, subsection Care Facilities Within a Dwelling, of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

               Care facilities for five or fewer persons receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the International Residential Code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

 

§16-3.3.  Repealed

Repealed by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

 

§16-3.4.  IFC – Amendment of Section 109.4
Section 109.4 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

               109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

Added by Ordinance No. 8957, effective 3-31-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

 

§16-3.5.  IFC – Amendment of Section 111.4
Section 111.4 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

               111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

Added by Ordinance No. 8957, effective 3-31-2005

§16-3.6.  IFC – Amendment of Section 105.1.2
Section 105.1.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

105.1.2 Types of permits. There shall be three types of permits as follows:

1. Fire Safety Occupancy Use Permit.  An Occupancy Use Permit is a renewal permit thereby allowing occupants to continue use of a structure previously permitted for occupancy by the building department by section 111.1 of the City adopted International Building Code.

2. Operational permit. An operational permit allows the applicant to conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by Section 105.6 for either:

2.1. A prescribed period.

2.2. Until renewed or revoked.

3. Construction permit. A construction permit allows the applicant to install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is required by Section 105.7.

 

§16-3.7.  IFC – Amendment of  Section 105.2
Section 105.1.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

105.2 Application. Application for a permit required by this code shall be made to the fire code official in such form and detail as prescribed by the fire code official. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans as prescribed by the fire code official.  Although an Occupancy Use Permit is required for all occupancies, an application for an Occupancy Use Permit is not required to be submitted to the fire code official if no change has transpired.  Application and new permits are required for any change of ownership of building or business, change of business, and any change of occupancy use.

 

§16-3.8.  IFC – Amendment of Section 106.2

Section 106.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

106.2 Inspections. The fire code official is authorized to conduct such inspections as are deemed necessary to determine the extent of compliance with the provisions of this code and to approve reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be prepared and submitted in writing for review and approval. Inspection reports shall be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The fire code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual, detailed or complex technical issues subject to the approval of the governing body.

 

If violations of this Chapter 16, Article I and this code are identified during a routine Occupancy Use Inspection the Fire Prevention Chief may revoke the Fire Safety Occupancy Permit until such time as corrections are made.  Such actions shall be in writing and shall contain the reasons for the revocation.

 

§16-3.9.  IFC – Amendment of  Section 108 Board of Appeals
Section 108 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:

 

Section 108 Board of Appeals

The Building Code Advisory Board established by city ordinance §8.6 is hereby recognized for purposes of determining the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction.

 

§16-3.10.  IFC – Amendment of Section 109 Violations
Section 109 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:

 

  [A]  109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

 

§16-4.  Transportation of Dangerous Material
               It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle transporting, carrying or hauling any flammable or explosive liquid or material, except its own fuel supply, over or upon any of the streets, highways, alleys, avenues, or boulevards within the City of Grand Island except over the following:

Capital Avenue,

provided, that such regulation shall not prevent the delivery of any such flammable or explosive liquid or material to the place of business of any person engaged in the manufacturing, processing, selling, or distributing of such flammable or explosive liquid or material within the City, nor shall the provisions of this section apply to any vehicle departing from the City of Grand Island, such vehicle having been loaded with flammable or explosive liquid material within the City.

               The City Engineer shall cause to be erected all necessary signs and signals routing such vehicles carrying flammable or explosive liquid or material according to the provisions of this section.

 

§16-5.  Definitions
As used in §16-4, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

               Flammable or explosive liquid or material shall mean gasoline, butane, propane, dynamite, nitroglycerin, or any other liquid or material of like character generally known to be inflammable or explosive.

               Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon, or by which flammable or explosive liquids and materials are or may be transported, carried or hauled, including by way of description and not of limitation, trucks, tractor trucks, trailers, semi-trailers, tankers, and transports.

               Person shall include all individuals, male and female, firms, associations, partnerships, and corporations.

 

§16-6.  Repealed

Repealed by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

 

§16-7.  Repealed

Repealed by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

 

§16-8.  False Alarms
               Any person who shall activate any fire alarm system knowing such alarm to be false without the permission of the mayor or chief of the fire department shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

 

§16-9.  Combustible Materials; Storing
               It shall be unlawful to keep, store, or maintain, in any building or on any premises any waste, refuse, debris, rubbish, garbage, or other loose combustible materials, except recognized fuels, in such manner as will enhance the danger of fire on such premises, when such premises are located within the City.

               In connection with automobile service stations, fuels offered for sale shall be stored in either: (1) underground tanks, or (2) above-ground tanks properly vaulted in an enclosure which is substantially liquid- and vapor-tight without backfill. The sides, top, and bottom of the enclosure shall be of reinforced concrete at least six (6) inches (15 cm) thick, with openings for inspection through the top only. Tank connections shall be so piped or closed that neither vapors nor liquid can escape into the enclosed space. Means shall be provided to use portable equipment to discharge to the outside any liquid or vapors which might accumulate should leakage occur.

 

§16-10.  Combustible Materials
               Any materials described in §16-9 which accumulate within the City which are not to be disposed of in an acceptable incinerator as defined in this chapter or in any other manner permitted by this Code shall otherwise be disposed of by regular haulage by carriers to an authorized central disposal area as provided by this Code or other ordinances of the City relating to such disposal.

 

§16-11.  Open Fires; When Allowed; Permit; Fire Locations; Hours of Burning
  (1) For purposes of this section, Open Fire shall mean burning under such conditions that the products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air and are not conducted thereto through a stack, chimney, duct, or pipe.

  (2) No person shall cause or permit any open fire within the limits of the City.

  (3) Exceptions:

(a) Fires set solely for the outdoor cooking of food for human consumption on other than commercial premises where no nuisance or hazard is created;

(b) Fires set with the written permission of the Fire Chief of the City of Grand Island or designated representative:

  (i) for the purpose of training public or industrial fire fighting personnel.

  (ii) for essential agricultural operation in the growing of crops where no nuisance or hazard is created.

  (iii) for the purpose of destroying dangerous materials or diseased trees.

  (iv) for the purpose of clearing land for roads or other construction activity.

  (v) for recreational purposes.

  (vi) for the purpose of burning leaves and brush where no nuisance or hazard is created.

(c) Fires set in operation of smokeless flare stacks for the combustion of waste gases, provided they meet the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Control.

(d) For opening burning of leaves and brush where no nuisance or hazard is created during the following periods: (1) A fourteen (14) day period beginning the third Sunday in April, and (2) A fourteen (14) day period beginning the second Sunday in October or as the Fire Chief may designate due to inclimate weather during the foregoing specified periods.

  (4) Open fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until the fire is extinguished. The person so attending shall have a water supply or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use, and no such fire shall be abandoned until it has been completely extinguished.

  (5) Permits to burn leaves and brush shall only be issued to the owner or occupant of private residential property fire locations. Permits may be issued during each open burning period and the week prior thereto. A separate permit shall be required for each open burning period and shall be maintained in the possession of a person tending the fire at all times.

  (6) Fire locations for leaf and brush piles greater than three (3.0) feet in diameter or two (2.0) feet in height must be at least fifty (50.0) feet away from any structure or other combustible material. Fire locations for leaf and brush piles less than three (3.0) feet in diameter and two (2.0) feet in height must be at least twenty-five (25.0) feet from any structure or other combustible material unless the fire is contained within an approved burning appliance or barrel with one-half (1/2") inch wire mesh screen covering the entire opening and such container or barrel is located not less than fifteen (15.0) feet from any structure or other combustible material.

  (7) Leaf and brush fires may only be burned between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of the open burning periods.

  (8) The Fire Chief of the Fire Department may prohibit any and all burning when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous.

 

 

Article II. Fireworks

 

§16-12.  Generally
               It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, offer for sale, bring into this City, or discharge any pyrotechnics, commonly known as fireworks other than permissible fireworks; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to:

        (1) Any fireworks for purposes of public exhibitions or displays purchased from a licensed distributor or the holder of a display license to be issued by the State Fire Marshal, which license shall be good only for the calendar year in which issued and which shall not authorize the holder to sell or hold for sale any permissible fireworks as defined in §16-20 or any firecrackers of any description, whether soft shell or hard shell;

        (2) Any public exhibition or display under the auspices of the City of Grand Island;

        (3) Any fireworks brought into this state for storage by a licensed distributor and held for sale outside of this State;

        (4) Any fireworks furnished for agricultural purposes pursuant to written authorization from the State Fire Marshal to any holder of a distributor's license; or

        (5) Toy cap pistols or toy caps each of which does not contain more than twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive material.

 

§16-13.  Permit to Sell Fireworks
               It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale permissible fireworks in the City without first making application to the Fire Administration Office (City Hall) for a permit and receiving a permit to do so from the Life Safety Division. Permits shall require that applicants disclose any location within the geographic boundaries of the City where they are storing fireworks for sale. Permits shall require applicants to offer proof of a valid liability insurance policy of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) naming the City as an additional insured party. This policy must be in full force and effect for the entire period of lawful fireworks sales as set forth in §16-15. Such permits shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule and shall be valid for the calendar year in which issued, and shall at all times be displayed at the place of business of the holder thereof. Such permits shall not be transferable.

Amended by Ord. No. 8895, effective 5-12-2004

Amended by Ord. No. 9386, effective 6-12-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

 

 

§16-14.  Repealed by Ordinance No. 8895


§16-15.  Dates and Times of Lawful Sale               

               Permissible fireworks may be sold or offered for sale in the City of Grand Island on June 28 through and including July 4 of each year.  Permissible fireworks may only be sold during the following times:

               June 28 through July 2 – 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

               July 3 – 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.

               July 4 – 8:00 a.m. to midnight

Amended by Ord. No. 9386, effective 6-12-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

 

§16-16.  Temporary Fireworks Stands
               Any person having obtained a permit to sell permissible fireworks may sell or offer for sale such fireworks only from a temporary stand or enclosure erected or placed on real estate for that purpose. No fireworks shall be sold from permanent buildings or structures in the City. If fireworks are to be sold from a temporary stand or enclosure, such stand or enclosure shall be of wood or steel frame construction covered with metal or wood. Any temporary enclosure or stand shall be permitted only in those areas of the City zoned for business or manufacturing, and only after a permit is obtained from the Life Safety Division for the erection or placement of such temporary enclosures or stands. Such temporary enclosures or stands shall be permitted to remain on real estate where permissible fireworks are sold for only the period beginning on June 22 through and including July 9 of each year. Any such temporary stand or enclosure shall not be located closer than twenty-five feet from any building, and at least one hundred feet from any station where gasoline and oil for motor vehicles is sold. Such temporary stand or enclosure shall not exceed five hundred square feet in size.  Such temporary enclosures shall only be permitted as an accessory to a permitted principal use on improved property, no vacant lots shall be utilized for sale of fireworks.  Temporary stands with customer openings adjacent to a public street or sidewalk shall maintain a ten (10) foot setback to protect customers from traffic on the adjacent street or sidewalk.

Amended by Ord. No. 8895, effective 5-12-2004

Amended by Ord. No. 9386, effective 6-12-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

 

 

§16-16.1.  Signage Required
               Smoking shall not be permitted inside or within 50 feet of the temporary fireworks stand or sales area. At least one sign that reads as follows, in letters at least 2 inches in height on a contrasting background, shall be conspicuously posted on the exterior of each side of the fireworks stand:

NO SMOKING WITHIN FIFTY FEET OR

DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS

WITHIN THREE HUNDRED FEET

OF THE PREMISES

In addition to the "no smoking" sign, at least one sign, 2 foot by 3 foot in size, on a contrasting background, shall be posted on the exterior of the fireworks stand that reads as follows:

THE GRAND ISLAND CITY CODE ALLOWS

FIREWORKS TO BE DISCHARGED ONLY ON THE

FOLLOWING DATES AND TIMES:

June 28 through July 2 – 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

July 3 – 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.

July 4 – 8:00 a.m. to midnight

Added by Ord. No. 8895, effective 5-12-2004

Amended by Ord. No. 9386, effective 6-12-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

 

§16-17.  Age Limitation for Selling Fireworks
               Retail sales establishments shall, at all times, be supervised by a person of at least sixteen (16) years of age. Failure to comply with this regulation may result in immediate revocation of the retail license.

 

§16-18.  Discharging Fireworks Where Sold

               It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge fireworks in or upon the premises where fireworks are sold or within three hundred (300) feet of the premises.

Amended by Ord. No. 8895, effective 5-12-2004

Amended by Ord. No. 9386, effective 6-12-2012

 

§16-19.  Explosives; Throwing Prohibited

               It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any firecracker, or any object which explodes upon contact with another object: (1) from, at, or into a motor vehicle; (2) onto any street, highway, or sidewalk; (3) at or near any person; (4) into any building; or (5) into or at any group of persons.

 

§16-20.  Definitions
               Permissible fireworks shall mean only sparklers, vesuvius fountains, spray fountains, torches, color fire cones, star and comet type color aerial shells without explosive charge for the purpose of making a noise, firecrackers not to exceed two inches in length and three-eighths of an inch in diameter, total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed 50.0 milligrams each in weight, color wheels, and any other fireworks approved under Section 28-1241(7) and 28-1247 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. See also Rules and Regulations concerning fireworks in the State of Nebraska Administrative Code, Title 157.

               Person as used in this Article shall include any person, firm, partnership, association of persons, or corporation.

               Sale shall include barter, exchange, or gift or offer therefor, and each such transaction made by any person whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee.

Amended by Ord. No. 8895, effective 5-12-2004

Amended by Ord. No. 9386, effective 6-12-2012

 

§16-21.  Repealed by Ordinance No. 8895


§16-22.  Discharge of Fireworks
               Permissible fireworks may be discharged, exploded, or used in the City of Grand Island on June 28 through and including July 4 of each year; provided that on such days the discharge and explosion of fireworks shall be permitted during the following times:

 

                              June 28 through July 2 ………………………   8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

                              July 3 ………………………………………..    8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.

                              July 4 …………………………………………  8:00 a.m. to midnight

 

               The discharge of fireworks within the City of Grand Island on any dates or times other than as set out in this section shall require a permit from the Life Safety Division. Public exhibition applications shall be accompanied by documentation of a display license issued by the State Fire Marshal. Private party display applications will not require a State Fire Marshal license, but displays will be limited to permissible fireworks as described in §16-20 of this Article. Applicant shall also show that there will not be any substantial danger to people or property. Factors that will be considered when reviewing an application will include, but not be limited to, where the fireworks will be discharged, the procedures used to discharge the fireworks and the qualifications of the individuals discharging the fireworks.

Amended by Ord. No. 8895, effective 5-12-2004

Amended by Ord. No. 9386, effective 6-12-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

 

 

Article III. Reserved

 

§16-23.  Reserved


 

Article IV. Fire Protection Contracts

 

§16-24.  Fire Protection Contracts
               Owners of buildings located outside the corporate limits of the City may enter into contracts which provide for fire protection services from the City Fire Department. Each such contract shall be evaluated by the city council on its merits and may be approved if the council deems it desirable. The mayor is authorized to cause such fire protection contracts to be drafted and to recommend their execution or denial.

 

§16-25.  Fire Protection Contract; Compensation
               In the preparation of fire protection contracts for buildings outside the corporate limits of the City, provisions shall be made for compensation to be made to the City on the basis of the City's levy on property within the corporate limits for fire protection purposes, or, in the alternative, a charge of $200 for all light and ordinary hazard occupancies, or $400 for all extra hazard occupancies, whichever computation would provide the most revenue for the City. Standards developed by the National Fire Protection Association shall be used in determining the nature of occupancies under such contracts.

 

§16-26.  Review of Contract Rates
               The Fire Department shall annually review the occupancy of buildings covered by fire protection contracts and shall report to the mayor any changes in occupancy which would affect the rate of changes made under such contracts. All contracts entered into for fire protection after the effective date of this ordinance shall include a rate structure as set forth in §16-25 of this Code.

 

Article V. Ambulance Service

 

§16-27.  Ambulance Service; Basic Rates
The rates for basic ambulance service provided by the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§16-28.  Paramedic Services; Rates
The rates for paramedic services provided by the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§16-29.  Ambulance Interlocal Agreements
               The mayor and city clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute agreements with Hall County, Hamilton County, Howard County, and Chapman Rural Fire District of Chapman, Nebraska, and any other communities wishing emergency ambulance and paramedic services, based on the rates set herein.

 

Article VI. Self-Service Fuel Stations

 

§16-30.  Unattended Self-Service Fuel Stations
               Card operated dispensing systems activated by a card, code, or other means of access to a customer's account, or any combination thereof, that may be used by the customer for the purpose of initiating electronic fund transfers and cash or coin operated dispensing systems shall be permitted at self-service stations whether or not an attendant is on duty at the time such dispensing systems are in operation and open to the public; provided,

        (1) Listed dispensing devices including automatic-closing-type hose nozzle valves with or without a latch-open device shall be used for dispensing Class I, II, and III-A liquids. The dispensing devices shall include listed equipment with a feature that causes or requires the closing of the hose nozzle before the product flow can be resumed or before the hose nozzle valve can be replaced in its normal position in the dispenser.

        (2) Clearly labeled emergency controls shall be installed at a location more than twenty feet but less than one hundred feet from dispensers. Additional emergency controls shall be installed on each group of dispensers for the outdoor equipment used to control the dispensers. Emergency controls shall shut off power to all dispensing devices at the station and shall require manual resetting.

        (3) Operating instructions shall be conspicuously posted in the dispensing area and shall include location of the emergency controls and a requirement that the customer must stay outside of his/her vehicle, in view of the fueling nozzle during dispensing.

        (4) Emergency instructions shall be conspicuously posted in the dispensing area which incorporate the following or equivalent wording:

                       Emergency Instructions In Case of Fire or Spill:

            1. Use emergency stop button.

            2. Report accident and location by calling 911 on the telephone.

        (5) A clearly identified telephone or alarm device directly connected to the 911 Center to notify the Fire Department shall be provided in a conspicuous location on the site subject to approval by the Fire Department.

Article VII. Home Day Care

 

§16-31.  Definition and Scope
        For purposes of this action, Home Day Care shall be defined by NFPA 101 (life Safety Code).

 

§16-32.  Life Safety Inspection and Occupancy Permit
        For a new Home Day Care service, an application for occupancy shall be requested by owner of record.  Only after a fire code official has conducted associated inspections indicating the applicable provisions of the life and fire safety codes have been met shall new home day care services be permitted and or conducted.

 

Added by Ordinance No. 9488, effective 06-17-2014

 

Article VIII. Recovery of Cost

 

§16-33. Recovery of Costs

The City of Grand Island Fire Department is hereby authorized to recover an hourly fee for responding to vehicular accidents.

 

§16-34. Rates.

A rate schedule for responding to vehicular accidents shall be set annually by the City’s Fee Schedule Ordinance and may be updated from time to time upon recommendation of the Grand Island Fire Chief.  The hourly rate shall be billed in 15-minute increments.

 

§16-35. Collection.

The fee set by the City’s Fee Schedule Ordinance may be recovered from any identified insurance carrier or person or persons, directly by the City or by an attorney, or through a third-party billing service acting as a contracted authorized agent for the collection of such costs. In addition to the reasonable costs as set forth in the above-mentioned rate schedule, the City, attorney, or the third-party billing service shall hereby be authorized to collect, in addition to the reasonable costs, reasonable interest, legal, and any other collection fees associated with collecting the said costs and fees as permitted by statute.  Insured motorists will not be billed for fees in excess of the amount paid by the insured motorist’s insurance carrier.

 

§16-36. Non-payment.

In the event that any insurance carrier or person or persons should fail to pay any bill or invoice within 30 days of the mailing or delivery of such notice of charges, the City, attorney or the third-party billing agency who mailed or delivered the bill or invoice may enforce the provisions of this chapter by turning over to a third-party collection agency or, if deemed appropriate, may be enforced by filing a civil action at law in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due to the City, together with statutory interest, court costs, collection fees and associated reasonable attorneys' fees if permitted by law.

The City shall not be obligated to pursue collection efforts against any insurance company or person in the event that the City reasonably determines that collection efforts will not be successful or that the costs of collections will exceed the amount due hereunder.

 

 

 

§16-37. No Refusal.

Emergency services not to be refused for lack of insurance or ability to pay. Nothing in this chapter shall authorize any City department or City staff member or department personnel to refuse or delay any rescue service to any person, firm, organization or corporation, due to the lack of insurance coverage or ability to pay for said rescue services.

 

§16-38. Severability.

The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any part of this chapter is declared to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, the validity of the remaining provisions shall be unaffected thereby. It is the intention of the Council of the City of Grand Island that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid part not been included.

 

§16-39. Effective Date.

Sections 16-33 through 16-39 shall be effective from and after January 1, 2018.

 

§ 16-40. [Reserved]

§ 16-41. [Reserved]

§ 16-42. [Reserved]

 
CHAPTER 17

GARBAGE, REFUSE, WASTE, AND WEEDS

 

Article I. Garbage, Refuse and Waste

Division 1. Duty of Disposal 

§17-1.  Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

                City Solid Waste Disposal System. The City solid waste disposal system shall mean and include the City-operated sanitary landfill, the City-operated transfer station, and the City-operated compost site.

                Compost. Compost shall mean the end product of an aerobic degradation process of yard and garden waste. Approved backyard composting site shall mean one which uses only composting materials as defined herein.

                Construction and demolition waste. This shall mean waste which results from land clearing, the demolition of buildings, roads or other structures, including but not limited to, beneficial fill materials, wood (including painted and treated wood), land clearing debris other than yard waste, wall coverings (including wall paper, paneling and tile), drywall, plaster, non-asbestos insulation, roofing shingles and other roof coverings, plumbing fixtures, glass, plastic, carpeting, electrical wiring, pipe and metals. Such waste shall also include the above listed types of waste that result from construction projects. Construction and demolition waste shall not include friable asbestos waste, special waste, liquid waste, hazardous waste and waste that contains polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB), putrescible waste, household waste, industrial solid waste, corrugated cardboard, appliances, tires, drums and fuel tanks.

                Detachable container. A detachable container is a container of the size approved by the Central District Health Department that can be lifted and dumped by a collection truck mechanism.

                Garbage. This word shall be held to include every accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable food waste generated by or resulting from the decay, deterioration, storage, preparation or handling of any animal and vegetable matter in any place or at any point where food is prepared for human consumption, including all kitchen and dining room refuse produced by households, hotels, restaurants, lunch rooms, clubs, hospitals, schools, stores, warehouses, cold storage plants, creameries, bakeries, or any other source whatsoever existing in the City.

                Hazardous Waste. This word shall mean a solid waste, or combination of solid wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may (a) cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness or (b) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human or animal health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.

                Junk. Junk shall mean old or scrap copper, brass, rope, batteries, rubber, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, trucks, tractors, and farm machinery or parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or non-ferrous material, which are not held for remelting purposes by an establishment having facilities for remelting material.

                Litter. Litter shall include, but not be limited to: (i) Trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, paper, rags, and ashes; (ii) wood, plaster, cement, brick, or stone building rubble; (iii) grass, leaves, and worthless vegetation; (iv) offal and dead animals; and (v) any machine or machines, vehicle or vehicles, or parts of a machine or vehicle which have lost their identity, character, utility, or serviceability as such through deterioration, dismantling, or the ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to perform their intended functions, or are cast off, discarded, or thrown away or left as waste, wreckage, or junk.


                Minimum Service Collection. A minimum service collection in a residential district shall mean not more than one full 32 gallon garbage can or any number of full baskets, boxes, sacks, or bundles equal in volume to but not exceeding one 32-gallon garbage can. The weight of such collection shall not exceed 50 pounds. Such minimum service collection shall be on a once-a-week basis.

                Refuse. This word shall be held to include the waste material from normal households or living conditions and business operations other than garbage, but the term shall not include waste materials from building construction or repair, factory wastes, or refuse from industrial plants of any character. In general, the kinds of materials classified as refuse are paper, rags, bottles, tin cans, bottle caps, cardboard, wornout clothing or furniture, household appliances, excelsior, garden or tree trimmings, and similar materials.

                Regular Collection. A collection in a residential district shall mean not more than three full thirty-two gallon garbage cans, or two full thirty-two gallon cans and any number of full baskets, boxes, sacks, or bundles equal in volume to not exceeding one thirty-two gallon garbage can. A regular collection shall be on a twice-a-week basis.

                Salvage Yard. Any building, lot, yard or premise used for the collection, processing, salvage, storage, bailing, or shipping of junked vehicles, vehicle parts, paper, cardboard, glass, plastic, metals, rags, scrap materials, junk, or any material similar to those listed herein.

                Special Waste. A solid waste, except waste which is regulated as a hazardous waste, which possesses physical, chemical, or biological characteristics that make it different from general household, or construction and demolition waste, and which requires special handling, treatment, or disposal methodologies in order to protect public health, safety, and the environment.

                Waste material. This word shall be held to include all items, objects, or material not included within the definition of garbage, litter, yard waste, or refuse as well as petroleum oils, greases, solvents, and fuels, insecticides, herbicides, chemical waste, hazardous materials, or any materials similar to those listed herein.

                Yard Waste. Yard waste shall mean grass and leaves and shall not include other yard debris such as tree limbs and brush.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8856, effective 10-8-2003
Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

§17-2.  Duty of Enforcement 
                The Central District Health Department or the Grand Island Police Department are hereby charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the collecting, transporting, and disposing, by approved methods, of all garbage, litter, refuse, yard waste, and waste materials within the City. Approved methods of disposal for garbage, litter, refuse and waste materials are as follows:

(A) By delivery to a licensed garbage or refuse collector;

(B) By hauling to the City-operated sanitary or landfill transfer station and dispensing there as directed by the person in charge; provided, that the transportation conforms to the requirements of §17-35;

(C) By disposal of garbage in a home garbage disposal unit.

 

Approved methods of disposal for yard waste are as follows:

(A) By utilizing such yard waste in an approved backyard composting site;

(B) By delivery to a licensed garbage collector in a separate yard waste collection service;

(C) By hauling to the City-operated composting site, which is adjacent to the City's transfer station, and dispensing there as directed by the person in charge.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8941, effective 11-24-2004
Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005
Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 


§17-3.  Removal; Duty of Owner
                It shall be the duty of every owner, and person in possession, charge, or in control of any dwelling, flat, rooming house, apartment house, hospital, school, hotel, club, restaurant, boarding house, or eating place, or in possession, in charge, or in control of any shop, place of business, or manufacturing establishment, where garbage, litter, refuse, yard waste, or other waste material is created, or accumulated, to remove or cause to be removed from the premises where accumulated such garbage, litter, refuse, yard waste or waste material.

                It shall be unlawful to place garbage, litter, refuse, yard waste, or waste material in any alley, easement, or vacant property.

 

§17-4.  Litter and Offensive Substances Prohibited; Removal
                It shall be the duty of every owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of any lot or parcel of ground within the city or within two (2) miles of the corporate limits thereof to keep said premises owned, leased, or occupied by such person free from garbage, litter, refuse, rubbish, brush, trash, junk, old building material, offal, manure, and any other offensive or unwholesome matter, and it shall be unlawful for such owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of such lot or parcel of ground to permit, keep, or maintain thereon any such condition liable to become putrid or injurious to the public health, or any such condition liable to produce disease, or which is conducive to the breeding and existence of rats, mice, flies, mosquitoes, bacteria, or any other rodent or insects. The maintenance or permitting of any of the foregoing conditions on any such lot or parcel of ground is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as hereinafter provided in this code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8856, effective 10-8-2003

 

§17-5.  Penalty for Violation
                Any person violating §17-4 shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a code violation. Each day shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as provided in this Code.

Amended by Ordinance. No. 8903, effective 6-9-2004

 

§17-6.  Notice to Remove; Noncompliance with Notice
                Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the Health Director, his or her designee or employees of the City of Grand Island, that there exists upon such lot or parcel of ground such nuisance, the Health Director, his or her designee or employees of the City of Grand Island shall cause a notice to abate and remove said nuisance within five (5) days to be served upon the owner or the owner's authorized agent, and upon the tenant or occupant of said premises. Said notice shall be served either in person or by mailing such notice by first-class mail, postage prepaid and posting notice of the violation on the property. Within five days after receipt of such notice, the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground may request a hearing with the City to appeal the decision to abate or remove a nuisance by filing a written appeal with the office of the City Clerk. A hearing on the appeal shall be held within fourteen days after the filing of the appeal and shall be conducted by the Health Director or his/her designee or the Police Chief or his/her designee. The hearing officer shall render a decision on the appeal within five business days after the conclusion of the hearing. If the appeal fails, the City may have such work done. Within five days after receipt of such notice, if the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing with the City or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the City may have such work done. The costs and expenses of any such work shall be paid by the owner. If unpaid for two months after such work is done, the City may either (a) levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefited in the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied and assessed or (b) recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets or alleys. If such owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant shall have failed or refused to abate and remove such nuisance at the expiration of the date fixed upon such notice, the Director of Health, his or her designee or employees of the City of Grand Island may cause such nuisance to be removed from such parcel or lot, and from any roads, streets, or alleys abutting thereon as set forth in §17-7 of this Chapter.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8856, effective 10-8-2003
Amended by Ordinance No. 8903, effective 6-9-2004
Amended by Ordinance No. 8941, effective 11-24-2004
Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

Amended by Ordinance No. 9494, effective 09-16-2014

 

§17-7.  Procedure for Removal for Noncompliance
                If the Health Director, his or her designee or employees of the City of Grand Island determines that there exists upon any lot or parcel of ground the conditions described above in such a manner as to constitute an immediate nuisance and hazard to the public health and safety, the director, his or her designee or employees of the City of Grand Island shall request the Mayor or his/her designee to declare that such an immediate public nuisance exists, and after any such declaration, the Health Director, his or her designee or employees of the City of Grand Island shall cause to be issued a written notice to abate and remove such public nuisance from such lot or parcel of land within twenty-four (24) hours. Said notice shall be served by personal service upon the owner or the owner's authorized agent, and to any tenant, lessee, or occupant of the premises. If such owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant shall have failed or refused to abate and remove such nuisance at the expiration of the twenty-four (24) hours from delivery of the notice, the Health Director, his or her designee or employees of the City of Grand Island shall cause such nuisance to be removed from such parcel or lot and from any roads, streets, or alleys abutting thereon.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8856, effective 10-8-2003
Amended by Ordinance No. 8903, effective 6-9-2004
Amended by Ordinance No. 8941, effective 11-24-2004
Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

§17-8.  Assessment; Levy; Collection
                If the costs and expenses of removing litter is not paid within the time provided, the city council shall, and it is hereby empowered to, levy and assess the costs and expenses of such work upon the property so benefitted. The same shall be levied on all lots, tracts or parcels of land to the extent of the special benefits to such real estate, by reason of such improvement, such benefits to be determined by the city council sitting as a board of equalization after publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the City and personal notice at least ten days prior thereto. The assessments so levied shall be a lien on the property on which levied from the date of levy and shall be due and payable to the city treasurer thirty days after such levy and shall become delinquent fifty days after such levy and shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per annum from the date they become delinquent; and, at the time of the next certification for general revenue purposes to the county clerk, if not previously paid, the special taxes shall be certified to the county clerk and by him be placed upon the tax list and be collected as other real estate taxes are collected, and be paid over to the city treasurer.

 

§17-9.  Disposal of Large Dead Animals
                All dead animals such as horses, cows, mules and goats, shall be the property of the owner thereof and shall be promptly hauled away and disposed of by such owner at no cost to the City.

 

§17-10.  Disposal of Construction and Demolition Waste
                All accumulation of waste occasioned by the construction, alteration, remodeling, rebuilding, repairing, and/or demolition of buildings or structures shall be removed and disposed of by the owner or contractor at no expense to the City and such waste shall not be considered as garbage or refuse within the meaning of this article.

 

§17-11.  Reserved
§17-12.  Reserved
§17-13.  Reserved

 

 

Division 2. Disposal Receptacles

 

§17-14.  Garbage Receptacles; Residential
                It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any residential premises where meals are served or where garbage or refuse is created or accumulated to provide and keep on the premises suitable and sufficient watertight, rodent-proof and insect-proof metal or plastic receptacles, equipped with a tight-fitting lid and handles or a bail for easy handling. Such receptacles shall not be larger than thirty-two gallons; provided, in multi-family residential areas, detachable containers may be used upon approval of the Central District Health Department.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

§17-15.  Garbage Receptacles; Non-residential
                It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any non-residential premises where meals are served or where garbage or refuse is created or accumulated to provide on such premises suitable and sufficient watertight, rodent-proof and insect-proof metal or plastic receptacles, equipped with a tight-fitting lid and handles or a bail for easy handling, provided, other receptacles may be used in accordance with the following:

(A) Fiber or pressed board receptacles may be used as garbage containers for restaurants, cafes and other similar businesses if such receptacles are protected from the elements and covered so that the contents will not blow away;

(B) Detachable containers may be used upon approval of the Central District Health Department.  

Except as provided above, garbage receptacles in non-residential areas shall not exceed twenty gallons. Fifty-five gallon barrels or drums shall not be permitted as garbage receptacles.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

§17-16.  Duty to Keep Clean
                It shall be the duty of every person to keep his or her garbage receptacles or waste cans reasonably clean and free from offensive odors.

 

§17-17.  Garbage Receptacles; Storage
                All receptacles and cans used for the collection of garbage and refuse shall be kept on the rear of the lot or at a convenient place upon the private premises to facilitate the collection thereof; provided, that where residential premises do not abut alleys, all baskets, boxes, plastic sacks, bundles, or other containers of leaves or grass, shall be placed by the owner or occupant of any such residential premises at the curb adjacent to the premises prior to the time of collection to facilitate the collection thereof. In no event shall receptacles, cans, or storage racks be located or permitted in City alleys, easements, or other City right-of-way.

 

§17-18.  Receptacles; Repair or Replacement
                If garbage cans or receptacles are in a state of disrepair, or do not meet the requirements of this article, it shall be the duty of the Central District Health Department to leave notice with the owner thereof directing such repair or replacement as may be necessary.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

§17-19.  Tree Limbs and Branches
                All tree limbs and branches to be picked up as garbage or refuse shall be cut so that none shall be more than five feet in length and the same shall be tied in bundles not to exceed fifty pounds in weight.

 

§17-20.  Reserved
§17-21.  Reserved
§17-22.  Reserved

 

 

Article II. Collection, Transportation and Disposal
Division 1. Licensed Collectors

 

§17-23.  License Required; Fee
  (A) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to collect and transport garbage or refuse for hire without first obtaining a license therefor from the City.

  (B) The following two types of licenses are authorized:

(1) Garbage Hauler License entitles the licensee to collect and transport both garbage and refuse.

(2) Refuse Hauler License entitles the licensee to collect and transport only refuse.

  (C) The license year shall run from October 1 of the calendar year to September 30 of the following calendar year.

  (D) The fee for a garbage hauler license shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, no part of which shall be refundable.

  (E) The fee for a refuse hauler license shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, no part of which shall be refundable.

  (F) The provisions of this section shall not apply to lawn care or tree trimmer businesses.

  (G) No license issued hereunder shall be transferable.

 

§17-24.  Residency Requirements
                All garbage hauler licensees must be and remain residents of Hall County, Nebraska, at all times during the license year. This requirement must be met in one or more of the following ways:

        (A) By the individual licensee; or

        (B) If the licensee is a partnership, by at least one partner; or

        (C) If the licensee is a corporation, by the corporation's registered agent or one or more corporate officers; or

        (D) If a licensee cannot satisfy the residency requirements set forth in subsections (A) through (C) above, the licensee must appoint a person as an agent who is authorized to receive service of process for the licensee and who meets the residency requirements of this section. Said authorization shall be in writing, acknowledged before a notary, and shall contain a provision that said authorization may not be revoked without the prior written consent of the City.

 

§17-25.  Application for License; Renewal
(A) Any individual, partnership, or corporation applying for a garbage hauler's license or a refuse hauler's license shall file the following with the city clerk:

        (1) A completed application form;

        (2) A list of all vehicles and auxiliary equipment therefor to be used by the applicant in collecting and transporting garbage or refuse. All motor vehicles shall be identified in the manner required by §17-26;

        (3) A certificate of insurance as required by §17-29;

        (4) A performance bond as required by §17-30 (garbage hauler licensees only);

        (5) The fee for the license for which application is made as established by §17-23;

        (6) A copy of the document appointing an agent pursuant to subsection 17-24(D), if the residency requirement of said section is being met under that subsection;

        (7) A certificate from the Central District Health Department showing that the licensee's equipment and method of operation are in compliance with the department's guidelines therefor approved by the city council under §17-26(B).

(B) The city clerk shall issue the appropriate license to the applicant after city council approval.

(C) The procedure for license renewal shall be the same as for a new license, with the additional requirement that the licensee must file his, her, or its application for renewal at least ten days but not more than thirty days prior to the expiration date of the license.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

§17-26.  Vehicle Specifications
                (A) Any vehicle used by a refuse hauler licensee to collect and transport refuse shall be equipped with a cover of such a material sufficient to prevent any refuse and waste materials from being blown away or jarred off such vehicle.

                (B) Any vehicle used by a garbage hauler licensee to collect and transport garbage, shall have a body designed specifically for the transportation of garbage which meets the Central District Health Department guidelines therefor. The Central District Health Department shall submit said guidelines to the city council for approval prior to implementation.

                (C) All garbage and refuse vehicles used by licensees shall display a commercially prepared sign showing the name of the licensee in letters not smaller than four inches high.

                (D) All applicants and licensees shall provide the city clerk with a list of all vehicles to be used in collecting and transporting garbage and/or refuse. For each vehicle, the list shall state: (1) the vehicle's make and model; (2) the VIN number; (3) the year produced; (4) the license plate number; and (5) the gross vehicle weight (GVW). Said list shall be updated whenever any vehicle is added or deleted from usage.

                (E) All vehicles and equipment used by a licensee shall be maintained in as clean and sanitary a condition as possible while in use.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

§17-27.  Office and Telephone Required
                All garbage hauler licensees shall maintain one or more offices within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island at all times during the license year, which are available for contact by the public from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. from Monday through Friday, and from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 Noon on Saturday. A licensee may use an automatic telephone answering machine or similar device for this requirement.

 

§17-28.  Complaints
All garbage hauler licensees shall:

        (A) Maintain a local telephone number for the receipt and processing of complaints, which will enable customers to make contact with the licensee during the business hours established by §17-27.

        (B) Make an investigation as to the validity of all complaints received, and take corrective action on all valid complaints within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving said complaint.

        (C) Maintain a record of complaints received, which sets forth the following information:

                1. The name and address of the complainant;

                2. The date and time the complaint was received;

                3. The action taken in response to the complaint; and

                4. The date and time action was taken.

  (D) Make the records required by subparagraph (C) above available for inspection by the City during the business hours established by §17-27 or produce said records for inspection by the city council upon request.

  (E) Publish a notice in the local weekly newspaper at least once every six (6) months, which informs the licensee's customers of the phone number or numbers which may be called if they have any complaints or questions regarding their garbage service. Said notice may be contained within and be a part of the licensee's normal advertisements.

  (F) The requirements of this section may be met by either the licensee or a designated agent.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

§17-29.  Insurance
  (1) Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska, with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:

(a) Worker's Compensation insurance in compliance with the laws of Nebraska, and Employer's Liability insurance with limits of not less than $100,000; except that a sole proprietor applying for a refuse hauler license who has no employees shall be exempt from providing proof of Worker's Compensation insurance.

(b) Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of the registrant with limits of not less than $500,000 for bodily injury and property damage.

(c) The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island City Clerk a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance coverage.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08/17/2010

 

§17-30.  Performance Bond
(A) Each garbage hauler licensee shall maintain in full force and effect a performance bond with a corporate surety licensed to do business in Nebraska and in favor of the City and all customers of the licensee, guaranteeing:

        (1) That all services purchased by the licensee's customers shall be furnished in a manner in full compliance with the provisions of §17-23 through §17-38 inclusive, or the money paid therefor be refunded in total to said customer or customers;

        (2) That all the licensee's duties under all contracts with residential customers shall be performed; and

        (3) That all fees owed the City, including landfill fees and spillage cleanup fees, shall be paid in full by the 20th day of the month as indicated in §17-42.

(B) The bond required hereby shall be in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).

Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

§17-31.  License Revocation
  (A) The city council may, after notice and hearing, suspend or permanently revoke a garbage hauler's or refuse hauler's license, for one or more of the following reasons:

(1) Failing to maintain residency requirements of §17-24.

(2) Failing to maintain all insurance required by §17-29.

(3) Failing to pay the City landfill fees or spillage cleanup fees when due.

(4) Misusing a license.

(5) Violating one or more provisions of this chapter relating to the collection and transportation of garbage, and/or trash; or failing to fulfill one or more of the terms of a contract with any customer, on five or more occasions in any twelve-month period.

  (B) If the city council determines that, based upon the evidence presented, a suspension is warranted, it shall order the hauler's license be suspended for a period of not less than thirty (30) nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days. Said suspension shall begin on the first day of the month following the date the order of suspension is entered. The licensee shall, before his, her, or its license may be renewed, refund to all customers all fees collected in advance for service to be rendered during the period of suspension; provided, that said licensee may, at his, her, or its option, pay a fine in lieu of suspension in the amount of ten (10) dollars for each day of suspension. Said option must be made and the fines therefor must be paid prior to the first day of suspension under the council's order.

  (C) If the city council determines that, based upon the evidence presented, revocation is warranted, it shall order the hauler's license to be revoked immediately. The order of revocation shall require the licensee to refund to his, her, or its customers, all fees collected in advance for services that were to be rendered after the date of revocation; and require the payment of all fees due the City.

  (D) Any licensee whose license has been revoked may not reapply for a license for a period of five years.

        (1) This prohibition shall apply to individuals, partners, corporate officers and agents, and all managerial personnel involved in the violations for which revocation was ordered.

        (2) Nothing herein shall prohibit a licensee from employing a person who is subject to the order of revocation.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

§17-32.  Use of Licensee Name by Another
                No licensee shall permit another by lease, rental, or other agreement to engage in such business under the name of the licensee or to use the licensee's equipment in such business; provided, that this shall not prohibit a licensee from lending equipment to another licensee on a temporary basis, so long as such equipment has been approved for use by the City.

 

§17-33.  Collection Time
                It shall be unlawful for any licensee or employee thereof to begin collecting garbage or trash from any property within the city limits before 5:00 a.m.

 

§17-34.  Levels of Service Offered
                Every licensed garbage hauler shall offer regular collection service to all customers.

                Upon customer request, every licensed garbage hauler shall provide minimum service collection.

                The rate for minimum service collection shall be the minimum rate necessary to offset the cost of the minimal service and will not be used to offset the cost of services provided to other customers.

                Haulers will provide a way for customers to occasionally dispose of additional refuse at additional cost. The hauler will charge an additional amount for this service, based on his additional cost to pick up, transport, process, and dispose of the additional refuse. Units of additional refuse shall be in volumes of 32 gallons, not to exceed 50 pounds each.

                Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit haulers from offering additional levels of service.

 

§17-35.  Disposal by Unlicensed Persons
                (A) The provisions of §17-23 through §17-34 shall not be interpreted as preventing persons from collecting and transporting their own garbage, refuse, construction and demolition waste, and waste materials approved for disposal from their own property to the City disposal facilities, so long as such garbage, refuse, construction and demolition waste, and trash is secured as set forth in subsection (B) below.

                (B) The garbage, trash, refuse, construction and demolition waste, and waste materials collected and hauled pursuant to this section must be completely covered or securely fastened so as to prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling, seeping, falling or blowing from the vehicle while in transit.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

Amended by Ordinance No. 9616, effective 12-28-2016

 

§17-36.  Reserved
§17-37.  Reserved
§17-38.  Reserved

 

 

Division 2. City Landfill

 

§17-39.  Landfill Site
                The City of Grand Island shall provide suitable landfill or transfer station areas for the disposal of garbage, refuse, and construction and demolition waste. All garbage and refuse collectors licensed by the City of Grand Island shall deposit all garbage, refuse, and construction and demolition waste collected in such areas. It shall be unlawful, except as set forth herein, to unload or deposit any garbage, refuse, construction and demolition waste and the contents of privy vaults and cesspools hauled from any premises within the corporate limits of the City of Grand Island, and destined for disposal within the State of Nebraska, at any place other than the approved disposal site designated as the landfill or transfer station areas provided by the City of Grand Island. The prohibition herein shall not apply to garbage or refuse processed at a Materials Recovery Facility operated pursuant to a permit issued by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality. All garbage, refuse, and construction and demolition waste lawfully deposited in City landfill areas shall become the property of the City of Grand Island.

 

§17-40.  Hours of Operation
                The Public Works Director shall have the authority to designate the days and hours that the City landfill or transfer station areas will be open to the public. Notice thereof shall be posted at the entrance to the area.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

§17-41.  Fees
                All persons who dispose of Municipal Solid Waste at the City transfer station, or the Grand Island Regional landfill when permitted, shall pay to the City for such dumping privileges, for each load, an amount in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

An additional charge shall apply when the delivering vehicle is not properly equipped or the load is not completely covered, or otherwise contained or securely fastened as required by this chapter or other applicable laws. Penalty provision applies to all loads.

All yard waste, clean trees and branches shall be free of trash and debris. All plastic bags must be removed by the hauler.

Special wastes as defined in §17-1 and so designated by the Solid Waste Superintendent or his/her designee as requiring additional handling due to disposal method and/or operational considerations shall be charged a disposal rate in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. Due to the additional handling necessary to process the disposal of special waste, no special waste will be accepted within one hour of the end of the working day.

Fuel contaminated soils require Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and landfill pre-approval.

Asbestos (ACM) requires Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and landfill pre-approval. Disposal only during scheduled hours. Haulers shall use same equipment and procedures at disposal area as required for removal procedures. ACM shall be in approved condition and/or containers.

If full payment is not received by the 20th of each month in the month it is due, a late payment charge shall be assessed. This charge shall be one percent (1%) per month of the unpaid balance.

                The fees required by this chapter may be waived by order of the mayor when, in the discretion of the mayor, the public health, safety, and welfare of the community would be enhanced by the waiving of such fees because of city-wide or district cleanup or improvement campaigns, or because of fire, flood, tornado, or other event, or series of events, causing extensive damage to the homes and property of the residents of the City of Grand Island.

                This section shall not be construed to permit the mayor to waive fees for garbage and refuse licensees under this chapter, disposing of garbage, refuse and waste materials for hire at the City transfer station or sanitary landfill in the normal course of their business.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

§17-42.  Fees; Monthly Statement
                All charges or approved licensee accounts made for such use of the City landfill shall be billed on the first day of the month and payable by the 20th day of such month; provided, the Department of Public Works shall accumulate all information necessary for such billings by the city treasurer, and all such billings shall be payable at the office of the city treasurer.

 

§17-43.  Fees; Failure to Pay
                The city council may in its discretion revoke the license of any person licensed under the provisions of this article who shall for fifteen days fail to pay any amount due the City for the use of the City landfill as provided by this article.

 

§17-44.  Lead-acid Batteries; Waste Oil; Hazardous Waste; Prohibited
                It shall be unlawful to deposit for disposal, attempt to deposit for disposal, or leave for collection by a licensed garbage or refuse collector, any lead-acid batteries, waste oil, or other hazardous waste materials in the City solid waste disposal system.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

§17-45.  Automobile Parts; Bulky Refuse
                It shall be unlawful for any person to haul to and deposit in the City landfill any automobile chassis, automobile tops, automobile frames, automobile fenders, any farm implements, or any bulky refuse made of iron, steel, tin, or metal of any kind without first having such automobile chassis, automobile tops, automobile frames, automobile fenders, any farm implements, or any bulky refuse made of iron, steel, tin, or metal of any kind cut or broken into pieces not over two feet in height.

 

§17-46.  Burn Barrels; Fireplace Ashes; Acceptance of
                The senior operator on duty at the Grand Island Solid Waste facilities (landfill and transfer station) shall, at his/her sole and absolute discretion, have the right to refuse burn barrels or fireplace ashes if in his/her judgment, based upon the time of day as relating to the time of closing of said facilities, such disposal will create the potential of fires.

 

§17-47.  Reserved
§17-48.  Reserved
§17-49.  Reserved

 

 

Article III. Weeds

 

§17-50.  Weeds; Prohibited
                It shall be unlawful and hereby declared a public nuisance for any owner, agent, occupant, or person in possession, charge or control of any lot or piece of ground in the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, to allow or maintain any growth of twelve inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation and upon conviction such owner, agent, occupant, or person shall be penalized in accordance with the provisions of the Grand Island City Code. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as having been committed on each calendar day that such weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation is permitted to remain on said premises.

                As used and applied in this section, weeds shall include, but not be limited to, bindweed (convolvulus arvensis), puncture vince (tribulus terrestris), leafy spurge (euphorbia esula), Canada thistle (cirsium arvense), perennial peppergrass (lepidium draba), Russian knapweed (cenaurea picris), Johnson grass (sorghum halepense), nodding or musk thistle (Carduus nutans), Scotch thistle (onopordum acanthium), morning glory (Impmoea spp.), bur ragwood (Franseria discolor/Franseria tomentosa), glodepodded hoary cress (Hymenophysa pubescens), quack grass (agropyron repens), perennial sow thistle (sonchus arvensis), horse nettle (solanum carolinense), bull thistle (cirsium lanceolatum), buckthorn (rahmnus sp.) (tourn), hemp plant (cannabis sativa), ragweed (ambrosiaceae), or any other economically useless plant or plant of unsightly appearance.

 

§17-51.  Duty to Cut
                It shall be the duty of each owner, agent, occupant, or person in possession, charge or control of any lot or piece of ground in the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, to cut and remove from such lot or piece of ground together with the adjoining streets or alleys, all weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation twelve inches or more in height, and the cuttings shall be removed from such real estate.

 

§17-52.  Notice to Abate; Remove Nuisance
                Notice to abate and remove such nuisance shall be given to each owner or owner's duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any, by personal service or by mailing such notice by first-class mail, postage prepaid and posting notice of the violation on the property.  Within five days after receipt of such notice or publication or posting, whichever is applicable, if the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing with the city or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the city may have such work done. If unpaid for two months after such work is done, the city may either (a) levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefited in the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied and assessed or (b) recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

Amended by Ordinance No. 9494, effective 09-16-2014

 

§17-53.  Reserved
§17-54.  Reserved
§17-55.  Reserved

 

 

Article IV. Unlicensed or Inoperable Vehicles

 

§17-56.  Definitions
The following definitions are applicable to all Code sections pertaining to unlicensed or inoperable vehicles:

(1) Unlicensed Vehicle means any vehicle as defined in Chapter 22 of the City Code which does not display valid license plates or valid in transit stickers.

(2) Building means a structure with four walls and a roof erected in compliance with the city building codes.

(3) Wrecked means a vehicle that has been damaged to such an extent that such vehicle, if operated on the streets or highways, would be in violation of one or more state statutes or city code sections pertaining to the condition of vehicles being operated on the alleys, streets or highways.

(4) Dismantled means lacking any vehicle part, the absence of which, if such a vehicle were operated on the streets or highways, would cause such vehicle to be in violation of one or more state statutes or city code sections pertaining to the condition of vehicles being operated on the alleys, streets or highways.

(5) Inoperable means having one or more parts necessary for the operation of a vehicle either not attached to such vehicle or in non-working condition, including but not limited to a fully charged battery and all tires fully inflated. Inoperable shall include totally or partially wrecked or dismantled vehicles.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8903, effective 6-9-2004

 

§17-57.  Unlicensed or Inoperable Vehicles; Public Nuisances
                The placement of any unlicensed or inoperable vehicle or any vehicle parts on any tract of land within the City of Grand Island shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to §20-15 of the Grand Island City Code upon written request by the Grand Island Police Department pursuant to §20-15 of the Grand Island City Code. It shall be unlawful for any owner, owner's duly authorized agent or person in possession, charge or control, or the occupant of such a tract to cause, maintain, or permit such public nuisance to exist on said property, except in a manner as set forth below.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8903, effective 6-9-2004
Amended by Ordinance No. 8941, effective 11-24-2004

 

§17-58.  Placement of Unlicensed or Inoperable Vehicles
Unlicensed or inoperable vehicles and vehicle parts, whether junked, salvaged, or new, may be placed:

                (1) On any tract being used as a salvage yard, which is in full compliance with all city code sections pertaining to such businesses, including zoning.

            (2) On any tract being lawfully used for a business activity related to unlicensed or inoperable vehicles, such as an automotive body shop, so long as the unlicensed or inoperable vehicles and parts are stored in an area that is screened from adjoining property and the public right-of-way by a sight-obscuring fence at least six feet in height, or such unlicensed or inoperable vehicles and vehicle parts are removed from the premises; provided, that unlicensed or inoperable vehicles being displayed for sale as whole units by a licensed automobile dealer are not subject to this screening requirement.

                (3) On any other tract, so long as such unlicensed or inoperable vehicles and such vehicle parts are placed within a building.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8903, effective 6-9-2004

 

§17-59.  Removal of Unlicensed or Inoperable Vehicles
(A) The chief of police or any police supervisor may cause the removal of any unlicensed or inoperable vehicle or vehicle parts:

(1) from any public property; or

(2) from any private property with the permission of the owner or occupant thereof or by authority of a Court order.

(B) The towing, impoundment, and disposal provisions set forth in Chapter 22 shall be applied to all unlicensed or inoperable vehicles and vehicle parts removed under authority of this section.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8903, effective 6-9-2004

 

§17-60.  Storage of Damaged Vehicles
                No automobile repair shop, body shop, or dealer may store any customer, inventory, or owned vehicles on the public right-of-way or streets, but shall be required to store such vehicles on the business premises.

 

§17-61.  Reserved
§17-62.  Reserved
§17-63.  Reserved

 

 

Article V. Graffiti

 

§17-64.  Intent
                Graffiti on public and private property is a blighting factor which not only depreciates the value of the property which has been the target of such malicious vandalism, but also depreciates the value of the adjacent and surrounding properties, and in so doing, negatively impacts upon the entire community. The City Council finds and determines that graffiti is a nuisance and unless it and other inscribed material is removed from public and private properties, it tends to remain.

 

§17-65.  Definitions
Whenever the following terms are used in this division, they shall have the meanings established by this section:

  Graffiti means the defacing, damaging or destroying by the spraying of paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public and private buildings, structures and places.

  Graffiti abatement procedure means an abatement procedure which identifies graffiti, issues notice to the landowner to abate the graffiti, and cures in absence of response.

  Private contractor means any person with whom the city shall have duly contracted to remove graffiti.

 

§17-66.  Graffiti - Prohibited
                It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint or draw upon any wall, rock, bridge, building, fence, gate, other structure, tree, or other real or personal property, either publicly or privately owned, any drawing, inscription, figure or mark of the type which is commonly known and referred to as "graffiti" within the city.


 

§17-67.  Same - Violation; penalty
                Any person who is convicted of violating §17-68 shall be punished by a fine pursuant to §1-7 of the Grand Island City Code. In addition to such punishment, the court may, in imposing sentence, order the defendant to restore the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed.

 

§17-68.  Same - Notice of removal
                Whenever the City Administrator, or his/her designee determines that graffiti exists on any public and private buildings, structures and places which are visible to any person utilizing any public right-of-way in this city, be this road, parkway, alley, or otherwise, and that seasonal temperatures permit the painting of exterior surfaces, the City Administrator, or his/her designee shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have ten (10) days after the date of the notice to remove or paint over the graffiti, or the conditions will be subject to abatement by the city. If the property owner elects to paint over the graffiti, the paint used to obliterate the graffiti shall be as close as practicable to background color(s).

                The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to this section shall consist of a written notice to be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises, as such owner's name and address appears on the last property tax assessment rolls of the county. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent in care of the property address. The notice required by this section may be served in any one of the following manners:

(1) By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property.

(2) By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the owner's last known address. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address.

                The notice shall be substantially in the following form:

NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI

Date:

 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required by law at your expense to remove or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as: ____________________________, Grand Island, Nebraska, which is visible to public view, within ten (10) days after the date of this notice; or, if you fail to do so, City employees or private contractors employed by the City will enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by removal or painting over the graffiti. The cost of the abatement by the City employees or its private contractors will be assessed upon your property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid.

 

All persons having any objection to, or interest in said matters are hereby notified to submit any objections or comments to the City Administrator of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, or his/her designee within forty-eight (48) hours from the date of this notice. At the conclusion of this ten (10) day period, the City may proceed with the abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property at your expense without further notice.

City of Grand Island, Nebraska, Municipal Corporation,

By:________________________________________

Title:_______________________________________

 

§17-69.  City's Costs Declared Lien
                Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of the graffiti nuisance under the provisions of this division may constitute a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed.

 

§17-70.  Removal by City
                Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice by the designated date, or such continued date thereafter as the City Administrator, or his/her designee approves, then the City Administrator, or his/her designee, with the consent of the Mayor, is authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by city forces or private contract, and the city or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the city, and any paint used to obliterate graffiti shall be as close as practicable to background color(s). If the City Administrator provides for the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, he shall not authorize nor undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti or other inscribed material is located.

 

§17-71.  Private Property Consent Forms
                Property owners in the city may consent in advance to city entry onto private property for graffiti removal purposes. The city will make forms for such consent available.

Article V moved from Chapter 8 pursuant to Ordinance No. 9045, effective 6-7-2006

 

CHAPTER 18

MECHANICAL

Article I. Natural Gas

§18-1.  Rates
               (A)  Schedule of Maximum Rates. The rates charged by NorthWestern Public Service, a division of NorthWestern Corporation, a Delaware corporation, doing business in the state of Nebraska as a Domesticated Corporation, for natural gas supplied to customers in the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, unless otherwise approved by the Mayor and City Council, shall not exceed the following, effective August 1, 2001:

Customer Charge Per Month

 

Residential Service Rate No. 91 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

$  5.00 per Meter

General Service Rate No. 92 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

$  6.00 per Meter

Commercial & Industrial Rate No. 94 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

$ 80.00 per Meter

 

 

Usage Charge – Rate No. 91

Non-Gas

Gas

  First 30 Therms per month

$0.26356

$0.70271 per Therm

  Over 30 Therms per month

$0.09513

$0.70271 per Therm

 

 

 

Usage Charge – Rate No. 92

 

 

  First 400 Therms per month

$0.12101

$0.70271 per Therm

  Next 1,600 Therms per month

$0.05343

$0.70271 per Therm

  Over 2,000 Therms per month

$0.03243

$0.70271 per Therm

 

 

 

Usage Charge – Rate No. 94

 

 

  All Therms per month

$0.04530

$0.47232 per Therm

 

 

 

Demand Charge – Rate No. 94

 

 

  Standard Service (all Therms)

$0.21910

$1.20470 per Therm

  Extended Service

 

 

     First 500 Therms/day

$0.24590

$0.33330 per Therm

     Over 500 Therms/day

$0.00000

$0.33330 per Therm

 

Minimum Monthly Charge:

        Shall equal the customer charge for Rate Nos. 91 and 92.

        Shall equal the amount of therms of demand billed and the customer charge for Rate No. 94.

 

Stand-by Capacity Charge:

        For Rate Nos. 91 and 92 customers that use natural gas as a back-up to an alternative fueled heating system, NorthWestern shall charge, in addition to the charges stated above, the following stand-by fee during the months of December through March:

               Rate No. 91 - $12.00 per Meter

               Rate No. 92 - $37.00 per Meter

 

Bills will be rendered at monthly intervals.

 

               (B) Gas Cost Adjustment. The foregoing rates for gas supplied in the period covered by any bill shall be increased or decreased from the foregoing schedule of rates as follows:

                       (1) If at any time or from time to time, the rate authorized to be charged NorthWestern for any natural gas purchased by it on a firm supply basis for resale in Nebraska shall be increased or decreased (whether or not charged under bond) resulting in an average cost per therm to NorthWestern in excess of or less than the average cost per therm prior to application of such increase or decrease, the charge per therm, including the amount that is included in the minimum bill, for gas supplied in each subsequent billing period (beginning not earlier than the effective date of such increase or decrease) may be increased or shall be decreased accordingly. In addition, gas cost variances resulting from the purchase of non-traditional supplies will be added or deducted from charges set forth in filed rates included herein.

                       (2) For the purposes hereof, the amount of any refund, including interest thereon, if any, received by NorthWestern from its supplier of charges paid and applicable to natural gas purchased on a firm basis in Nebraska shall be refunded to the customer as a reduction in billings over the succeeding twelve month period or other period determined appropriate.

                       (3) Variances in actual gas cost incurred and gas cost recovered through unit sales rates will be measured monthly. Gas supply related costs collected from NorthWestern's Agency Sales Service will be credited to actual gas cost incurred. Resulting under or over cost recoveries will be spread to gas cost component of rates over the succeeding twelve month period following the filing of any gas cost adjustment. All accrued over or under variances shall be assessed a carrying charge which shall be the overall rate of return allowed by the Rate Area in NorthWestern's last general rate filing.

                       (4) Any increase or decrease in rates because of gas cost adjustment hereinbefore provided for shall become effective immediately upon the filing with the City Clerk of the City of Grand Island of amended rates reflecting such increase or decrease.

§18-2.  Basis of Measurement
               The rates prescribed by this chapter shall be understood to apply to and be based upon natural gas of the British Thermal Unit heating value of not less than nine hundred British Thermal Units per cubic foot of gas calculated according to standard measurements and in the event that the average total heating value of said gas in any billing period shall fall below said minimum, then the gas to be billed during such billing period shall be decreased proportionately to the deficiency in such heating value.

§18-3.  Violations of Article
               It shall be unlawful for any person operating a system of natural gas and distributing through the streets and public places and selling natural gas in the City, or for any agent or employee of any such person, to sell or attempt to sell or to collect for or to charge for, any such gas supplied or furnished to any customer, user, or purchaser thereof in the City at any rate or price in excess of the rate or price fixed by this article, and any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an infraction.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9049, effective 6/28/2006

§18-4.  Filing Fee; Amount
               The City shall charge and collect a filing fee from natural gas companies for a rate filing. The fee shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

§18-5.  Uniform Mechanical Code Adopted
               The Uniform Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is hereby adopted, together with Appendices as set forth hereafter, and any amendments thereto as may be made from time to time, except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by ordinance and set forth in this chapter of the Grand Island City Code. One copy of the Uniform Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, and all supplements or amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the city clerk as provided by law.

The following appendices shall be adopted along with the Uniform Mechanical Code adopted by this section:

Appendix C- Installation and Testing of Oil (Liquid) Fuel-Fired Equipment.
Appendix E- Sustainable Practices
Appendix F- Sizing of Venting Systems and Outdoor Combustion and Ventilation Opening Design
Appendix G- Example Calculation of Outdoor Air Rate
 

Amended by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9668, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§18-6.  UMC - Certain Sections not Adopted
               It is especially provided that the following chapters, sections, and tables of the Uniform Mechanical Code are not adopted or approved, and the same shall be of no force and effect:

1.                1 Table 104.5 Mechanical Permit Fees.

2.                Sections 1203.2 Dual Purpose Water Heater, 1207.3 Dual-Purpose Water Heaters, 1207.3.1 Temperature Limitations and Table 1203.2 Water Heaters.

3.            Chapter 11- Refrigeration.

4.            Chapter 14- Process Piping.

5.            Chapter 16- Stationary Power Plants.

6.            Appendix A- Residential Plan Examiner Review Form for HVAC System Design.

7.            Appendix B- Procedures to be Followed to Place Gas Equipment in Operation.

8.            Appendix D- Fuel Supply: Manufactured/Mobile Home Parks and Recreational Vehicle Parks.

9.            Section 806.0 Certificate of Acceptance Forms of Appendix E- Sustainable Practices.

 

Deleted by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9668, effective 01-01-2018

 

§18-7.  UMC - Public Copy
               Not less than one copy of the Uniform Mechanical Code adopted pursuant to 18-5 shall be kept on file by the city clerk for inspection by and use of the public.

§18-8. UMC - Amendment of Section 101.0
Section 101.1 of the Uniform Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

101.1. Title.

This document shall be known as the "Uniform Mechanical Code" together with Appendices and any amendments thereto, and shall be cited as such, and will be referred to when used herein or in Chapter18 of the Grand Island City Code as "this Code".

 

 §18-9. UMC - Amendment of Subsection 112.1
Subsection 112.1 of the Uniform Mechanical Code is hereby amended to include the following:

     112.1.   Permits Required.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any installation, alteration or repair any mechanical system regulated by this Code except as permitted in Subsections 112.2 of this section, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a permit to do such work from the Grand Island Building Department.

(A) A permit is required for the installation or replacement of all fuel burning heating equipment, and water heaters together with all chimneys, vents and their connectors.

(B) A permit is required for the installation, repair, or alteration of all fuel gas piping in or in connection with any building or structure or within the property lines of any premises, other than service pipe.

    A permit is required for the installation or replacement of all warm-air furnaces and heating systems including all chimneys, vents, and their connectors.

(C) No Commercial Hoods and Kitchen Ventilation equipment shall be installed without a permit.

(D)  A separate permit shall be obtained for each building or structure.

     No person shall allow any other person to do or cause to be done any work under a permit secured by a permittee except persons in his or her employ.

(E) A permit is required for the repair, replacement, or installation of a gas piping.

(F) No permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any work regulated by this Code, except to a person holding a valid unexpired and unrevoked mechanical license as required by this chapter, except when and as otherwise hereinafter provided in this section.

(G) Any permit by this code may be issued to do any work regulated by this code in a single family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings in the event that such person is the bona fide owner of any such dwelling and accessory buildings and quarters, and that the same are currently occupied by said owner, provided, that said owner shall personally purchase all material and shall personally perform all labor in connection therein. This, however, shall exclude all gas piping and venting of fuel combustion appliances.

§18-10.  UMC - Amendment of Subsection 115.2
Subsection 115.2 of the Uniform Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

  115.2  Permit Fees.

The fee for each permit identified in this chapter shall be set forth in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§18-11.  Reserved

Deleted by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012

 

 

Article II. Gas Appliances and Gas Piping

Division 1. Generally

§18-12. Definitions
               For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall be used and the terms herein set forth shall be construed to have the meaning set forth in this section:

 Mechanical Appliance installation is the act of installing fixtures, equipment, appliances or apparatus, using natural or artificial gas between the outlet of the meter set assembly or outlet of the service regulator, when a meter is not provided, and the inlet connection of fixtures, equipment, appliances or apparatus. Appliance installation shall include the venting of such fixtures, equipment, appliances or apparatus where required.  Gas company shall mean the franchised distributor of gas in the City, pursuant to a franchise ordinance granted to such distributor or its successors or assigns and approved by the mayor and city council.

HVAC is Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning

Mechanical work is the act of heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, gas piping, miscellaneous heat producing, and energy-utilizing equipment, but also to include regulating and controlling the design, construction installation, quality of material, location, operation and maintenance or use of heating, ventilating, cooling, incinerators, air condition systems and other miscellaneous heat producing appliances within this jurisdiction.   Journeyman mechanical fitter is any person qualified under the ordinances of the City of Grand Island to become a Journeyman mechanical Fitter upon obtaining the required license.

  Journeyman plumber is any person qualified under the ordinances of the City of Grand Island to do plumbing work.

  Master mechanical fitter is any entity qualified under the ordinances of the City of Grand Island to become a master gas fitting contractor upon obtaining the required license and bond.

 Mechanical contractor is any entity engaged in the business of gas fitting and appliance installation in connection with any building or structure or to serve any building or structure with natural or artificial gas.

  Master plumber is any person qualified under the ordinances of the City of Grand Island to do plumbing contracting work upon obtaining the required license and bond.

 Workmanship   shall mean executed in a skilled manner; e.g. generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work. Cutting, notching and boring of floor joists and studs shall comply and adopted herein.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007

§18-13. Interfering with Safety Equipment
               Any owner of a gas installation which has been provided with automatic safety equipment, any employee or agent of such owner or any other person who shall block open by manual means or by any other manner whatsoever interfere with or defeat the purpose of such devices to function automatically in the interest of safety shall be guilty of an infraction within the terms of this article, and subject to its penalties, as in the base of a violation of any other of its terms or provisions.

§18-14. Unlawful Connection of Gas Line
               It shall be unlawful for any person except employees or agents of the gas company to open or make any connection to or do work on any gas main or gas service pipe of the gas company on the upstream side of the gas meter without written authorization of the gas company.

§18-15. Prohibiting Use for Electrical Connection
               The gas piping shall not be used for an electrical ground or grounding electrode, nor shall electric circuits utilize gas piping, casing on controls, panels or other metal parts of the gas piping or appliance installations in lieu of wiring.

               This provision shall not apply to low voltage control and ignition circuits and to electronic flame detection device circuits incorporated as a part of the gas appliance or equipment.

§18-16.  Pilot Burners; Safety Shutoff Devices
               (A) All residential and commercial heating equipment with inputs less than 400,000 BTUH shall be equipped with a pilot burner and safety shutoff device. In the event of ignition device failure or pilot outage, complete shutoff of the gas to both the main burner and pilot burner shall take place. The combined time required for the safety shutoff device and the automatic valve to shutoff the gas supply shall not exceed 3 minutes. On heating equipment approved only for outdoor installation, the safety shutoff device need not cause shutoff of the pilot gas.

               (B) All heating equipment with rated inputs between 400,000 and 6,000,000 BTUH must have approved electronic type safety shutoff devices. The response time of the primary safety control to de-energize or activate the gas shutoff device shall not be more than four seconds. The pilot flame-establishing period for expanding, intermittent and interrupted pilots shall not be more than 15 seconds. Gas to such pilots shall be automatically shut off if the pilot fails to ignite. Inputs 2,000,000 BTUH or above shall be equipped with both a solenoid valve and a motorized valve.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007

Article III. Mechanical Fitters, Contractors, Installers

Division 1 Examining Board

§18-17.  Examining Board; Membership
               There is hereby created an examining board for mechanical fitters which shall consist of seven members appointed annually by the Mayor and approved by a majority of the city council. The seven members shall consist of the following:

               (1) The Chief Building Official, or his/her designee

               (2) One member from the local gas company

               (3) One contracting master  mechanical fitter

               (4) One member from the community

Amended by Ordinance No. 9034, effective 03-22-2006

Amended by Ordinance No.  9117, effective 05-29-2007

Amended by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012

§18-18.  Meetings; Chairman
               The Board shall hold its first meeting upon call by the chief building official, and within thirty days following the appointment of its members. The members shall select a chairman from their own number, but not the chief building official. Such chairman shall hold office until the December 31 following, or until his or her successor has been selected. The Board shall meet upon call by the chief building official at such intervals as may be necessary for the proper performance of its duties, but in any case not less than twice a year.

§18-19. Duties; Examinations; Licenses
               The Board shall establish standards and procedures for the qualification, examination and licensing of master mechanical fitter and journeyman mechanical fitter, and shall issue an appropriate license to each person who meets the qualifications therefore and successfully passes the examination given by the Board.

§18-20. Board of Appeals
               The duly appointed Board shall act as a Board of Appeals in making a correct determination of any appeal arising from actions of the chief building official or his authorized representative.

§18-21. Quorum for Board
               Four (4) members of the Board of Appeals shall constitute a quorum.

§18-22. Records
               The Board of Appeals shall keep an accurate record of all their official transactions and shall submit a copy to the office of the city clerk.

§18-23. Procedures
               Appeals shall be made within thirty (30) calendar days from date of the chief building official's decision. Decisions of the Board shall be made within thirty (30) days of receipt of appeal. Decisions of the Board shall be in writing. A copy of the Board's decision shall be delivered to the appellant within 30 calendar days after receipt of original appeal.

§18-24. Filing Fee
               Any person who is aggrieved by any decision of the chief building official or his authorized representative relating to the suitability of alternate materials or type of installation or interpretation of any provision of this Code may obtain review of such decision upon filing a written request for review by the Board in the office of the chief building official or his authorized representative within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision and payment of a filing fee as provided below:

  (1) A $50.00 fee for review of a decision of the chief building official or his authorized representative interpreting any provision or provisions of this Code.

  (2) A $50.00 fee for review of a decision of the chief building official or his authorized representative concerning the suitability of an alternate material or type of installation.

               Enforcement of any decision, notice or order of the chief building official or his authorized representative issued under this Code shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.

§18-25. General Rules
               (1) All mechanical apprentices actively engaged under a master mechanical fitter will be required to register with the City Building Department.  Experience accrued towards taking the journeyman mechanical test will only be accepted as a registered apprentice.  Time accrued previous to registration will be noted.

               (2) Time required for an apprentice to be actively engaged in the trade under the supervision of a master, journeyman, or qualified shop will be a minimum of three years. Proof of qualifications will be submitted to the Board in writing for consideration and approval for the journeyman examination. Any academical time to be considered by the Board in place of actual apprenticeship time in the trade must be from a State accredited college or Technical school.

               (3) Applicants must hold a journeyman license for a minimum of four years before taking the Master exam, and be actively engaged in the trade for the full two years.

               (4) The minimum age limit for a Journeyman examination will be Twenty (20) years of age unless approved by the Board.

               (5) The allotted time for the Master and Journeyman examination will be four hours (four hours open book).

               (6) Request for Master and Journeyman examination will be filed in the City of Grand Island Building Department Office prior to the examination date for the consideration of the Board. Examination fee will be paid with the application. No exam fee will be refunded after taking the examination.

               (7) All applicants will submit, along with their request for examination, letters of proof of the required apprenticeship time actively engaged in the trade.

               (8) In the event that an applicant fails to pass the examination given, he may make application for a subsequent exam after eighty-five (85) days have passed.

               (9) At the discretion of the Board, experience gained at a industrial plant or outside the tri-city jurisdiction may be considered as apprenticeship time to qualify for a Journeyman examination. Information considered by the Board shall include written proof of previous experience record and oral examination.

               (10) All examination papers are the property of the examining Board. Applicants will not be permitted to remain during grading or to review examination papers after they have been submitted for grading. Test results will be sent by mail.

               (11) Applicant must obtain a passing score on each part of the exam (written as well as drawing).

               (12) An applicant with a passing score will have a 30 day grace period to pick up a new license dated from the test date.

               (13) An applicant must supply his own copy of this Code; the Grand Island Building Department will not supply copies to anyone during the test. Photocopies, reference books, or any other reference materials will not be allowed in the testing area during the test.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012

 

Division 2. Mechanical Inspector

§18-26.  Office Created; Authority; Assistants
               There is hereby created and established the office of the mechanical inspector, who shall be the chief building official, and who shall have supervision of all  gas piping, gas appliance installations and mechanical work in the city and the two mile area adjacent thereto. The mechanical inspector shall have such assistance as may be necessary. Assistants shall be hired only after being examined and recommended by the chief building official. Any such assistant shall have the same power as the mechanical inspector.     

§18-27.  Duties
               It shall be the duty of the mechanical inspector to issue permits and inspect all mechanical work and gas distribution from the outlet side of the meter and all gas installations, but to exclude gas mains, within the City and the two mile area adjacent thereto and to investigate all reported cases of the use of imperfect materials or workmanship on any job of mechanical work or the violation of any of the provisions of this article by a plumber, mechanical fitter or builder.

§18-28.  Inspections
               It shall be the duty of the mechanical inspector to make inspections of any mechanical work, gas piping, appliance installation or connections at the request of the installer, department head, owner, agent, tenant, or occupant of any building or the premises where such gas piping or mechanical work is located in order to ascertain whether or not the mechanical work, gas piping or appliances in such building or premises are in a safe condition. The inspector shall have the authority to enter any building or upon any premises at all reasonable hours to ascertain if the provisions of this article, or any ordinances relating to mechanical work, gas piping or appliance installations have been or are being violated or being complied with, and should the inspector, upon making such an inspection as requested by the installer, owner, agent, tenant, or department head, find an unsafe or unsatisfactory installation, the inspector shall have the authority to request the gas company to shut off the appliance or service at the meter (depending upon the seriousness of the conditions as determined by the inspector), tag same, and shall notify the installer immediately if the job is a new installation, or the owner, agent, tenant, or one in charge of the property to cause the same to be remedied within a specified time, not exceeding ten days if the same is not a new installation. Should the installer, owner, agent, tenant, or one in charge of the premises fail to make such corrections, changes or repairs, or fail to notify the inspector to make a re-inspection within the specified time after receiving such notification to comply therewith, said owner, agent, tenant, installer or person in charge, shall be considered maintaining an unsafe mechanical installation and violating the requirements hereof, and the inspector shall make a re-inspection of the premises and report the findings to the chief building official, who shall in turn cause action to be taken in the proper court to secure compliance, and the penalties as set forth in this chapter shall apply. It shall be the duty and the responsibility of the installer or one making such correction, changes or repairs to notify the inspector within forty-eight hours after completion of such correction, changes or repairs, and request for re-inspection.

§18-29.  Inspection Prior to Covering Installation
               Before any part of any installation is covered from sight, a notification shall be given the mechanical inspector who shall, within forty-eight hours, inspect such part of the installation.

§18-30.  Reserved

§18-31.  Procedure for Re-inspection
               If, by reason of noncompliance with the provisions of this article or through the use of defective material or inferior workmanship, the approval of the mechanical inspector is not given and subsequent inspections become necessary, the installer shall notify the mechanical inspector when such work shall be ready for such subsequent inspection, which shall be made in the same manner as is hereinbefore provided. The fees for  re-inspection shall be provided in the fee schedule.

§18-32.  Inspector May Require Testing
               When permits have been issued for additional fixtures or piping or alterations to any existing system, the mechanical inspector may, if in his or her discretion it is deemed necessary, require the installer to make a complete test of the whole system as is required for new systems.

§18-33.  Authority to Condemn; Penalty
               Authority is hereby granted to the mechanical inspector to condemn any existing gas or mechanical installations which, in his discretion, is hazardous or dangerous to human life. It shall be the duty of the property owner to immediately eliminate the hazardous conditions by removal or repair of these conditions. Failure to do so will be a violation of the provisions of this article.

§18-34.  Reserved

               Deleted by Ordinance No.  9117, effective 05-29-2007 

§18-35. 

 

Division 3. Registration of Contractors

§18-36. Registration Required
               No person shall engage in the mechanical fitting business in the City until registered in the office of the chief building official as a mechanical contractor.

§18-37. Registration; Individual
               No person shall be registered as a mechanical contractor unless he is licensed as a master mechanical fitter under the provisions of this section and has in force and effect one or more insurance policies as required by other sections of the city code.

§18-38. Registration; Firm, Corporation
               No firm, association or corporation shall be registered as a mechanical contractor unless the proper officers of the concern shall certify to the chief building official that an identified master mechanical fitter, licensed under the provisions of this section, is an officer, member or regular employee of such concern, and that such master mechanical fitter will be in direct supervision of all of the mechanical work contracted and done by such concern, and unless such concern has in force and effect one or more insurance policies as required by other sections of the city code.

§18-39.Registration; Fee
               The fees to be collected by the chief building official for the registration of a mechanical contractor shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

§18-40. Registration; Certificate
               The chief building official shall issue a certificate of registration to any mechanical contractor applying for such and qualifying under the provisions of this section, for a period beginning on the date thereof and expiring on December 31 of the same year. The holder of the certificate shall display same at the regular place of business of the holder.

               Renewal of a registration certificate may be obtained upon showing of qualifications as provided for in this section and payment of the proper fee.

§18-41. Certificate; Revocation
               The Board may revoke any certificate of registration of any mechanical contractor after hearing by the Board for any of the following reasons:

(1) Lack of competency or lack of knowledge in matters relevant to the certificate of registration;

(2) Certificate of registration being obtained by fraud;

(3) The lending of any certificate of registration or the obtaining of permits there under for any other person;

(4) Failure to comply with this Code and any rules issued by the chief building official or Board;

(5) Abandonment of any contract or undertaking without good cause or fraudulent departure from plans or specifications;

(6) Failure to obtain or cause to be obtained permits when the same are required by this code.

The chief building official shall serve notice of such action by registered mail to the holder of the certificate.

 

§18-42.  Mechanical Contractors
               Every mechanical contractor shall be required at all times to have a licensed journeyman mechanical fitter in charge of all work as a condition for the issuance and maintenance of such license.

§18-43. Insurance
      (1) Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance policies written by a company or     companies authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska, with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:

(a) Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.

(b) A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.

(c) The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Building Department with a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance coverage.

(d) Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy herein required to expire or lapse.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010

§18-44. Use of Licensee's Name by Another
            No person or concern who has obtained a mechanical contractor registration pursuant to this chapter shall allow his or her name to be used by another person or concern, either for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing business or work under such registration or license. Every person licensed pursuant to this section shall notify the Board of any change of street address.

Division 4. Master & Journeyman Mechanical Fitters

§18-45. Examinations; Fee; Exemptions
               Any person desiring to be licensed as a master mechanical fitter or as a journeyman mechanical fitter pursuant to this chapter shall make written application for an examination to the Board. Examination fees shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

               Examination fees shall accompany such application. Examination fees are not returned but shall be forfeited in the event the applicant fails the examination.

§18-46.  Reserved

Deleted by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012

 

§18-47. Re-Examination
               Any person desiring to become a master mechanical fitter or a journeyman mechanical fitter who fails to pass an examination pursuant to this chapter as prescribed by the Board may make written application for a subsequent examination 85 days after taking the examination.

§18-48. Licenses; Term; Renewal; Fees
               (1) All licenses issued by the Board pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued, but may be renewed within thirty days thereafter upon application and payment of fees in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. Any license holder who does not renew his license within this thirty-day grace period shall automatically forfeit such license. In the event of forfeiture of a license in this manner, the holder may apply for and qualify to recover the lapsed license by passing an examination as required under the provisions of this code.

               (2) The annual fee for master and journeyman mechanical fitters shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

              (3)  After January 1, 2008 journeyman and master gasfitter licenses will not be issued. Journeyman and master licenses will be issued as journeyman mechanical fitter and master mechanical fitter.

              (4)  Any person holding a valid master or journeyman plumbing license, will be eligible to obtain an equivalent mechanical license from April 1, 2007 to January 31,2008. Any person after January 31, 2008 applying for application to test for journeyman or master mechanical license will be required to have appropriate time, experience or qualifications for the level of license applying for.

§18-49. License; Revocation
               The city council by a majority vote shall have the power to revoke the license of any journeyman mechanical fitter or master mechanical fitter upon the recommendation of the Board, if the license was obtained through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is shown to be grossly incompetent, or has a second time willfully violated any of the provisions of this article or any other provisions of City of Grand Island Code related to gas piping, Heating, Venting, Air Conditioning systems (HVAC) or mechanical work. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to the penalties prescribed for the violation of the provisions of this article.

               Before a license may be revoked, the licensee shall have notice in writing, enumerating the charges alleged, and shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council not sooner than five days from receipt of the notice. The licensee shall be given an opportunity to present testimony, oral or written, and shall have the right of cross-examination. All testimony before the city council shall be given under oath. The city council shall have power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and compel the attendance of witnesses. The decision of the city council shall be based upon the evidence produced at the hearing, and such decision shall be final. A person whose license has been revoked shall not be permitted to reapply for another such license within one year from the date of such revocation.

§18-50. Temporary Journeyman Mechanical Fitter License
               The chief building official may issue a temporary journeyman mechanical fitters license pending examination; provided that the applicant therefore holds a similar license from an equivalent board. Such permit shall be valid until the next examination by the Board.

§18-51. Use of Licensee's Name by Another
               No person or concern who has obtained a mechanical fitter's license pursuant to this article, shall allow his or her name to be used by another person or concern, either for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing business or work under such registration or license. Every person licensed pursuant to this section shall notify the Board of any change of street address.

 §18-52. Renewal of License
               Any person licensed under the provisions of this article as a master mechanical fitter or a journeyman, who does not renew his license for a period of thirty days after the expiration of same, shall pay the examination fee required by this article, and shall submit himself to an examination by the Board for mechanical fitters before such person can be again licensed hereunder.

 Division 5. General

§18-53.  Application
               Application for registration shall be made in writing to the building department which shall show the name, residence and business location of the applicant and such other information as may be required.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9049, effective 06-28-2006

Amended by Ordinance No.   9117, effective 05-29-2007

§18-54.  Fees
Fees in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule shall be charged for registration and examination as follows:

New mechanical contractor's license fee issued between January 1 and June 30

New mechanical contractor's license fee issued between July 1 and December 31

Renewal of mechanical contractor's license

Master mechanical fitter's license registration card

Journeyman mechanical fitter's registration card

Master mechanical fitter's examination

Journeyman mechanical fitter's examination

§18-55.  Examination; Prerequisites; Exemptions
               (A)  Before the applicant shall be registered as a master mechanical fitter, contractor or journeyman, as the case may be, he or she shall submit to an examination to determine fitness and competency to engage in the business, trade, or calling of gas fitting, mechanical work or appliance installation work, as the case may be, which examination shall be given by the examining board for mechanical fitters as hereinbefore set forth, such applicant after having by such examination been shown to be fit, competent and qualified to engage in the business, trade, or calling of a master or journeyman mechanical fitter, as the case may be, shall be registered by the chief building official, who shall deliver to such applicant a certificate of registration, signed by the chief building official.

               (B)  An applicant failing to pass an examination shall not be eligible for re-examination until eighty five days shall have elapsed after the previous examination. Each applicant shall pay an examination fee for each re-examination required.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012

 

§18-56.  Reserved

               Deleted by Ordinance No. 9378, effective 05-15-2012

 

§18-57.  Insurance
    (1) Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska, with the following coverages,  amounts, and provisions:

  (a) Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.

  (b) A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.

  (c) The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Building Department a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance coverage.

  (d) Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy herein required to expire or lapse.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010

§18-58.  Expiration of Insurance
               Any registration certificate issued to a mechanical contractor under the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked by the mayor and city council should the holder of such registration certificate permit the insurance policy herein required to expire or lapse. Any corporation, firm, or partnership which may be registered hereunder as a mechanical contractor in the name of such corporation, firm, or partnership, shall have a master mechanical fitter who has submitted to the examination given by the examining board for mechanical fitters and has thereby shown himself or herself fit, competent and qualified to engage in the business, trade, or calling of mechanical work, HVAC installation and gas piping as a bona fide officer of such corporation or as a member of such firm or partnership and who shall at all times be in actual charge of and be responsible for the installation, removal, or repair of any mechanical work or HVAC installation or gas piping work done by such corporation, firm or partnership. Before such corporation, firm, or partnership shall be registered in its corporate, firm, or partnership name as a  mechanical contractor, there shall be filed with the chief building official a certificate from the examining board of mechanical fitters showing the fitness and competency of such officer of such corporation or such member of such firm or partnership to engage in the business or calling of master mechanical fitter; provided, if, after a certificate of registration is issued such corporation, such member of such firm or partnership shall withdraw there from and cease to be connected therewith, then and in that event, the mayor and city council shall forthwith revoke the certificate of registration of such corporation, firm, or partnership upon the request of the chief building official.

§18-59.  Reserved

§18-60.  Mechanical Contractors
               Every mechanical contractor shall be required at all times to have a licensed journeyman mechanical fitter in charge of all work as a condition for the issuance and maintenance of such license.

§18-61.  Corporations; Registration; Revocation
               Any corporation, firm, or partnership which may be registered hereunder as a mechanical contractor in the name of such corporation, firm or partnership shall have a master mechanical fitter who has submitted to the examination given by the examining board for mechanical fitters and installers and has thereby shown himself or herself fit, competent and qualified to engage in the business, trade, or calling of mechanical work, HVAC installation and gas piping as a bona fide officer of such corporation or as a member of such firm or partnership and who shall at all times be in actual charge of and be responsible for the mechanical work, HVAC installation, removal or repair of any gas fitting work done by such corporation, firm, or partnership. Before such corporation, firm or partnership shall be registered in its corporate, firm, or partnership name as a mechanical contractor, there shall be filed with the chief building official a certificate from the examining board of mechanical fitters showing the fitness and competency of such officer of such corporation or such member of such firm or partnership to engage in the business or calling of mechanical contractor; provided, if, after a certificate of registration is issued such corporation, such member of such firm or partnership shall withdraw there from and cease to be connected therewith, then and in that event the city council shall forthwith revoke the certificate of registration of such corporation, firm or partnership upon the request of the chief building official.

§18-62.  Violations of This Article
               It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of contracting mechanical work, HVAC installation and gas piping of any nature without first being registered as a mechanical contractor qualified under the provisions of this division; further, mechanical contracting shall be bonded and duly authorized as provided for in this division.

               Journeyman mechanical fitters shall work under the supervision of a master mechanical fitter and are prohibited from engaging in the business of mechanical contractor within the scope of this article.

§18-63.  Expiration of Registration
               Such registration shall expire on December 31 following the date thereof and shall not be assignable. If registration and license fees are not paid within thirty days, the license shall automatically be revoked.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007

§18-64.  Revocation; Re-Registration
               The mayor and council by a majority vote shall have the power to revoke any mechanical  contractor or master mechanical fitter's certificate or registration upon the recommendation of the chief building official and examining board for mechanical fitters if the same was obtained through error or fraud or if the recipient thereof is shown to be grossly incompetent or has willfully violated any of the provisions of this article or the mechanical  code of the City a second time. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to the penalties prescribed for the violation of the provisions of this article. If a certificate of registration be revoked, the holder of the same shall not apply for registration until one year from the date of such revocation.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007

§18-65.  Renewal
               Certificates of registration at the time of their expiration may be renewed upon recommendation of the chief building official for mechanical fitters without an examination upon payment of the required registration and license fees.

               Any person licensed under the provisions of this division as a master or journeyman mechanical fitter who does not renew his or her license within a period of one month after the expiration of the same shall pay the examination fees required by this division, and submit to an examination by the examining board before such person can be licensed hereunder.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007

§18-66.  Persons Not Required to Register
               Any person engaged in wholesale or retail sales of plumbing or gas connecting materials or supplies but not engaged in the installation, alteration, repair or removal of gas piping or appliances shall not be required to registered hereunder.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007

§18-67.  Unlawful Use of Registered Name
               No registered mechanical fitter shall allow his or her name to be used by another person directly or indirectly either to obtain a permit for the installation of any mechanical and HVAC, or to do any gas fitting work or any appliance installing work, and if any registered mechanical fitter violates this provision, the mayor and city council shall forthwith revoke the certificate of registration issued to such mechanical fitter, and in addition to having such certificate of registration revoked, such mechanical fitter may be prosecuted under §18-72 for such violation.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007

§18-68.  Unregistered Mechanical-Fitter
               It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any job of mechanical or HVAC, gas piping or making any gas connection incident to any property owned, managed, or controlled by such person unless the fitter performing such work has been registered as required by this division and has received a permit from the chief building official for such particular work; and any such person causing or permitting any such work to be done in violation of the provisions hereof shall be guilty of a violation of this division and subject to the penalties hereinafter provided for such violation.

 

Division 6. Permit to Perform Mechanical Work

 

§18-69.  Required; To Whom Issued; Term
               Before any new gas fitting mechanical work or HVAC installation is started or any repairs are made to existing gas fitting,  mechanical, HVAC installation inside any building or structure, except the stoppage of leaks or minor repairs or adjustments, a permit shall be obtained from the chief building official and the required fee paid to the city building department. No permits shall be issued to anyone except a licensed master mechanical contractor or authorized journeyman mechanical fitter. All gas fitting  mechanical work or HVAC installation work shall be inspected by the mechanical inspector. All gas fitting mechanical work or HVAC installation permits shall expire and become invalid sixty days after the date of their issuance.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007

§18-70.  Fees
               Upon the granting of a permit for gas fitting mechanical work or HVAC installation, the applicant shall pay a fee to the City in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007

§18-71.  Permit to be Kept on Premises
               It shall be the duty of the installer to keep all permits on the premises where the work for which the permit was issued is being done until such time as the work is completed, inspected, tested and accepted by the mechanical inspector.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007

Division  7. Penalty

§18-72.  Penalty for Violation of Article
               It shall be unlawful for any person upon whom a duty is placed by the provisions of this article to fail or neglect to comply with the provisions thereof, and every person failing or neglecting to comply with or violating any of the provisions of this article, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding one hundred dollars; each day's failure or neglect to comply with or the violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be cumulative and deemed a separate and distinct offense and punishable as such. The penalty provided for in this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any other penalty provided for in this article.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9049, effective 6/28/2006

Amended by Ordinance No. 9117, effective 05-29-2007

CHAPTER 19

LIBRARY

 

§19-1.  Established
                There shall be established in the City a public library and reading room.

 

§19-2.  To Be Free to Inhabitants of City
                The use of the library and reading room established under this chapter shall be forever free to the inhabitants of the City, subject to the rules and regulations of the library board.

 

§19-3.  Library Board; Compensation; Term
                The library board shall consist of seven members, to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The members shall be residents of the city of Grand Island. Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall be a member of the Library Board. Terms of office shall be a four (4) year period, with board positions terminating on June 30 of the year their respective term expires.

                In case of vacancies by resignation, removal, or otherwise, the mayor and city council shall make appointments to fill such vacancies for the unexpired term.

                No director shall receive any pay or compensation for any services rendered as a member of the board. No director shall be elected for more than two successive terms.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8876, effective 12-24-2003

 

§19-4.  Library Board; Organization; Rules
                The library board directors shall, immediately after their appointment, meet and organize by electing one of the members president, and one secretary, and such other officers as they shall deem advisable. Four members of such board shall be a quorum to transact business, and such board shall have power to make and adopt such bylaws, rules, and regulations for its guidance and for the government of the library and reading room that they may deem expedient, subject to the supervision and control of the city council. Such board shall have exclusive control of the expenditures of all money collected or donated to the credit of the library fund and of the renting or construction of any library building, the supervision, care, and custody of the grounds, rooms or buildings, constructed, based, or set apart for that purpose.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8878, effective 12-24-2003

 

§19-5.  Library Board; Powers Generally
                The board of directors of the public library shall have power to purchase or lease grounds, to exercise the power of eminent domain and to condemn real estate for the purpose of securing a site for a library building; to erect, lease or occupy any appropriate building for the use of such library; to appoint a suitable librarian and assistants, to fix their compensation and to remove their appointments in accordance with the Personnel Rules of the City; to establish regulations for the government of such library as may be deemed necessary for its preservation and to maintain its usefulness and efficiency; to fix and impose by general rules, penalties and forfeitures for trespasses or injury upon or to the library, grounds, rooms, books or other property, or the failure to return any book, or for any violation of any bylaw or regulation; and to exercise such power as may be necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of Neb. Rev. Stat. §51-201 through §51-219 and to carry out the provisions of this chapter in establishing and maintaining the public library and reading rooms.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8977, effective 06-08-2005

 

§19-6.  Reserved


§19-7.  Donations
                Any person may make any donation of money or lands for the benefit of the public library and the title to property so donated may be made to and shall rest in the library board and their successors in office and such board shall thereby become the owners thereof in trust for the uses of the public library.

 

§19-8.  Private Books and Works of Art
                The library board shall have the power to authorize any circulating library reading matter or works of art of any person to be deposited in the public library rooms and to be drawn out or used outside of the rooms only on payment of such fee as the person owning the same may require. Deposits of such reading matter or works of art may be removed by the owner thereof at pleasure. The books or other reading matter so deposited in the rooms of the public library shall be separately and distinctly marked and kept upon the shelves apart from the books of the public library and every such private library or other property so deposited in the public library, while so placed or remaining therein, shall be subject to the use and reading within the library room, without charge, of anyone entitled to the free use of the public library.

 

§19-9.  Library Fund
                Any tax levied or collected or funds donated for the benefit of the public library shall be kept for the use of such library separate and apart from all other funds of the city and shall be drawn upon by the proper officers upon the authenticated vouchers of the library board, and shall not be used or disbursed for any other purpose.

 

§19-10.  Library Penalties
                Penalties unpaid or accruing by any bylaw or regulation of the library board may be recovered in a civil action. Such action shall be instituted in the name of the library board and moneys collected in such action shall be forthwith placed in the city treasury to the credit of the library fund.

 

§19-11.  Amendment of Library Rules
                Any bylaw or regulation established by the library board may be amended or annulled by the city council.

CHAPTER 20

MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES

 

§20-1.  Disturbing the Peace
                It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by loud noise, music, or language, by fighting or threatening to fight, or by any other offensive action. It shall be unlawful for any person in legal possession or charge of a residence or other private property to permit, or by inaction allow other persons on the premises to disturb the peace jointly or severally by loud noise, music, or language.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8958, effective 3-9-2005

 

§20-2.  Trespassing
                It shall be unlawful for any person to enter onto or remain on any publicly-owned or privately-owned property for which said person has been given notice against trespassing by actual communication, by posting as prescribed by law or reasonably likely to come to said person's attention, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to exclude intruders.

 

§20-3.  Littering

                (A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to litter by placing, throwing, dropping, scattering, or otherwise depositing in any manner or by any means, any rubbish, refuse, waste materials, garbage, trash, debris, or other foreign substances, solid or liquid, of any form, size, kind, or description, on any public or private property, or in any waters.

(B)  This prohibition shall not apply to any person who, with the consent of the owner of the property, places such items within a proper receptacle or system.

(C)  The operator of any motor vehicle from which litter is dropped, thrown, deposited, or dumped in violation of subsection (A) above shall be deemed to have committed this violation.

 

§20-4.  Shoplifting
                It shall be unlawful to shoplift. A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when he or she, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his or her own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession of such property or its retail value, in whole or in part, does any of the following:

(A)  Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment;

(B)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment;

(C)  Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another;

(D)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise;

(E)  Causes the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less than the retail price of the merchandise;

(F)  Aids, abets, procures, or causes another to commit the offense of shoplifting.

 

§20-5.  Tampering with Meter
                It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, alter, or otherwise interfere in any manner with any meter made or provided for the measuring or monitoring usage of electricity, gas, water, or audiovisual transmission for which payment is required, without first having the permission of the person or company supplying such services.

 

§20-6.  Theft of Services
                It shall be unlawful for any person to make or knowingly have any unauthorized connection to any electric, gas, water, or cable television service, or part thereof.

 

§20-7.  Public Urination
                It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or attempt to urinate on the public streets, alleys, or other places open to the public within the City.

 

§20-8.  Discharging Fire Arms, Air Rifles, etc.
                (A)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer in the course of his or her duties, to discharge or fire a gun, pistol, fire arm, cannon, air rifle, sling shot, or other item designed for the discharge of bullets, missiles, rocks, or other dangerous items by the operation thereof, anywhere within the City.

                (B)  The above prohibition shall not apply to a location designed and utilized for the safe usage of such items, whether established or constructed on a temporary or permanent basis.

                (C)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess in the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle off his or her own premises, an air rifle, bb or pellet gun, airsoft gun, or paintball gun, unless the item is unloaded and encased in a closed container that is secured by means of latches, zipper, or similar method.  Any item found in violation of this section shall be seized as evidence and held by the Grand Island Police Department for a minimum period of sixty (60) days.  If at the end of the sixty-day period the item is no longer required to be held as evidence for the prosecution of any violation of this section, any other city ordinance, or violation of any federal or state statute, the item will be returned to the rightful owner.  If the rightful owner is under eighteen (18) years of age at the time the item is eligible for release, the item will be released to the rightful owner’s parent or legal guardian.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9207, effective 03-25-09

 

§20-9.  Curfew; Persons Under Age of 16 Years
                It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to be upon the public streets or other public places within the City between the hours of 10:30 p.m., and 6:00 a.m., of the following day on all days preceding a school day, nor between the hours of 12:00 Midnight and 6:00 a.m., on the following day on all other days, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, or an adult having the legal custody and care of such minor person, or unless such minor person is upon an emergency errand or other business directed by his or her parent or legal guardian.

 

§20-10.  Horses on City Streets
                (A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tether, walk, ride, or otherwise permit one or more horses, mules, oxen, or other draft animals on or along the public right-of-way of the streets set forth in subsection (B) below, unless said person has notified the chief of police of the route to be followed at least twelve (12) hours prior to traveling thereon. Permission shall be denied if, in the opinion of the chief of police such usage would interfere with, or endanger, the normal traffic or use of the streets.

                (B)  The following streets and areas shall require advance notice of usage:

1.  Webb Road from Highway 281 to Highway 2;
2.  Broadwell Avenue from Anna Street to northern city limits;
3.  Eddy Street from Anna Street to State Street
4.  Second Street;
5.  First Street from Greenwich Avenue to Plum Street
6.  Locust Street from Highway 34 to First Street

7.  Central Business District: the area bounded on the north by Fourth Street, on the east by Oak Street, on the south by Koenig Street, and on the west by Eddy Street.

 

§20-11.  Obstructing Public Right-of-Way
                (A) It shall be illegal for any person, corporation or entity to erect, plant, place, or maintain, fences, hedges, shrubbery, or other natural or man-made objects or structures on any public right-of-way which interfere with or are hazardous to the City's or the general public's use of the right-of-way. No such objects may be placed on any public right-of-way without the prior consent of the City.

                (B) When the City discovers any objects on the city right-of-way as described in Subsection (A) herein, the City will notify the adjacent property owner or tenant that said objects shall be removed immediately upon giving personal notice or posting the property.

                (C) Any objects not removed pursuant to Subsections (A) and (B) herein may be removed by city personnel and taken to the Grand Island Police Department impoundment facility or such other facility as the city deems appropriate for storing said objects. If the objects are not claimed by the owners within thirty days after being placed in storage, then the city may dispose of the property as it deems appropriate. If said objects are auctioned, the City may retain sufficient funds to pay all of the expenses of removal from the right-of-way and storage. Any person who has items removed from the right-of-way by the City shall pay a daily storage fee, the cost of disposal and an administrative fee of $50.00.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8936, effective 10-13-2004

 

§20-12.  Obstructing Public Easement
                It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant, or person in charge of private property to erect, plant, place, or maintain trees, fences, hedges, shrubbery, or other natural or man-made objects or structures on any portion of said property on which the City has an easement, where the said object will interfere in any way with the City's rights under the easement in effect.

 

§20-13.  Nuisances Generally Defined
A nuisance consists in doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either:

(A)  Violates any provision of this Code or any ordinances of the City of Grand Island or statute of the State of Nebraska which is consistently repeated or of a continuous and ongoing nature, if uncorrected.

(B)  Is an act or thing done, made, permitted, allowed, or conducted on any property, public or private, by any person, firm, or corporation, their agents or servants, detrimental to the health, or to the damage or injury of any of the inhabitants of the City.

(C)  Is offensive to the senses.

(D)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square, street, or highway in the City.

(E)  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property.

(F)  Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8936, effective 10-13-2004

 

§20-13.1.  Nuisances; Specifically Defined
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting of any of the following specific acts, omissions, places, conditions, and things are hereby declared to be nuisances:

(A)  Any odorous, putrid, unsound or unwholesome grain, meat, feathers, vegetable matter, or the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish, or fowl.

(B)  Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits or like places which are not securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or malodorous.

(C)  Filthy, littered or trash-covered cellars, houseyards, barnyards, stable-yards, factory-yards, mill yards, vacant areas in rear of stores, granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or premises.

(D)  Stockpiling animal manure in a manner that causes an abundance of flies, malodorous conditions or creates other health concerns, or which is kept or handled in violation of any ordinance of the City.

(E)  Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher's trimmings and offal, parts of fish or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any quantity; provided, nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in receptacles in a manner approved by the health officer of the Central District Health Department, nor the dumping of non-putrefying waste in a place and manner approved by the health officer.

(F)  Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron, wire metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery, broken glass, broken plaster, and all trash or abandoned material, unless the same be kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles.

(G)  Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates, packing crates, mattresses, bedding, used furniture, used appliances, excelsior, packing hay, straw or other packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal not neatly piled, old automobiles or parts thereof, or any other waste materials when any of said articles or materials create a condition in which flies or rats may breed or multiply, or which may be a fire danger.

(H)  Any unsightly building, billboard, or other structure, or any old, abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure or any building or structure commenced and left unfinished, which said buildings, billboards or other structures are either a fire hazard or a menace to the public health or safety.

(I)  All places used or maintained as junk yards, or dumping grounds, or for the wrecking and dissembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or buildings or by other persons.

(J)  Stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground.

(K)  All other things specifically designated as nuisances elsewhere in this Code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8936, effective 10-13-2004
Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005
Amended by Ordinance No. 8990, effective 8-10-2005

 

§20-14.  Maintenance of Nuisance Unlawful
                It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a nuisance whether on said person's property, or on public property.

 

§20-15.  Procedure for Abatement of Nuisances
                If the owner, occupant, or agent in charge of any lot, building, or other premises, or the person responsible for the maintenance of a nuisance fails to abate said nuisance ten (10) days after a notice to abate has been mailed by ordinary first class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such person or persons, the city attorney's office may, with the consent of the mayor, bring legal action to obtain abatement of the nuisance.

                In the event legal action to abate a nuisance is commenced on behalf of the City of Grand Island, the City Attorney shall request that the Court enter such order as is appropriate to expeditiously and completely abate said nuisance and that said order be of a continuing nature, permanently enjoining the defendant from continuing, maintaining, renewing or restoring said nuisance on said persons property or public property and entering a judgment against the defendant(s) for the costs incurred by the City of Grand Island in abating said nuisance conditions.

 


§20-16.  Skateboards

(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to skateboard within the following described boundaries of the City of Grand Island:  Union Pacific right-of-way on the north, Oak Street on the east, First Street on the south, and Elm Street on the west.

(2)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be fined according to the provisions of the Grand Island City Code.

 

§20-17.  Disorderly House
                (A)  The term "disorderly house" as used in this code shall mean any room, house, building, structure, or premises, where unlawful or illegal acts are being committed.

(B)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in possession, charge, or in control of any room, house, building, structure, or premises to knowingly collect or permit to be collected therein persons who are engaging in any unlawful act, or to knowingly make, cause, permit or suffer to be made therein any loud or improper noise to the annoyance or disturbance of any person or neighborhood.

(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be a resident or occupant of, or visit or frequent any disorderly house with knowledge of, and participation in, the illegal activities occurring therein.

 

§20-18.  Failure to Disperse
                (A)  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a person or persons are creating a disturbance of the peace and quiet of any person or neighborhood, such police officer may order said person or persons not residing on the premises to disperse for the purpose of abating the said nuisance.

(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to comply with a lawful order to disperse given by a police officer in the performance of the officer's duties under this section.

 

§20-19.  Volume Control
                No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated, any radio, tape recorder, cassette player, compact disc (CD) player, or other machine or device for reproducing sound, if it is located in or on any public property, including any public street, highway, building, sidewalk, park or thoroughfare; or any motor vehicle on a public street, highway or public space unless the volume of amplified sound shall be so controlled that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of one hundred (100) feet from the source and so that the volume is not unreasonably great and the noise, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.

Added by Ordinance No. 8958, effective 3-9-2005

 

§20-20.  Tobacco; Possession By Minors

                (A)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess any tobacco products, vapor products or alternative nicotine products.

(B)  It shall not be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to:

(1)  Possess tobacco products, vapor products or alternative nicotine products under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home.

(2)  Sell or handle any unopened container of tobacco products, vapor products or alternative nicotine products in the course of his or her employment by a tobacco licensee; or

(3)  Possess or purchase tobacco products, vapor products or alternative nicotine products for the purpose of testing or enforcing compliance with statutes, laws or ordinances governing the sale of tobacco products, vapor products or alternative nicotine products as long as law enforcement is conducting the compliance check.

(C)          Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined according to the provisions of the Grand Island City Code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9547, effective 08-04-2015

Amended by Ordinance No. 9745, effective 09-11-2019

 

 

§20-20.1.  Definitions

(A) Tobacco products shall mean any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, or dipping tobacco.

(B) Vapor products shall mean any noncombustible product, whether containing nicotine or not, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor. Vapor product shall include any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any vapor cartridge or other container of solution that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. Vapor product does not include an alternative nicotine product, cigarette, cigar, or other tobacco product, or any product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.

(C) Alternative nicotine product shall mean any noncombustible product containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means. Alternative nicotine product does not include any vapor product, cigarette, cigar, or other tobacco product, or any product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.

Added by Ordinance No. 9547, effective 08-04-2015

 
CHAPTER 21

MANUFACTURED HOMES

and MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS

 

§21-1.  Definitions
                For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

                Chief building official means the legally designated authority of the city or his authorized representative.

                Manufactured Home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width, and forty body feet or more in length, or when erected on site is three hundred twenty or more square feet in size and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.

                Manufactured home lot means any individually owned plot of ground zoned and platted so that it is permissible to place a single manufactured home upon it after a permit is issued by the chief building official or his/her designee.  The manufactured home may be attached to a permanent foundation or basement built in accordance with approved codes.

                Manufactured  home park means any lot of ground zoned and licensed as such by the City within which two or more manufactured home spaces are located.

                Manufactured home space means an area within a manufactured home park for the placement of a single manufactured home and reserved for the exclusive use of its occupants.

                Manufactured home stand means that facility for the placing of a single manufactured home and appurtenant structures thereto onto a foundation system designed to resist horizontal wind pressure of fifteen (15) pounds per square foot minimum and nine (9) pounds per square foot minimum for uplift, or upon a surface foundation system designed to resist the same forces.

                Permit means a written permit issued by the chief building official or his/her designee promulgated thereunder.

                Recreational Vehicle as defined in Chapter 22, Article IX of the Grand Island City Code.

                Service building means a building housing toilet and bathing facilities for men and women with laundry facilities and such other facilities as may be required by this chapter.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006

 

§21-2.  Jurisdiction
                It is intended that the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced within the city and in the two mile area beyond its corporate limits.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006

 

§21-3.  Permit Required
                It shall be unlawful for any person to open, conduct, establish or maintain site for the purpose of a manufactured home park unless a permit to do so shall have first been issued by the city.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006

 

§21-4.  Applications; New Permits
                Applications for a manufactured home park permit shall be in writing and signed by the applicant or authorized agent and shall contain the following:

  (1) The name and address of the applicant.

  (2) The interest of the applicant in and the location and legal description of the manufactured home park.

  (3) A complete plan of the manufactured home park, showing compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter and regulations promulgated thereunder.

  (4) Such further information as may be requested by the chief building official or his/her designee to determine that the proposed manufactured home park will comply with legal requirements.

 

§21-5.  Renewed Permit
                Renewal of permits shall be made in writing to the City Building Department.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006

 

§21-6.  Park Plan to be Filed
                The applicant for a permit required by this chapter or authorized agent shall file with the chief building official or his/her designee a complete plan showing:

(1) The area and dimensions of the tract of land to be used for such manufactured home park.

(2) The number, location, and size of all manufactured home spaces.

(3) The location and width of roadways and walkways.

(4) The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures.

(5) The location and size of water and sewer lines.

(6) Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the manufactured home park.

(7) Parks may have spaces for recreational vehicles provided that such spaces shall be identified on the park plan filed, and shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total number of spaces.  Recreational vehicles shall be limited in duration of stay.  No recreational vehicle shall be allowed to remain in a space for more than one hundred eighty (180) days within any consecutive three hundred sixty five (365) day period.  Any revisions or additions to such plan must be reviewed and approved by the City Council as provided in Section 21-7 of this chapter.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006

 

§21-7.  Investigation; City Council
                Before any permit is issued to construct a manufactured home park, it shall be the duty of the chief building official or his/her designee to examine the plans and specifications of such park on file, as well as the proposed premises ascertaining whether or not all ordinances pertaining to zoning, plumbing, heating, electrical installations, storm water drainage and traffic flows have been observed and if all regulations of the city concerning the construction and operation of sewer and water mains and the handling and removal of garbage comply with city ordinances and the laws of the state. The application for such permit, together with the findings and recommendations of the chief building official or his/her designee shall then be referred to the city council for its approval or rejection.

 

§21-8.  Permit Fee
                (1) If the city council grants such permit required by this chapter to any such applicant, it shall thereupon direct the chief building official or his/her designee to issue such permit upon prepayment of a permit fee to the building department, in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

                (2) Prior to expiration of the annual permit, a permit may be renewed upon prepayment of the annual permit fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

                (3) Failure to obtain a permit renewal by January 31 of each subsequent year, an investigation fee equal to the permit fee shall be paid, in addition to the permit fee, prior to obtaining a renewal of such permit.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006

 

§21-9.  Reserved

 

§21-10.  Permit; Revocation; Notice; Hearing
                If any operator of a manufactured home park to whom a permit has been issued shall continue to violate the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state pertaining to sanitation, public health and welfare after due notice by the officials of the city or the state of such violation, the city council shall have the right to revoke such permit to operate such park in the following manner:

                A notice shall be served on the person holding such permit, setting forth wherein permittee has failed to comply with the ordinances of the city or laws of the state and citing permittee to appear before the city council at a day and hour therein specified, not less than three days after the personal service of such notice of such permittee or agent in charge of such manufactured home park and show cause, if any, why such permit should not be revoked or suspended. At the time and place mentioned in such notice, the permittee shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel and to introduce evidence.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006

 

§21-11.  Permit; Transferability
                No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable.

 

§21-12.  Permit; Expiration
                All permits granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 following the date of issuance unless sooner revoked.

 

§21-13.  Parking on Private Property
                It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit the parking of any manufactured home on private or public property unless such property is within an approved zoning district permitting manufactured homes, or within a permitted manufactured home park or an approved space.  A permit for the placement of the manufactured home must be issued by the City Building Department prior to placement.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006

 

§21-14.  Annual Inspections; Reports
                It shall be the duty of the chief building official or his/her designee to inspect all manufactured home parks now existing in the city and in the area two miles beyond its corporate limits, and all manufactured home parks hereafter established at least annually. No charge shall be made for such inspection, and the owners of such manufactured home parks shall be furnished in writing the results of such inspection.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006

 

§21-15.  Register of Manufactured Homes in Park
                The owner or operator of any manufactured home park shall keep a register containing a record of all manufactured homes within the park to include the name, address, and occupation of each owner; the make, year, model, width, trade name, and length of each manufactured home; the present license plate of each manufactured home; and the date of arrival and departure of each manufactured home. Such record shall at all times be open for inspection to police officials or other officials of the city.

 

§21-16.  Condition and Repair of Park Grounds
                Every person owning, operating or caring for a manufactured home park shall maintain such park ground, service buildings, baths, or other permanent equipment in connection herewith in a clean and sanitary condition and shall maintain such equipment in a state of good repair and shall in all respects comply with all the ordinances of the city.

 

§21-17.  Restriction on Location of Parks
                It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or conduct a manufactured home park within the city or in the two-mile area beyond its corporate limits except in districts zoned for that purpose.

 

§21-18.  Location, Area, General Layout and Improvements
                The manufactured home park shall be located on a well-drained site and shall be so located that its drainage will not endanger any water supply. A Storm Water Drainage Plan shall be submitted and approved by the Director of Public Works.  All such manufactured home parks shall be in the areas free from marshes, swamp, or other potential breeding places for insects or rodents.

                The area of the manufactured home park shall be large enough to accommodate:

(A) The designated number of home spaces

(B) Necessary streets and roadways

(C) Off-street parking of automobiles shall be provided; such spaces shall be hard surfaced and in the amount of two (2) per dwelling. Parking spaces may be provided on unit space where trailers are parked, by separate parking areas, or both.

                Each manufactured home space shall contain a minimum of three thousand (3,000) square feet.

                Every manufactured home space shall abut on a driveway or other clear area with unobstructed access to a public street. Such places shall be defined and enumerated.

                Manufactured homes shall be parked in such spaces so that there will be a minimum of fifteen feet between manufactured homes and so that no manufactured home will be less than ten feet from the exterior boundary of the manufactured home park. It shall be unlawful to locate a manufactured home less than thirty feet from any state highway, or so that any part of such manufactured home will obstruct any roadway or walkway in a manufactured home park.

                It shall be unlawful to allow any manufactured home to be occupied in a manufactured home park unless the manufactured home is situated on a manufactured home space.

                Access roads shall be provided to each manufactured home space. Each access road shall provide for continuous forward movement, shall connect with a street or highway, shall have a minimum width of forty feet, and provide for emergency vehicle access.

                All newly constructed roadway, access roads and parking spaces shall be constructed with a permanent type, dust-free surface such as asphaltic cement concrete, portland cement concrete, or paving brick.

                The ten (10) foot exterior boundary shall be landscaped as per requirements identified in §36-36.1 of this code.

                Recreational Vehicle Sites shall provide the following:

                (1) A minimum site of 1,500 square feet.

                (2) A minimum site width of 30 feet.

                (3) A minimum setback to site boundary of 5 feet.

                (4) A minimum separation between vehicles of 12 feet.

                (5) One hard surfaced vehicle parking pad of 180 square feet for a passenger vehicle.

                (6) All recreational vehicle sites shall be served with a single meter and service for electrical and water utilities, except where multiple spaces are separated by access roadways, in which case separate services and meters may be allowed for each grouping of recreational vehicle sites.

                (7) All applicable provisions of the Building, Electrical, and Plumbing codes shall apply.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9005, effective 9-28-2005

 


§21-19.  Water Supply
                An adequate supply of potable water from the city's water system for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied to meet the requirements of such park ground. Such water supply shall be connected by pipes to all manufactured home spaces for connection to manufactured home units.

 

§21-20.  Sewage Disposal
                Each manufactured home park shall have an adequate connection with the sanitary sewer system of the city, and there shall be a sanitary sewer connection on each unit space in such park for connection with manufactured homes when unit spaces are occupied. It is expressly provided that when such unit spaces are unoccupied the outlet in the sanitary sewer shall be capped by a device which would require tools to remove.

 

§21-21.  Private Water and Sanitary Sewage Systems
                In all cases where manufactured home parks or manufactured home lots are so situated that connections with the city water main or with sanitary sewer are not available, the private water supply and sanitary sewer disposal system for such parks or lots shall be located and constructed or reconstructed to meet the standards of the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the city.

 

§21-22.  Appurtenances; Accessory and Administrative Buildings
                All accessory and service buildings shall be detached and located the same as regulations concerning accessory buildings provided in Chapter 36 of the Grand Island City Code, and shall be constructed in conformance with the City Building, Plumbing, and Electrical Codes pursuant to a permit issued by the Building Department prior to construction. No additions shall be permitted onto a manufactured home except an add-on unit constructed by a manufacturer of manufactured homes recognized by the State of Nebraska.  Such add-ons shall receive a permit from the Building Department prior to placement and attachment to the manufactured home and shall be placed onto a foundation system equal to that which the manufactured home rests upon.

                Exceptions:

                (A)  A one hundred twenty (120) square foot or less entry porch (no living space) which is open on at least two (2) sides;

                (B)  Carport or patio cover open on at least three (3) sides;

                (C)  Manufactured home on a private lot placed upon a permanent foundation.

No additions shall be constructed without first obtaining a permit from the Grand Island Building Department.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006

 

§21-23.  Refuse Storage and Collection
                The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the manufactured home park shall be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution.

                All refuse shall be stored in approved containers. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse.

                Racks or holders shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container racks or holders shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around them.

                All refuse shall be collected at least twice weekly. Where suitable collection service is not available from municipal or private agencies, the manufactured home park operator shall provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers.

                Common use or central collection sites shall be visually screened or fenced.

 

§21-24.  Exterior Electrical and Lighting Facilities
                An electrical outlet supplying at least one hundred and fifteen volts shall be provided for each manufactured home space. The installation shall comply with all applicable state and local electrical codes and ordinances. Such electrical outlets shall be grounded and weatherproof. No main power supply line shall be permitted to lie on the ground or to be suspended less than eighteen feet above the ground.

                Streets, driveways and walkways shall be adequately lighted.

 

§21-25.  Manufactured Home Stands and Skirting
                If a manufactured home is not placed upon a permanent foundation, the manufactured home shall then be placed upon a manufactured home stand to provide an adequate and approved foundation for the positioning of the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation, or overturning in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.

                Skirting shall be required for all manufactured homes placed on a manufactured home stand unless such unit will be on the manufactured home stand for less than forty-five (45) days. The skirting shall be sufficient to withstand wind load requirements and shall not provide a harborage for junk or rodents, nor create a fire hazard. Such skirting shall be provided with removable or hinged access panels sufficient to provide easy access to all utility connection points of the manufactured home and its subsequent connection to the utility risers if they are located within the skirted area.

 

§21-26.  Dogs, Cats, etc. Running at Large
                No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat, or other pet animal shall permit it to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any manufactured home park.

 

§21-27.  Fuel Storage Tanks
                All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to manufactured homes shall be copper or other acceptable tubing and shall be permanently installed and securely fastened in place. All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath the manufactured home or less than five feet from any manufactured home exit.

 

§21-28.  Fire Prevention
                (1) Fire prevention in all manufactured home parks shall be under the direct supervision of the City Fire Department.

                (2) Manufactured home park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish, and other flammable materials.

                (3) Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention authority shall be kept in service buildings and at all other places designated by such fire prevention authority and shall be maintained in good operating condition.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006

 

§21-29.  Authority of Officials to Inspect
                All proper officials, agents and employees of the city charged with the duty of inspection of manufactured home parks or the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or of repairing and maintaining the utilities constructed on such park grounds shall have the right and they are hereby empowered to enter upon the premises of any manufactured home park ground now operating or which may hereafter be operated within the city or the two-mile area thereto to inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith or located thereon and to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

 

§21-30.  Existing Manufactured Home Parks
                This chapter shall not apply to existing mobile home parks, now referred to as manufactured home parks, in existence prior to March 10, 1975, except in the following instances:

        (1)  Any installation, reconstruction, remodeling, or reconfiguration of manufactured home spaces, utility connections, streets, sidewalks, or other infrastructure upon which work is commenced after April 30, 1998, shall comply with all provisions of this chapter.

        (2)  Any placement of a new or different manufactured home on an existing manufactured home space occurring after April 30, 1998, shall comply with all provisions of this chapter.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9050, effective 6/28/2006

 

§21-31.  Minimum Construction Code
                All manufactured homes and manufactured home parks shall comply with the minimum housing standards as set forth in Chapter 8 - Buildings, Article VII. Property Maintenance Code of the City of Grand Island and Title 178 - Nebraska Department of Health, Chapter 5 - Rules, Regulations and Standards Governing Mobile Home Parks, Section 001, Definitions and Scope, 005, Utility Systems, 006, Sanitary Conditions and 007, Observance of Regulations.  In any instance in which there is a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the Nebraska Department of Health, the more stringent provisions shall govern.


 
CHAPTER 22

MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

 

Article I. In General

§22-1.  Definitions
               For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

        Alley shall mean a street intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.

        Alley entrance shall mean the extension of the alley from the property line to the street curb line.

        Arterial street shall mean any street designated by the city council as part of a major arterial system of streets.

        Authorized emergency vehicle shall mean vehicles of the Fire Department, the Police Department, or ambulance owned by public or privately-owned ambulance services.

        Automatic traffic signals shall mean any device electrically or mechanically controlled by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed.

        Bicycle shall mean every device propelled solely by human power, upon which any person may ride, and having two or more wheels, either of which is more than fourteen inches in diameter.

        Bus shall mean every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle other than a taxicab designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.

        Congested district shall include that portion of the City within the following bounds:

South Front Street from Oak Street to Walnut Street;

Third Street from the Burlington Northern-Sante Fe Railroad Company right-of-way to Eddy Street;

Second Street from the Burlington Northern-Sante Fe Railroad Company right-of-way to Elm Street;

First Street from Sycamore Street to Cedar Street;

Fourth Street from Eddy Street east to Sycamore Street;

Oak Street from Second Street to Fourth Street;

Kimball Avenue from Second Street to South Front Street;

Sycamore Street from First Street to Fourth Street;

Pine Street from Court Street to Sixth Street;

Locust Street from South Front Street to Charles Street;

Wheeler Avenue from South Front Street to Koenig Street;

Walnut Street from First Street to Fifth Street;

Cedar Street from First Street to South Front Street;

Elm Street from Second Street to Fourth Street;

Cleburn Street from Second Street to Fourth Street; and

Eddy Street from Second Street to Fourth Street.

Crosswalk shall mean:

  (A) That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalk on opposite sides of the street measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edge of the roadway;

  (B) Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly designated for pedestrian crossing by lines, signs, or other devices.

               Curb shall mean the lateral boundaries of that portion of a street designed for the use of vehicles, whether marked by curb stones or not so marked.

               Driver or operator shall mean any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.

               Intersection or street intersection shall mean the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two or more highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. The junction of any alley with a street shall not constitute an intersection.

               Median shall mean that part of a divided street or highway, such as a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section or space, so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic across or within such barrier, section, or space, or to divide such highway or street into two roadways for vehicular travel in opposite directions.

               Moped shall mean a bicycle with fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power, an automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity not exceeding fifty cubic centimeters which produces no more than two brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the bicycle at a maximum design speed of no more than thirty (30) miles per hour.

               Motorcycle shall mean every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.

               Motor Vehicle shall mean every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated on rails, except mopeds or self-propelled invalid chairs.

               Official Traffic Signals shall mean all signals not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of the city council or official having authority for the purpose of directing, warning, or regulating traffic.

               One-Way Street shall mean a street designated as such by the city council upon which vehicle traffic shall move in one direction.

               Owner shall mean a person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person, but excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security.

               Park or Parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street or alley, otherwise than in obedience to traffic regulations or a traffic control device.

               Pedestrian shall mean any person afoot.

               Person shall mean every natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.

               Police Officer or Traffic Officer shall mean every officer of the Grand Island Police Department, or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or make arrests for the violation of traffic regulations.

               Private Road or Driveway shall mean every way or place in private ownership and for vehicular travel by the owner or those having express or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons.

               Right-of-Way shall mean the privilege of the immediate use of the street.

               Safety Zone shall mean the area or space officially set apart within a street for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.

               Sidewalk shall mean that portion of the sidewalk space intended for use by pedestrians or any pathway or route intended for use by pedestrians.

               Sidewalk Space shall mean that portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines.

               Stop, when required, shall mean complete cessation of movement.

               Street or Highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary limits of any street, road, avenue, boulevard or way which is publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

               Traffic shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, and vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street or highway for purposes of travel.

               Traffic Control Device shall mean any sign, signal, marking or other device placed or erected by authority of the City of Grand Island, the County of Hall, the State of Nebraska, or the United States of America for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.

               Traffic Lane shall mean that portion of a street designated by the city council as a path, track, or passageway within which vehicular traffic shall move.

               Trailer shall mean any vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.

               Truck shall mean any motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property, and shall specifically include truck-tractors, with or without trailers, which are licensed for a GVW of six tons or more.

               Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

               Viaduct shall mean a bridge-like structure carrying highway or street over another highway or street or over railroad tracks.

All words and phrases not defined herein shall have ascribed to them the definition set forth in Chapter 39, Article 6, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, as amended.

 

§22-2.  Traffic Division; Establishment
               There is hereby established a Traffic Division of the Police Department to be under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police.

 

§22-3.  Traffic Division; Duties
  (1) It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division to enforce the traffic ordinances, laws, and regulations of the City of Grand Island and the State of Nebraska and make arrests and issue citations in lieu of arrest for law violations.

  (2) It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division to develop means of improving traffic safety and efficient traffic flow.

  (3) It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division to investigate traffic accidents, make accident reports, and arrest any person who has violated a traffic law or regulation in connection with the accident.

  (4) It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division to keep records and to prepare an annual report containing information on traffic accidents, traffic law enforcement, and other pertinent data on traffic safety. The report shall include statistical information on the number of traffic related fatalities, injuries, and accidents, the number of persons cited for traffic law violations and other data, plans, or recommendations related to traffic enforcement, accidents, or safety.

 

§22-4.  Chief of Police; Powers and Duties
  (1) The chief of police shall have charge of the supervision of the Traffic Division.

  (2) The chief of police is hereby granted the power and authority by effective measures to carry out all the duties imposed upon the chief of police and upon the Traffic Division by this chapter.

  (3) It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to coordinate traffic activities, to carry on educational activities in traffic matters, to supervise the preparation and publication of traffic reports, to receive complaints having to do with traffic matters, and to recommend to the mayor and city council ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations.

 

§22-5.  Temporary Traffic Regulations
               The mayor, city administrator, city engineer, chief of police, or the commanding officer in charge of the Police Department are hereby empowered collectively and individually, to make and enforce temporary traffic regulations to cover emergency or special conditions. It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the directions of such regulations as promulgated pursuant to this section.

 

§22-6.  Police Officers; Powers
               City of Grand Island police officers shall be vested with authority to regulate, control, and direct the movement of traffic in such a manner as will facilitate the efficient and safe movement of traffic. Such officers shall have authority to make arrests, issue citations in lieu of arrest, and it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any lawful order, signal, or direction of any police officer relating to movement of traffic.

 

§22-7.  Traffic Division Record
               The Traffic Division shall maintain a record of all violations of traffic laws and all traffic accident reports. Such records and reports shall be held for a period of ten years, after which they may be destroyed at the direction of the chief of police.

 

§22-8.  Locations Where Ordinances Apply
               The provisions of this chapter relating to the operation of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles while upon streets, alleys, or other public right-of-way of the City of Grand Island, unless a different place is specifically referred to in an ordinance section. The ordinances pertaining to careless, reckless, and willful reckless driving shall refer to operation of motor vehicles throughout the City of Grand Island, whether the acts are committed on streets, alleys, public property, or private property.

 

§22-9.  Chapter Does Not Affect Civil Liability
               Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or pleaded as justifying, absolving, or rendering blameless, either directly or indirectly, any person in charge of operating or owning any vehicle for any injury or damage to persons or property due to the operation of any vehicle.

 

§22-10.  Authorized Emergency Vehicles
  (1) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section.

  (2) The driver of such emergency vehicle may stop, park, or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter, and disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.

  (3) The driver of such emergency vehicle may also:

  (A) Proceed past a steady red signal, a flashing red signal, or a stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safety operation.

  (B) Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life, limb, or property.

  (C) Except for such emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle, the exemptions granted in this section to such emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of such vehicle, while in motion, sounds an audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when such vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred feet to the front of such vehicle.

  (D) The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of such emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect such driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.

 

§22-11.  Issuance of Citation
  (1) Whenever there is any violation of any ordinance regulating traffic in the City, a police officer finding the violation shall, except as otherwise provided in this section, take the name, address, and driver's license number of the person violating such ordinance, and the license number of the motor vehicle involved. The officer shall issue a citation or otherwise notify such person in writing to appear at a time and place specified in the citation. The citation shall include a description of the violation or offense charged, the time and place at which the person cited is to appear, a warning that failure to appear in accordance with the command of the citation is a punishable offense, and such other matter as is deemed appropriate. Unless the person cited requests an earlier date, the time of appearance shall be at least three days after the issuance of the citation. One copy of the citation shall be delivered to the person cited, and the duplicate thereof shall be signed by such person, giving his promise to appear at the time and place stated therein. Such person thereupon shall be released from custody.

  (2) The foregoing provisions for issuance of citation and for release of the person arrested shall not apply and the person may be confined in jail when the accused fails to identify himself or herself satisfactorily, or refuses to sign the citation, or when the arresting officer has reasonable grounds to believe that:

  (A) The accused will refuse to respond to the citation;

  (B) Such custody is necessary to protect the accused or others when his continued liberty would constitute a risk of immediate harm;

  (C) Such action is necessary in order to carry out legitimate investigative functions;

  (D) The accused has previously failed to appear in response to a citation.

  (E) The accused has committed a felony.

 

§22-12.  Failure to Appear
               It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to appear in court or otherwise comply with the command of a citation after signing a promise to appear in court on the citation.

 

 

Article II. Vehicles And Operators

 

§22-13.  Motor Vehicle Registration; General
  (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to park or operate a motor vehicle or trailer upon a highway, street or alley within the City or public parking lot owned by the City without having registered the motor vehicle or trailer in compliance with the motor vehicle registration statutes of the State of Nebraska.

  (2) The registration certificate for a motor vehicle shall at all times be carried in or upon the motor vehicle, and it shall be unlawful to fail to exhibit the registration certificate for inspection upon the request of a police officer.

 

§22-14.  Registration Plates; Motor Vehicles
               (1) It shall be unlawful to park or operate a motor vehicle or trailer upon any highway, street or alley within the City or public parking lot owned by the City without having attached thereto the registration plates furnished by the State or County in connection with the Motor Vehicle Registration statutes of the State of Nebraska. Where two registration plates are issued, one shall be prominently displayed at all times on the front and one on the rear of the registered vehicle; when only one plate is issued it shall be prominently displayed on the rear of the registered vehicle, except for truck-tractors upon which is shall be prominently displayed on the front thereof. The registered plate issued for a motorcycle shall be attached to the rear thereof. Registration plates shall be securely fastened in an upright position to the motor vehicle so as to prevent such plate from swinging, and so as to be at a minimum distance of sixteen inches from the ground.

               (2) It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle if the registration plates are displayed in a manner inconsistent with the requirements of this section.

               (3) This section shall not apply to mopeds.

 

§22-15.  Motor Vehicle Registration Plates; Trailers
               Any motor vehicle or trailer parked or operated upon any highway, street, or alley within the City or public parking lot owned by the City in violation of §22-13 and §22-14 of this Code is declared detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of this City and shall be deemed a public nuisance, subject to removal and impoundment by the Police Department pending compliance with the motor vehicle registration statutes of the State of Nebraska or forfeiture.  The cost of removal and impoundment shall be paid by the owner of the motor vehicle or trailer prior to release from impoundment.

 

§22-16.  Operator's License Required
               It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street or highway within the City without having in full force and effect an operator's license to operate the same as provided by the laws of the State of Nebraska.

 

§22-17.  Operator's License; Duty to Carry
               The operator's license shall at all times be carried by the licensee when operating a motor vehicle on the streets or alleys of the City and shall be presented by the licensee for examination, or shall present proof of ownership of the same, upon demand by a police officer of the City. It shall be unlawful for any person when operating a motor vehicle to fail to display his license card upon demand of any police officer.

 

§22-18.  Operator's License; Acts Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person:

        (1) To lend his or her operator's license to any person or knowingly permit the use thereof by another;

        (2) To display or represent as one's own any operator's license not issued to said person;

        (3) To authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by or under the control of said person to be driven upon any street or highway of the city by any person who is not authorized to do so.

 

§22-19.  Audible Horn Required; Siren Prohibited
               It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle on the streets or alleys of the City which is not equipped with an audible horn.

               It shall be unlawful for any vehicle except an authorized emergency vehicle to be equipped with a siren.

§22-20.  Red Light; Required on Vehicle
               It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon the streets or alleys of the City between the hours of one-half after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, without having a red light plainly visible from the rear of such vehicle under normal atmospheric conditions for a distance of at least five hundred feet.

 

§22-21.  Head Lights
               It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, except a motorcycle or moped, upon the streets or alleys of the City between the hours of one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, or at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible any person on the street at a distance of five hundred feet ahead, without having lighted two or more white colored lights on the front thereof, one on each side. In all other respects such head lamps and any auxiliary lighting devices on such motor vehicles shall be maintained and adjusted at all times in strict compliance with the laws of the State of Nebraska.

 

§22-22.  Headlights; Motorcycles
               It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorcycle or moped upon the streets or alleys of the City between the hours of one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, or at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible any person on the street at a distance of five hundred feet ahead, without having one white colored light lighted on the front thereof.

 

§22-23.  Dimming Headlights
               It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle equipped with headlamps projecting glaring or dazzling lights to persons in front of such headlamps, when meeting a vehicle proceeding in the opposite direction and upon signal of the oncoming vehicle, to fail to immediately dim the headlamps of his vehicle so as not to blind or confuse the vision of the operator in front of such headlamps. Signal shall mean the alternating flashing of the headlamps from low beam to high beam.

 

§22-24.  Brakes
               It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be operated upon the streets, highways or alleys of the City unless equipped at all times with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle.

 

§22-25.  Vehicles Operated Upon Streets
               Every motor vehicle operated upon the streets, highways, or alleys of the City shall meet the following requirements, to wit:

  (1) Windshield Wipers. All vehicles shall be equipped with a windshield wiper in good working condition that will wipe off moisture uniformly over the entire sweep of the wiper.

  (2) Rear View Mirror. All vehicles shall be equipped with a rear view mirror, sufficiently large and in good reflective condition, so located, fastened and adjusted as to reflect to the driver at all times a clear view of the highway for a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet to the rear of such vehicle.

  (3) Glass. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle with any object placed or hung in or upon the motor vehicle, except required or permitted equipment of the motor vehicle, in such a manner as to significantly and materially obstruct or interfere with the view of the operator through the windshield or to prevent the operator from having a clear and full view of the road and condition of traffic behind the motor vehicle.  Any sticker or identification authorized or required by the Federal Government or any agency thereof or the State of Nebraska or any political subdivision thereof may be placed upon the windshield of the motor vehicle without violating this section.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a ;motor vehicle with glass that is broken, cracked, discolored, or obscured to such an extent that the visibility of the operator is impaired.

  (4) Tires. All vehicle tires shall be in a safe condition. A tire shall be considered unsafe if the outer tread is worn down to the breaker strip, or if such tire is not free from bulges or breaks caused by broken fabric.

  (5) Wheel Alignment. Wheels shall be aligned so that side slippage due to error in alignment as indicated by an alignment indicator shall not exceed 30 feet per mile.

  (6) Steering Equipment. All steering equipment on vehicles shall be in good condition and wheel play shall not exceed twenty-five degrees.

  (7) Muffler. All motor vehicles shall be equipped with a muffler in good working condition and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke. No "muffler cut-out" shall be used on any vehicle.

  (8) Height. No vehicle unladen or with load shall exceed a height of 13 feet, 6 inches; provided, however, the owners, lessees, and operators, jointly and severally, of vehicles exceeding 12 feet, 6 inches, in height shall assume the risk of loss to the vehicle or its load, and shall be liable for any damages that result to overhead obstructions from operation of a vehicle exceeding 12 feet, six inches, in height.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9539, effective 06-30-2015

 

§22-26.  Projecting Loads
               It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle loaded in such a manner that any portion of the load extends more than four feet beyond the rear end of the body of such vehicle, and to fail to attach a red flag by day and a red light after sunset securely fastened in a conspicuous position at the extreme end of such load.

 

 

Article III. Traffic Regulations

 

§22-27.  City Council; Regulation of Traffic
               The city council may, by resolution or ordinance, regulate or entirely prohibit traffic upon any street, alley, or portion thereof, and when so regulated or prohibited may direct the placing of traffic control devices upon such streets to indicate such regulation or prohibition.

 

§22-28.  Traffic Signs or Signals; Obedience
               It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise directed by a police officer.

 

§22-29.  Automatic Signals
  (1) At such intersection or other location where an automatic traffic control device is installed and actually functioning, all vehicular and pedestrian traffic crossing or entering such intersection or other location shall be governed by such automatic traffic control device. Whenever traffic is controlled by such automatic traffic control devices exhibiting different colored lights or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red, and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying word legend, and such lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:

Green. Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.

Green Arrow. Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal shown alone may enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow or arrows. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians or other vehicles lawfully using the intersection.

Yellow. Vehicular traffic facing a circular yellow signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or other location, unless such stop cannot be made safely, in which event the vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection; and pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the street or highway.

Yellow Flashing. Vehicular traffic and pedestrian traffic facing a flashing yellow signal may proceed through the intersection and past such signal only with caution and after reducing speed.

Red. Vehicular traffic facing a circular steady red signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk, or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the intersection and shall remain stopped until a green light is displayed, and pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter or cross the street or highway except as otherwise provided at intersections controlled by automatic pedestrian-control signals except where a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn after making a complete stop. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.

Red Flashing. Vehicular traffic facing a flashing red signal shall come to a complete stop at such signal and before entering the intersection and crosswalk and regardless of the direction, shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles and pedestrians upon the street to be entered or crossed. If the automatic signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.

 

§22-30.  Defacing Traffic Signs and Signals
  (1) It shall be unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or any part thereof.

  (2) It shall be unlawful to place or maintain any commercial advertising upon any traffic control devise.

 

§22-31.  Reports; Personal Injury Accidents
               The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident which occurs anywhere within the City of Grand Island and results in injury or death to any person shall:

  (1) Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident;

  (2) Give his or her name, address, and the registration number of his or her vehicle and exhibit his or her operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck or the driver or occupants of any vehicle collided with; and

  (3) Render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying of such person to a physician or surgeon for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or is requested by the injured person.

 

§22-32.  Reports; Property Damage Accidents
  (1) The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident which occurs anywhere within the City of Grand Island and results in damage to property shall:

        (A) Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident; and

        (B) Give his or her name, address, and the registration number of his or her vehicle and exhibit his or her operator's or chauffeur's license to the owner of the property struck, or the driver or occupants of any other vehicle involved in the collision.

  (2) If the accident involves a collision with a parked unattended vehicle, the operator of the vehicle which strikes the unattended vehicle shall:

        (A) Immediately stop his or her vehicle at the scene of such accident; and

        (B) Either immediately locate the owner or a person in charge of the unattended vehicle, or, if such person cannot be located, leave in a conspicuous place in or upon the unattended vehicle struck, written notice. The written notice to be left in or upon the unattended vehicle shall consist of the name and address of the operator of the vehicle which struck the unattended vehicle. If the owner or person in charge of the unattended vehicle is immediately located, the operator of the vehicle shall comply with subsection 1(B) above.

  (3) If the accident involves a collision with a fixture or improvement, in, upon, or adjacent to a street or highway, the operator of the vehicle involved in the collision shall within 24 hours from the time the accident occurred, give his or her name, address, vehicle registration number, and exhibit his operator's license to the owner or person in charge of the fixture.

 

 

Article IV. Operation of Vehicles

 

§22-33.  Right-of-way; Intersections
               (1) When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately the same time, it shall be unlawful for the driver of the vehicle on the left to fail to yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right, except as otherwise provided by this chapter.

               (2) When a vehicle enters a street from an acceleration lane or other approach road, it shall be unlawful for the driver of the vehicle on the acceleration lane or other approach road to fail to yield the right-of-way to a vehicle on the street entering such merging area at the same time, regardless of whether the approach road is to the left or the right of the main roadway, unless posted signs indicate otherwise.

 

§22-34.  Right-of-way; Left Turn
               It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at an intersection or into any alley, private road, or driveway, to fail to yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection, or which is so close to the left turning vehicle as to constitute an immediate hazard.

 

§22-35.  Entering Street; Yield Right-of-Way
               (1) It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle entering a street from an alley, building, parking lot, private drive, or private road, to fail to yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such street.

               (2) It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, parking lot, private drive, or private road to fail to stop such vehicle immediately before driving onto a sidewalk area extending across such alley, building entrance, parking lot entrance, private drive, or private road, or to fail to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk area.

 

§22-35.1.  Direction of Traffic in Alley
               All vehicles which traverse the alley in Block 79, Original Town, now City of Grand Island, shall travel from east to west, more specifically, enter the alley at Pine Street and travel west to Locust Street.

 

§22-36.  Right-of-way; Parked Vehicle to Yield
               It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle parked or stopped at the curb or edge of a street when leaving such position to fail to yield the right-of-way to all properly operated vehicles in motion upon the street.

 

§22-37.  Stop Signs; Yield Right-of-Way
               Every driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection where a stop is indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if no crosswalk is indicated, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the street about to be entered and all pedestrians at the intersection.

 

§22-38.  Yield Signs; Right-of-way
               The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a speed reasonable under the existing conditions, and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if no crosswalk is indicated, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard if such driver moved across or into such intersection.

 

§22-39.  Right-of-way; Emergency Vehicles
  (1) Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle which makes use of proper audible or visual signals.

(A) The driver of any other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of the street, or to either edge or curb of a one-way street, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until such emergency vehicle passes, unless otherwise directed by any police officer;

(B) Any pedestrian using such street shall yield the right-of-way until such emergency vehicle passes, unless otherwise directed by any police officer.

  (2) This section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street.

 

§22-40.  Right-of-way; Blind Persons
               When the operator of a motor vehicle, or other vehicle, approaches or comes into the proximity of a person who is using a guide dog, or who is carrying a white cane or white stick, it shall be unlawful for the driver to fail to immediately come to a stop and yield the right-of-way to such person if such person is in the path of or is approaching the path of such vehicle, and shall remain stopped until such person has reached a position well outside the course normally used by the operator of such vehicle.

 

§22-41.  Forfeiture of Right-of-way
               The driver of any vehicle except an authorized emergency vehicle, traveling at an unlawful rate of speed shall forfeit any right-of-way which he might otherwise have under the provisions of this article.

 

§22-42.  Pedestrians; Right-of-way
               (1) Pedestrians shall obey the instructions of any traffic control device specifically applicable to said person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.

               (2) Every pedestrian who crosses a street at any point other than within a marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the street.

               (3) Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk.

               (4) No pedestrian shall cross a street intersection diagonally.

               (5) It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to fail to perform or obey the requirements, duties, or provisions of this section.

 

§22-43.  "U" Turns
  (1) A "U" turn is the turning of a vehicle upon a street so as to proceed in the opposite direction, whether accomplished by one continuous movement or not. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to make a U-turn:

        (A) At any place where signs prohibiting such a turn have been erected;

        (B) Upon any street between intersections;

        (C) At any intersection at which traffic is being controlled in any direction by the traffic control devices of a stop sign, yield sign, automatic traffic signal, or flashing lights.

  (2) U-turns may be made only at intersections in areas at which traffic is not being controlled by the traffic control devices enumerated above.

 

§22-44.  Turning at Intersections
               Except as otherwise directed by a police officer or any official traffic-control device, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection to fail to do so in the following manner:

Right Turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.

Left Turns on Two-Way Streets. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof, and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.

Left Turns on Other than Two-Way Streets. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the streets, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.

Intersections Where Automatic Signal Functioning. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to turn such vehicle at any intersection where an automatic signal is installed and actually functioning, except when such signal is displaying a green light, or flashing yellow, or when a right hand turn on a steady red light is not prohibited by a sign placed at the intersection, or when a green turning arrow permits a turn.

 

§22-45.  Turning and Stopping Signals
  (1) It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to turn such vehicle from the direct course of travel upon a street, slow down or stop, or change traffic lanes, unless and until such movement can be made in safety, and then only after giving an appropriate signal of such intention, in the following manner.

        (A) A signal of intention to turn right or left from the direct course of travel, or to change lanes, shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning or changing lanes;

        (B) If the required signals are given by hand, such signals shall be given in the following manner, and such signals shall indicate as follows:

TURN RIGHT by extending the left hand and forearm upward from the left side of the vehicle;

TURN LEFT by extending the left hand and arm horizontally from the left side of the vehicle;

STOP or DECREASE SPEED by extending the left hand and arm downward from the left side of the vehicle;

CHANGING LANE TO LEFT (Use turn left rule);

CHANGING LANE TO RIGHT (Use turn right rule).

        (C) If the required signals are given by a signal light of a type approved by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of Nebraska, such signals shall be given in the following manner, and such signals shall indicate as follows:

TURNING LEFT - Flashing of only the left signal light;

TURNING RIGHT - Flashing of only the right signal light;

STOPPING or DECREASING SPEED - Flash of brake signal lights;

CHANGING LANE TO LEFT - Flashing of left signal light;

CHANGING LANE TO RIGHT - Flashing of right signal light.

  (2) The signals herein required to be given shall be given either by means of the hand and arm as herein prescribed, or by a signal light of a type approved by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of Nebraska.

  (3) No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal.

 

§22-46.  Driving on Right Half of Street
  (1) Upon all streets a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the street, except as follows:

        (A) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement;

        (B) When an obstruction exists, making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the street; Provided, that any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the street within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard;

        (C) Upon a street divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; or

        (D) Upon a street restricted to one-way traffic.

  (2) Upon all streets, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the vehicle proceeding in the same direction, or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway.

  (3) Upon any street having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the centerline of the street, except when authorized by traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the street for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as permitted under subparagraph (2) or subsection (A) of this section. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the crossing of the centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway, unless such movement is otherwise prohibited by signs.

 

§22-47.  Overtaking and Passing
               Except where overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction:

  (1) The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall first give a visible signal of his intention and shall pass to the left of the other vehicle at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle;

  (2) The driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle; and

  (3) The visible signal of intention to pass shall consist of either a short sounding of the horn, or, if at night, the flashing of headlights once from low to high beam and back to low beam.

 

§22-48.  Passing on the Right
  (1) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions:

        (A) When the vehicle to be overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; or

        (B) When a street has more than one lane for traffic moving in the same direction and the act of passing on the right is accomplished in a traffic lane.

  (2) In no event shall the driver of a vehicle overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right unless such movement may be made in safety and upon the pavement or main traveled portion of the street. In no event shall the parking lane of a street be used for passing on the right.

 

§22-49.  Passing on the Left; Precautions
  (1) No vehicle shall overtake another vehicle proceeding in the same direction on an undivided two-way street when such overtaking shall require the overtaking vehicle to be driven on the left side of the center of the roadway unless the left side is clearly visible for a distance sufficient to accomplish such overtaking and is free from oncoming traffic for a distance sufficient to:

        (A) Permit the overtaking vehicle to return to an authorized lane of traffic before coming within two hundred feet of any approaching vehicle; and

        (B) Permit the overtaking vehicle to be safely clear of the overtaken vehicle while returning to the authorized lane of travel.

  (2) After completing such overtaking, the overtaking vehicle shall return to the authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable.

  (3) Authorized lane of travel shall mean a traffic lane on which city ordinances allow a vehicle to operate when not engaged in the act of overtaking or passing.

 

§22-50.  Passing on the Left; Limitations
  (1) No driver shall overtake and pass another vehicle or drive to the left of the center of the street whenever:

        (A) He approaches the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the street where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction;

        (B) He approaches within one hundred feet of or traverses any intersection, railroad grade crossing, or viaduct;

        (C) The section of roadway is designated as a no-passing zone.

  (2) No driver shall cross the centerline of an undivided highway providing for two or more lanes of traffic in each direction for the purpose of overtaking or passing another vehicle.

  (3) The limitations imposed by this section shall not apply upon a one-way roadway, nor when an obstruction exists which requires a driver to drive to the left of the center of the street nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road, or driveway unless otherwise prohibited by signs.

 

§22-51.  Speed Limitations
               (1) General Rule. It shall be unlawful for a driver to operate any vehicle on, over, or upon any street or streets in the City at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the traffic, surface, width, and condition of the road, and the hazards at intersections; nor at a rate of speed as to endanger life or limb of a person.

               (2) Basic Limit. Except as may be otherwise provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on, over, or upon any street within the City at a rate of speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour, or on, over, or upon any alley at a rate of speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour.

               (3) Modification of Limits. The city council may, by resolution, establish speed limits at a rate of speed greater or less than twenty-five (25) miles per hour for any street or portion of a street within the City. The city engineer shall cause the installation of speed limit signs along the street or portion of a street, indicating the speed so established, and upon such installation, the speed limit for such street or portion of a street shall be as indicated by the speed limit signs installed.

               (4) Construction Zones. The maximum speed limit through any maintenance, repair or construction zone on any street or streets within the city shall be twenty-five miles per hour. Such speed limits shall take effect only after appropriate signs giving notice of the speed limit are erected or displayed in a conspicuous place in advance of the area where the maintenance, repair or construction activity is or will be taking place and a written order establishing the work area speed zone is approved by the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director may increase or decrease the speed limit through any street maintenance, repair or construction zone in increments of five miles per hour as needed for the safety of the public and the construction workers for the duration of the construction project.

For Summary, see ATTACHMENT "A"


 

 

Article V. Serious Traffic Offenses

 

§22-52.  Racing on Streets Prohibited
               It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street in the City in any race, speed competition or contest, drag race or acceleration contest, test of physical endurance, exhibition of speed or acceleration, or for the purpose of making a speed record.

 

§22-53.  Careless Driving
               It shall be unlawful for a person to operate any motor vehicle carelessly or without due caution so as to endanger a person or property.

 

§22-54.  Reckless Driving
               It shall be unlawful for a person to operate any motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate an indifferent or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.

 

§22-55.  Willful Reckless Driving
               It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate a willful disregard for the safety of persons or property.

 

 

Article VI. Miscellaneous Offenses

 

§22-56.  Debris on Street; Duty to Remove
               It shall be unlawful for any person removing a wrecked or damaged motor vehicle or trailer from any street or alley to fail to remove from the street or alley all glass, debris, or other substances incident to the wrecked or damaged motor vehicle or trailer.

 

§22-57.  Following Emergency Vehicles
               It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, except another authorized emergency vehicle, to follow at a distance closer than five hundred (500) feet an authorized emergency vehicle responding to a call, or to drive into or park within the block where the authorized emergency vehicle has stopped in response to a call.

 

§22-58.  Driving Over Fire Hose
               It shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle over unprotected hose of the Fire Department which is laid down at any place within the City without the consent of the Fire Department official in command.

 

§22-59.  Spilling Contents of Vehicle
               It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle which is so constructed or loaded as to permit the contents of the vehicle to drop, sift, spill, leak, or in any manner escape from the vehicle.

 

§22-60.  Toy Vehicles
               It shall be unlawful to use any skates, skateboard, sled, toy vehicle, or similar conveyance upon the streets or alleys of the City, except while crossing a street at a crosswalk or at an intersection.

 

§22-61.  Driving While Embracing Another
               It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon the streets of the City when the operator has another person in front of him, on his lap, or in his embrace, or when another person, package, or other encumbrance prevents the free and unhampered operation of such vehicle.

 

§22-62.  Overloading Front Seat
               (1) It shall be unlawful for a person to drive a motor vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there is in the front seat such number of persons exceeding three, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of such vehicle.

               (2) It shall be unlawful for a passenger in a vehicle to ride in such a position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver's control or the driving mechanism of such vehicle.

 

§22-63.  Soliciting Rides
               It shall be unlawful for any person to stand on the traveled portion of any street or alley for the purpose of soliciting rides from the driver of any vehicle.

 

§22-64.  Slow Moving Vehicles; Impeding Traffic
               (1) It shall be unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic.

               (2) It shall be unlawful for drivers of motor vehicles traveling at a speed less than the speed limit established for such street, or at a speed less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing, to fail to drive in the right hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway.

               (3) It shall be unlawful for a driver of a motor vehicle to impede the normal and reasonable flow of traffic on a street having two or more lanes of travel in one direction by operating his motor vehicle side by side with and at the same speed as another motor vehicle in an adjacent lane.

               (4) Motor vehicles traveling in the same direction of travel shall be operated only in a single file manner. It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle side by side with and at the same speed as another motor vehicle in the same traffic lane.

 

§22-65.  Following Vehicles Ahead
               The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, and such driver shall have due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway.

 

§22-66.  Backing Against Traffic
               It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to back such motor vehicle on City streets, except while moving out from an angle parking position, while moving into a parallel parking position, or while moving it from a driveway. No backing movement shall be made unless it can be made safely.

 

§22-67.  Avoiding Traffic Signal
               It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive such vehicle across property adjacent to an intersection to avoid following the instructions of a traffic control device or signal erected at the intersection.

 

§22-68.  Clinging to Motor Vehicles Prohibited
               (1) It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to permit any pedestrian or any person traveling upon any bicycle, sled, roller skates, skateboard, or any toy vehicle, to cling to or attach himself or his bicycle, sled, roller skates, skateboard, or toy vehicle to such motor vehicle.

               (2) It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian or any person traveling upon any bicycle, sled, roller skates, skateboard, or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself to any motor vehicle being operated on the streets or alleys within the City.

 

§22-69.  Riding on Outside of Vehicles
  (1) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to permit any person to:

        (A) Ride on the hood, top, fenders, or outside surface of any motor vehicle; or

        (B) Ride while sitting or standing on the doors or on the top of the seatback of any motor vehicle; or

        (C) Ride while standing in the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle, or to ride standing in an open truck bed.

  (2) It shall be unlawful for any person to:

        (A) Ride on the hood, top, fenders, or outside surface of any motor vehicle; or

        (B) Ride while sitting or standing on the doors or on top of the seatback of any motor vehicle; or

        (C) Ride while standing in the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle; or

        (D) Ride while standing in an open truck bed.

  (3) This ordinance shall not apply to persons participating in parades authorized by the city council.

 

§22-70.  Driving Within Sidewalk Space
               It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to drive such vehicle within any sidewalk space except when such space is a permanent or temporary driveway; provided, the provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles authorized to be used for snow removal and street cleaning as provided in §32-75 of this Code.

 

§22-71.  Driving Over Newly-laid Pavement
               It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle over or across any newly laid or repaired pavement, across or around which there has been placed a barrier, or at or near which there is a person or sign warning persons against driving over such pavement.

 

§22-72.  Truck Traffic Regulations; Definitions
               For the purpose of §22-72 through §22-76.1, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the following meanings:

  (1) Delivery zone is any area within the City which is surrounded on all sides by truck routes;

  (2) Deviating truck is a truck which leaves a truck route while traveling inside the City;

  (3) Gross vehicle weight is the sum of the empty weight of a truck or vehicle-trailer combination, plus the weight of the maximum load to be carried thereon at any one time;

  (4) Light utility truck is a truck with a width no greater than six feet six inches (6' 6"), a length no greater than twenty feet (20'), and a gross vehicle weight no greater than 10,000 pounds;

  (5) Protected street is any street which has traffic control signs or signals protecting it at every intersection along its way and which transverses a delivery zone;

  (6) Trailer is any vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle;

  (7) Truck is any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property;

  (8) Truck route is the system of streets as designated by §22-76, over and along which trucks may travel within the City.

 

§22-73.  Truck Traffic Regulation; Exceptions
               (1) No person shall operate a truck or vehicle-trailer combination upon any street not designated a truck route by §22-76 except for the purpose of picking up or delivering property in the ordinary course of business within a delivery zone, and then only in the manner set forth by §22-74 below.

               (2) The provisions of subsection (1) above shall not apply to light utility trucks except when such vehicles are carrying property from a point of origin for delivery to a destination point.

 

§22-74.  Truck Traffic Deviating Off Truck Routes
  (1) Single Destination. The operator of a deviating truck with a single destination point within a delivery zone, shall follow the truck route to the intersection thereon which is closest to the destination point and shall deviate from the truck route only at that intersection and shall proceed directly to the destination point. Upon leaving said point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest possible route.

  (2) Multiple Destinations. The operator of a deviating truck with multiple destination points within a delivery zone shall proceed to the first destination point in the manner required by subsection (1) above. Upon leaving the first destination point, a deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points within the delivery zone by the shortest possible routes between destination points. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest possible route.

  (3) Use of Protected Streets Permitted. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) above, the operator of a deviating truck may use any protected street within a delivery zone as part of his or her route to reach a destination point if the following conditions are met:

        (A) The use of the particular protected street or streets will reduce the total necessary distance of travel on streets other than protected streets within the particular delivery zone; and

        (B) The combined route used under subparagraph (3)(A) is the shortest most direct combined route from the truck route to the destination point or back to the truck route.

 

§22-75.  Exceptions
The provisions of §22-73 shall not prohibit:

               (1) Emergency Vehicle. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the City;

               (2) Public Utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the City, public utilities, any contractor or materialman, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements, or street utilities within the City;

               (3) Detoured Trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case were such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is established.

 

§22-76.  Truck Routes Designated
               The city council may, by resolution, designate truck routes along which trucks may travel within the City in accordance with §22-72 through §22-76.1 of this code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9040, effective 04-12-2006

Truck Routes Identified in ATTACHMENT "B"

 

§22-76.1.  Engine Braking; Prohibited
               It shall be unlawful within the city limits for any operator of a motor vehicle with a total gross vehicle weight rating of seven thousand pounds or more, including its towed unit or units, to attempt to retard the forward movement of said vehicle by initiating a device commonly known as jake brakes to contain the engine’s compression, thus rapidly slowing the engine’s revolutions per minute.

 

 

Article VII. Stopping, Standing, and Parking

Division 1. Generally

 

§22-77.  Parking Regulations; City Council
               The city council may, by resolution, entirely prohibit, or fix a time limit for the parking and stopping of vehicles in or on any public street, public property, or portion thereof. The parking or stopping of any vehicle in or on any such street, public property, or portion thereof in violation of such regulations shall constitute a violation of this article.

 

§22-78.  Color Legend
               (1) The use of yellow paint upon the curb of any street shall indicate obstructions such as traffic islands within the traveled way. Yellow paint or yellow plastic markings or appropriate signs shall also be used to indicate the boundaries of safety zones and no parking zones.

               (2) The use of yellow paint upon the curb of any street in conjunction with appropriate signs shall designate fifteen minute parking zones or loading zones.

               (3) The use of white paint or white plastic markings upon the surface of the street shall indicate pedestrian lanes, traffic lanes, and parking spaces.

               (4) The use of blue paint upon the curb of any street or the paved portion of any parking space shall indicate that such space has been set aside as a handicapped parking space.

               (5) The use of green paint upon the curb of any street in conjunction with appropriate signs shall indicate that such space has been set aside as an express zone parking space.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009

 

 

§22-79.  Responsibility of Vehicle Owner
               If any vehicle is found upon any street or alley in violation of any of the provisions of this article regulating the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles, and the identify of the driver cannot be determined, the owner, or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.

 

§22-80.  Manner of Parking
               (1) It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle upon the streets or in any publicly-owned parking lot in any manner or position other than that indicated by appropriate signs or markings, or as directed by an officer or authorized parking lot attendant.

               (2) It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle upon any publicly-owned property other than in an area clearly designated as a parking lot or parking area for motor vehicles.

               (3) For the purposes of this section the words "publicly-owned" shall mean property owned by the State of Nebraska or any of its political or governmental subdivisions.

 

§22-81.  Brakes to Be Set
               It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle upon any perceptible grade without effectively setting the brake of such vehicle and turning the front wheels thereof toward the right-hand curb or side of the highway.

 

§22-82.  Loading Zones
               It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, park, or leave such vehicle standing at any designated loading or unloading zone for a period of time longer than twenty minutes, except when necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, merchandise, or materials.

               The Street Division shall designate such loading and unloading zones by causing the curb to be painted yellow, and shall either paint on such curb or sidewalk above it the words, "Loading Zone," or shall appropriately place loading zone signs.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009

 

§22-83.  Parking so as to Obstruct Traffic
               It shall be unlawful for any person, except in case of accident or emergency, to stop any vehicle within any street intersection or alley entrance or in such location as to obstruct any street crossing, crosswalk, or alley entrance, or back of other vehicles parked at the curb.

 

§22-84.  Vending Vehicles
               It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any vehicle used for the purpose of vending merchandise, meats, vegetables, or confectionery, or any other vehicle commonly known as a peddler's car or wagon, to stand on any street longer than ten minutes in any one location.

 

§22-85.  Parking Within Sidewalk Space
               It shall be unlawful to park or permit any vehicle to remain within any sidewalk space, except with a permit to do so from the chief of police.

 

§22-86.  Parking Near Intersections
            It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle, for any purpose whatever or for any period of time whatever, within twenty feet of any street intersection, or on a sidewalk, or within an intersection, or on a crosswalk, or within 30 feet of any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or other traffic control device located at the side of the roadway, or within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, unless designated as parking stalls painted on the roadway.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009

 

§22-87.  Obstructing Private Driveways

               It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle so as to obstruct a private driveway or drive.

 

§22-88.  Parking Near Fire Hydrants
               It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle, for any purpose whatever or for any period of time whatever, within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009

 

 

§22-89.  Freight Vehicles Backing to Curb
               Vehicles while discharging freight may back to the curb and shall occupy as little of the street as possible, leaving available not less than ten feet of the street for free movement of vehicular traffic at all times. If such vehicle is of the semitrailer type, the tractor part shall be turned so as to stand parallel with the curb and headed in the direction of the traffic, and shall be so parked only during the time necessary for the actual loading or unloading thereof.

 

§22-90.  Parking Vehicle for Sale
               It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon any street, alley, or public place within the city any vehicle displayed for sale.

 

§22-91.  Parking for Washing, Repairing
               It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing upon any street, alley, or public place within the city any vehicle for the purpose of washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, and it shall be unlawful for any person to wash, grease, or repair any vehicle upon any street or public place within the city; provided, that this section shall not apply to repairs necessitated by an emergency.

 

§22-92.  Truck and Trailer  Parking Prohibited

               (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck or trailer with a licensed capacity over five tons, or any truck which individually or in combination with a trailer exceeds 21 feet in length or seven feet in width, upon any street or alley for a period of more than one hour unless such vehicle is, after the expiration of such period, actually delivering or collecting goods, wares, merchandise or materials, or waiting an opportunity to so load or unload materials and providing the driver is present therewith; or except when such trailer is parked in connection with and in aid of the ongoing performance of constructions upon or reparative service to or on property in the City block in which such trailer is parked.  Any vehicle in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is subject to immediate removal and impoundment.

               (b)  This section shall not be construed as permitting the parking of any vehicle in any zone where parking is otherwise prohibited or restricted by this chapter, or as extending the time of parking where such is now restricted to a shorter period than herewithin allowed.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9309, effective 08-30-2011

 

§22-93.  Angle; Parallel; Double Parking
               It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle at any time in any part of the city, except with the right hand side thereof parallel with the curb and not more than one foot from the curb; provided, that the traffic division may designate any street or portion thereof where vehicles shall be parked at an angle, and all vehicles when parked on any such street or portion thereof shall be parked at the designated angle, with the right front wheel of such vehicle at the curb. Where the stalls are designated either on the curb or on the pavement, vehicles will be parked within such stalls. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle beside any vehicle which is lawfully parked parallel with the curb of a street or behind any vehicle which is lawfully parked at an angle to the curb of a street, nor shall any vehicle be parked beside any vehicle on the main traveled portion of the street.

 

§22-94.  Parking on One-Way Streets
               On one-way streets where parking is permitted upon the left hand side of such streets, the provisions of §22-94 shall apply in all respects except that the left hand side of such vehicles shall be parked parallel to the curb, or, if angle parking is permitted, the left front wheel of such vehicle shall be parked at the curb.

 

§22-95.  Unauthorized Designation of Spaces
               It shall be unlawful for any person to paint the curb of any street, or to in any manner set aside or attempt to prevent the parking of vehicles in any street or part thereof. The marking or designating of portions of streets or alleys where the parking of vehicles is prohibited or limited shall be done only by the city through its proper officers.

 

§22-96.  Parking In Alleys
               It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any alley, except a vehicle used for delivery purposes, and then only for such time as is necessary for the actual loading or unloading thereof. Every such vehicle, while loading or unloading in any alley, shall be parked in such a manner as will cause the least obstruction possible to traffic in such alley.

 

§22-97.  Parking Garbage Trucks
               It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any wagon, automobile, or truck used for the collection of garbage or refuse or any agent or employee of any such owner or operator to park such wagon, automobile, or truck on the streets or in any alley in the city except for the purpose of collecting garbage or refuse and then only for the period of time required for the collection thereof.

 

§22-98.  Parking Large Vehicle; Endgate Down
               It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle of an overall length of twenty feet or more to stop or park such vehicle on any street where angle parking is permitted except for the purpose of loading or unloading freight. It shall also be unlawful for the operator of any commercial vehicle, regardless of the length of the same, to park such commercial vehicle with the endgate of the same down and extending beyond the body of such vehicle into the street.

 

§22-99.  Seventy-two Hour Parking
               It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to permit such vehicle to stand at one location upon the streets or upon any public "free parking" lot for a period longer than seventy-two hours.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8959, effective 3-9-2005

 

§22-100.  Parking Near Fires
               It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a motor vehicle to drive to, leave such vehicle standing, whether attended or unattended, or park the same nearer than three hundred feet to any location to which the city fire department has been called to extinguish a fire; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to motor vehicles when used on official business nor when the motor vehicle was so parked and left standing prior to the outbreak of such fire.

 

 

Division 2. Violations; Procedure

 

§22-101.  Parking Violations Bureau
               There is hereby established a Parking Violations Bureau to handle parking violations, which Bureau shall be under the supervision of the Grand Island Police Department. The Bureau shall be open at such hours as the Police Department may designate. It shall be the duty of the Parking Violations Bureau to accept parking penalties and fines and issue receipts therefor pursuant to this article and Article XII of this chapter from such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty by written waiver.

 

§22-102.  Official Police Ticket to Be Issued
               Each violator of the parking provisions of this article or Article XII in this chapter shall be given notice in the form of an official police ticket attached to the offending motor vehicle, which notice shall require such violator to appear at the police department.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9483, effective 05-13-2014

 

§22-103.  Parking Fines
               Parking violators of this article or Article XII of this chapter shall pay a fine of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each violation.  Fines must be paid at the Police Department.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9336, effective 11-01-2011

 

§22-104.  Appearance In Response to Police Ticket
               Persons receiving police tickets for violations of this article or Article XII of this chapter shall have five (5) days from the date on which the official ticket was attached to the offending motor vehicle to report in person to the Police Department with said official police ticket and pay the amounts set out in §22-103, or to mail the official police ticket and full payment as set out in §22-103 to the Police Department. Further, said persons shall also be in violation of the provisions of this Code and subject to the penalties provided herein.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9483, effective 05-13-2014

 

 

Division 3. Impoundment of Vehicles

 

§22-105.  Vehicle Pound
               (1) There is hereby created a pound for the impounding of vehicles which are found to be in violation of any provisions of this chapter of the City Code.

               (2) The chief of police shall be in charge of the pound and is hereby empowered and directed to locate and establish a pound sufficient to accommodate all vehicles impounded under the provisions of this chapter. The chief of police may change the location of such pound and may designate one or more parking stalls or other areas of the public right-of-way for use as a temporary pound, when deemed necessary.

 

§22-106.  Impounding of Vehicles Generally
               (1) Whenever any vehicle is found by an employee authorized by the Police Department to:

(A)   Be parked, abandoned, or left standing in the streets or alleys of the City in violation  of the provisions of this chapter; or

(B)   Have two (2) or more unpaid overdue parking tickets; or

(C)   Be a danger to the public, health, welfare and or safety,

 

Such Police Department employee may remove and convey such vehicle, or cause such vehicle to be removed and conveyed by means of towing or otherwise, to the automobile pound. A report documenting the reason for and the towing of the vehicle shall be completed by the Police Department employee and placed in a designated location for such reports.  No impounded vehicle shall be released or removed from impoundment prior to the public sale provided for in §22-108 except by payment by the owner, operator, or driver of such impounded vehicle, of all unpaid overdue parking tickets, an impounding fee as set forth in the User Fee Schedule approved and adopted by the City Council, and any towing and storage charge assessed against such automobile as provided for in §22-107.  Further, no impounded vehicle shall be released from impoundment without:

(A)  The person claiming the vehicle, or another person accompanying them, presenting for inspection a valid driver’s license; and

(B)   The vehicle being properly registered and insured for operation upon the roadway in accordance with State Statute.

In the event that conditions (A) and (B) above cannot be met, the vehicle may be released to a towing service only after the owner arranges for the vehicle to be towed from the impoundment facility by the towing service and is not operated on the roadway.

               (2) When, and if, the owner, operator, or custodian of such automobile presents himself/herself at the Police Department, it shall be the duty of the Police Department to inform such person of the nature of the violation for which such vehicle was impounded. In case the owner, driver, or custodian of any impounded vehicle executes an affidavit denying the facts upon which the impoundment has been based, and protesting the payment of such impounding, towing, and storage fees, the receipt for the same shall be marked, "Paid Under Protest," and in such case it shall become the duty of the chief of police to make complaint in conformity with the provisions of this Code, or other ordinances of the City. If such person is found not guilty by the court upon such charges, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to refund to such person the fees so paid under protest.

               (3) Neither the owner, lessee, nor occupant of the premises from which any abandoned vehicle shall be removed, nor the City of Grand Island shall be liable for any loss or damage to such vehicle which occurs during its removal or while in the possession of the City or its contractual agent, or as a result of any subsequent disposition.

               (4) It shall be the duty of the chief of police, or their designee, to account for any fees collected by the Police Department under the provisions of this section to the city treasurer, who shall place the same in the police fund. The chief of police, or their designee, shall keep a record of each impounded vehicle containing the name of the owner, the registration plate numbers, (if any), the make, model and year of the vehicle, the nature of each violation involved and the ultimate disposition of each impounded vehicle.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9483, effective 05-13-2014

 

§22-107.  Towing and Storage Charges
               (1) In addition to the impoundment fee established by §22-106, there shall be assessed against each impounded vehicle, the actual towing charge for said vehicle, plus storage charges, as set forth in the User Fee Schedule approved and adopted by the City Council, during the period of impoundment.

               (2) The chief of police is authorized to negotiate with one or more towing services and thereby establish the actual towing charges for each vehicle towed, based upon the type of vehicle, the condition of the vehicle, the weather conditions, and any other factor affecting the cost of such towing, including the availability of a towing service.

 

§22-108.  Sale of Impounded Vehicles
  (1) If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no number plates of the current year affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into consideration the condition of the vehicle, of one hundred dollars or less, title shall immediately vest in the City of Grand Island as provided by the laws of the State of Nebraska.

  (2) Except for vehicles governed by subsection (1) above, the City of Grand Island Police Department having custody of an abandoned vehicle, shall make an inquiry concerning the last-registered owner of such vehicle as follows:

  (A) Abandoned vehicle with number plates affixed, to the jurisdiction which issued such number plates; or

  (B) Abandoned vehicle with no number plates affixed, to the Department of Motor Vehicles.

 (3) The chief of police shall notify the last-registered owner, if any, that the vehicle in question has been recovered as an abandoned vehicle and that, if unclaimed, it will be sold at public auction after five days from the date of such notice was mailed. If the agency described in subsection (A) of this section also notifies the chief of police that a lien or mortgage exists, such notice shall also be sent to the lienholder or mortgagee. Any person claiming such vehicle shall be required to pay the cost of removal and storage of such vehicle.

  (4) Title to such abandoned vehicles, if unclaimed, shall vest in the City of Grand Island as provided by the laws of the State of Nebraska five days from the date such notice is mailed, or if the last-registered owner cannot be ascertained, when notice of such fact is received.

 

§22-109.  Rights of Owner or Lienholder
               The owner of any impounded vehicle or the holder of any registered lien on any impounded vehicle may obtain possession of such impounded vehicle by paying to the City of Grand Island the charges assessed against such automobile for the impounding fee, towing charge and storage charges at any time prior to the sale of such impounded vehicle as provided for in §22-108.

 

§22-110.  Proceeds of Sold Impounded Vehicles
               All money paid for impounding fees, towing charges or storage charges on impounded vehicles, and all money paid for the purchase of impounded vehicles sold according to the provisions of §22-108 of this Code shall be paid to the chief of police, whose duty it shall be to account for such money collected by him to the city treasurer, who shall hold the same for the benefit of the owner of such vehicle for a period of two years. If not claimed within such two-year period, such proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of the City of Grand Island.

 

§22-111.  Construction of Six Preceding Sections
               Nothing in the six preceding sections shall be construed as superseding any other provisions of this chapter concerning the proper parking or operation of vehicles of any character in the City, and the impounding of any vehicle and the collection of a fee therefor under the preceding six sections shall not prevent or preclude prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter concerning the parking or operation of vehicles in the City. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a vehicle within the City of Grand Island.

 

 

Division 4. Regulations to Facilitate Snow Removal

 

§22-112.  Parking Restricted on Certain Streets
               To facilitate the removal of snow from the streets, highways, and alleys of the City, it shall be unlawful for any person to leave any motor vehicles standing or parked on the streets named in this section between the hours of 12 Midnight and 8 a.m., from October 15 through April 15:

Cedar Street, between First Street and Union Pacific Railroad;

Division Street, between Locust Street and Walnut Street;

East Sixth Street, between Vine Street and Plum Street;

Elm Street, between Second Street and Union Pacific Railroad;

First Street, between Cedar Street and Sycamore Street;

Fourth Street, between Eddy Street and Beal Street;

Locust Street, between Fourth Street and Fifth Street;

Locust Street, between Koenig Street and South Front Street;

Pine Street, between First Street and Sixth Street;

Second Street, between Cedar Street and Sycamore Street;

South Front Street, between Walnut Street and Kimball Avenue;

Sycamore Street, between First Street and Fifth Street;

Third Street, between Clark Street and Kimball Avenue;

Walnut Street, between Division Street and Fifth Street;

Wheeler Avenue, between Fourth Street and Fifth Street;

Wheeler Avenue, between Koenig Street and South Front Street.

               This section shall take precedence over all other parking regulations involving the aforementioned streets when in direct conflict therewith.

 

§22-113.  Snow Emergency Routes
            The City Council may, by resolution, designate snow emergency routes within the City in accordance with Section 22-113 through 22-117 of the City Code.  Appropriate signs or other traffic control devices shall be installed indicating the existence of such snow emergency routes. A designation of any street, avenue, road, or highway, or portion thereof, as a snow emergency route shall in no way affect designation of that street, avenue, road or highway for any other purpose.

 

Adams Street between Stolley Park Road and Anna Street;

Anna Street between Blaine Street and Locust Street;

Bismark Road between Locust Street and BNSF Railway Right-of-Way (City Limits);

Blaine Street between Rainbow Rd and Third Street;

Broadwell Avenue between Anna Street and ¼ Mile North of Roberts Street (City Limits);

Cannon Road between North Road and Mansfield Road;

Capital Avenue between Engleman Road and ½ Mile East of Sky Park Road (City Limits);

Cherry Street between Bismark Road and Sutherland Street;

College Street between Broadwell Avenue and Webb Road;

Custer Avenue between Third Street and Capital Avenue;

Diers Avenue between Old Potash Highway and Capital Avenue;

Eddy Street between Anna Street and State Street;

Eighteenth Street between the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railroad and St. Paul Road;

Faidley Avenue between Redwood Road and Broadwell Avenue;

Fonner Park Road between Stuhr Road and 320 feet west of Sylvan Street;

Fourth Street between Broadwell Avenue and Sky Park Road;

Harrison Street between Stolley Park Road and Anna Street;

Howard Avenue between Faidley Avenue and Tenth Street;

Husker Highway between U.S. Highway 30 and U.S. Highway 281;

Independence Avenue between Manchester Road and Nebraska Highway No. 2;

Koenig Street between Blaine Street and Plum Street;

Lafayette Avenue between State Street and Capital Avenue;

Locust Street between 1,200 feet north of Interstate 80 (City Limits) and First Street;

Manchester Road between Viking Road and Mansfield Road;

Mansfield Road between Thirteenth Street and Manchester Road;

Nebraska Highway 2 between 1,400 feet west of Independence Ave and U.S. Highway 281;

North Front Street between Webb Road and Broadwell Avenue;

North Road between Husker Highway and Nebraska Highway No. 2;

Old Lincoln Highway between Custer Avenue and Broadwell Avenue;

Old Nebraska Highway No. 2 between Broadwell and U.S. Highway 281;

Old Potash Hwy between 540 Feet West of Arapahoe Avenue and Custer Avenue;

Old U.S. Highway 30 between West Intersection with U.S. Highway 30 and East Intersection with U.S. Highway 30 Overpass;

Pine Street between Court Street and South Front Street;

Pioneer Boulevard between Blaine Street and Stolley Park Road;

Pleasant View Drive between Bismark Road and Fonner Park Road;

Plum Street between Sutherland Street and Second Street;

Riverside Drive between Stagecoach Road and Stolley Park Road;

St. Paul Road between Fourth Street and Capital Avenue;

Schimmer Drive between ½ Mile West of U.S. Highway 281 (City Limits) and Blaine Street (City Limits);

Second Street between Webb Road and Garfield Street;

Seedling Mile Access Road between Seedling Mile Road and U.S. Highway 30

Seeding Mile Road between ¼ Mile West of Museum Drive and ¼ Mile East of Shady Bend Road (City Limits);

Seventeenth Street between Walnut Street/State Street Intersection and the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railroad;

Shady Bend Road between Bismark Rd and Union Pacific Railroad Right-of-Way (within City Limits)

Shady Bend Road between 1910 Feet North of Capital Avenue and Airport Road;

Sky Park Road between Fourth Street and White Cloud Road;

South Front Street between Vine Street and Walnut Street;

Stagecoach Road between Blaine Street and Locust Street;

State Street between Seventeenth Street/Walnut Street Intersection and North Road;

Stolley Park Road between 920 Feet West of Freedom Drive and Stuhr Road;

Stuhr Road between North Intersection With Stolley Park Road and U.S. Highway 30;

Sutherland Street between Cherry Street and Plum Street;

Swift Road between Stuhr Road and ¾ Mile East of Stuhr Road;

Sycamore Street between Court Street and Capital Avenue;

Tenth Street between Broadwell Avenue and St. Paul Road;

Third Street between Blaine Street and Vine Street;

Thirteenth Street between 910 Feet West of Branding Iron Lane and Wheeler Avenue;

U.S. Highway 30 between Husker Highway and Grant Street;

U.S. Highway 30 (Second Street) between Grant Street and Greenwich Street;

U.S. Highway 30 (Eastbound)/Greenwich Street between First Street and Second Street;

U.S. Highway 30 (First Street/Second Street) between Greenwich Street and Plum Street;

U.S. Highway 30 between Plum Street and 270 Feet West of Shady Bend Road (City Limits);

U.S. Highway 34 (Husker Highway) between U.S. Highway 281 and ¼ mile East of Locust Street (City Limits);

U.S. Highway 281 between ¼ Mile South of Wildwood Drive and Nebraska Highway 2;

Walnut Street between Locust Street/Charles Street Intersection and Fourth Street;

Webb Road between South Intersection with U.S. Highway 281 and North Intersection with U.S. Highway 281;

Wheeler Street between Fourth Street and Capital Avenue;

Wildwood Drive between 380 Feet West of Elk Drive (City Limits) and Locust St.

                                                                           Amended by Ordinance No. 8780, effective 11-27-2002

Amended by Ordinance No. 9087, effective 11-08-2006

Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009

Amended by Ordinance No. 9563, effective 11-17-2015

Amended by Ordinance No. 9566, effective 12-15-2015

 

§22-114.  Snow Alert; Parking Prohibition
               Whenever the mayor or his or her designated representative, shall find, on the basis of falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain, or on the basis of an official forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau predicting snow accumulation, sleet, or freezing rain, that such weather conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited, they may declare a snow alert/emergency. Such declaration of a snow alert/emergency shall state the time that said alert/emergency will be in effect. During such snow alert/emergency all parking of vehicles on snow emergency routes shall be prohibited.  The prohibition imposed under this section shall remain in effect until snow or threat of snow as indicated by the U.S. Weather Bureau has passed and the emergency snow route cleared, or until the formal declaration of a snow alert/emergency has been terminated by the mayor or said designated representative.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009

 

§22-115.  Parking on Residential Streets
               Whenever during a snow alert/emergency the mayor shall determine that conditions make it necessary that parking on local and residential streets should be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, the mayor may put into effect a parking prohibition on parts of or on all local and residential streets by declaring that parking be prohibited on one side of the local and residential streets, designating either the odd or even address numbered side, at their discretion. In such declaration, the mayor shall state the date and time on which such parking prohibition shall take effect. The prohibition shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement by the mayor, who may then declare that there shall be in effect a parking prohibition on the opposite side of those local and residential streets designated above, which prohibition shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the mayor. While the prohibition is in effect, no person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any side of a street whereon parking is prohibited.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009

Amended by Ordinance No. 9309, effective 08-30-2011

 

 

§22-116.  Vehicles on Snow Emergency Routes
               Whenever a motor vehicle becomes stalled for any reason, on any snow emergency route on which there is a parking prohibition in effect, the person operating such vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway of such snow emergency route, either onto the nearest cross street which is not a snow emergency route, or other appropriate location.  No person shall abandon or leave a vehicle in the roadway of a snow emergency route, except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time necessary to go to a nearby telephone or to a nearby garage, gasoline station, or other place of assistance and return without delay.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009

 

§22-117.  Snow Alert/Emergency; Notice
               The mayor or their designated representative shall cause each declaration of a snow alert/emergency made pursuant to this chapter, to be publicly announced by means of broadcast or telecast from broadcasting stations with a normal operating range covering the city, and may cause such declaration to be further announced in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. Each announcement shall describe the action taken, including the time it became or will become effective, and shall specify the streets or areas affected.

               When the conditions which gave rise to a parking prohibition placed in effect pursuant to the provisions of this chapter no longer exist, the mayor or their designated representative may declare the prohibition terminated, in whole or in part, effective immediately upon announcement or at a later specified time.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009

 

§22-118.  Temporary Provisions; Precedence
               Any provision of this chapter which becomes effective by declaration of the mayor or their designated representative upon the occurrence of a snow alert/emergency, takes precedence over other conflicting provisions of law while in effect, except that it shall not take precedence over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a police officer.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009

 

§22-119.  Removal of Stalled or Parked Vehicles
               (1)  Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove or have removed a vehicle from a street to another place or location on a street or to a lot, garage, storage yard, or other similar facility designated by the police department when:

        (A) The vehicles on a snow emergency route are in violation of this division.

                      (B) The vehicle is stalled on a snow emergency route on which there is a parking prohibition in effect and the person who is operating said vehicle does not appear to be removing it in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

                       (C) The vehicle is parked on any street in violation of this division.

               (2)   Such vehicle removal may be made by towing to the city automobile pound, pursuant to the

provisions of Chapter 22, Article IV, Division 3, of this Code, or the police department may cause such vehicles to be removed to a private lot, garage, storage yard, or other similar facility; and any such vehicle shall not be released therefrom except upon payment by the owner of the vehicle to the person or persons in charge of the lot, garage, storage yard, or other similar facility for the cost of towing, and the cost of storage, at the appropriate charges as listed in the most current fee schedule, during which time the vehicle remains stored, and a receipt for such fees shall be issued to the owner of the vehicle.

               (3) It shall be the duty of the person or persons in charge of the lot, garage, storage yard, or other similar facility designated by the police department to keep a record of the name of the owner of all vehicles towed in under the provisions hereof, together with the registration number of each vehicle, and the nature and circumstances of each violation, and the amount of fees collected hereunder, and to deliver a report of each day's transactions to the chief of police not later than one day following the day for which the report is made.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9204, effective 02-25-2009

 

§22-120.  Penalty
               Any person violating the provisions of this division of the Grand Island City Code, notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter to the contrary, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $5, nor more than $100, together with administrative costs for necessary towing upon being deemed guilty. Such fine and costs may be paid upon issuance of a police tag at the police department within five days of the issuance. All persons failing to report to the police department in response to the aforesaid police tag within the five days period shall be in violation of the provisions of this Code and subject to the penalties provided herein.

 

 

Article VIII. Minibikes

 

§22-121.  Minibikes; Defined
               A minibike shall mean a two-wheel motor vehicle which has a total wheel and tire diameter of less than fourteen inches, or an engine rated capacity of less than 45 cubic centimeters displacement, or a seat height less than twenty-five inches from the ground, or any other two-wheel motor vehicle primarily designed by the manufacturer thereof for off-road use only.

 

§22-122.  Minibikes; Prohibited on City Property
               No person shall operate any minibike on any property owned by the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, unless specifically permitted by this Code.

 

§22-123.  Reserved
 

 

Article IX. Recreational Vehicles and Vessels

§22-124.  Definitions
For the purposes of this article, Recreational Vehicle is defined as, and shall include, the following:

               Boat Trailer. A vehicular structure without its own motive power designed to transport a recreational vacation use, which is eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for highway use;

               Camper Trailer. A folding or collapsible vehicle structure without its own motive power, designed as temporary living quarters for travel, camping, recreation and vacation use, and eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for highway use;

               Horse Trailer. A vehicular structure without its own motive power not exceeding twenty feet in length, eight feet in width, and ten and one-half feet in height, designed primarily for the transportation of horses, and which, in combination with the carrying vehicle, is eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for highway use;

               Motor Home. A vehicular unit primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters which are built into an integral part of or permanently attached to, a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or van, containing permanently installed independent life-support systems that meet the state standard for recreational vehicles and providing at least four of the following facilities: cooking; refrigeration or ice box; self-contained toilet; heating, air conditioning, or both; a potable water supply system including a faucet and sink; separate one-hundred-twenty-nominal-volt electrical power supply; or LP gas supply;

               Recreational Vessel. A term applying to all manner of water craft, other than a seaplane on water, whether impelled by wind, oars, or mechanical devises, and which is designed primarily for recreational or vacation uses. A recreational vessel, when mounted upon a boat trailer, and its towing recreational vehicle, when parked or stored in the side or rear yard or behind the required front yard, shall be considered one unit, exclusive of its towing recreational vehicle.

               Travel Trailer. A rigid vehicular structure, without its own motive power, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreation or vacation use, and eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for highway use, and which when equipped for the road, has a body width of not more than eight feet;

               Truck Camper. A portable structure, without its own motive power, designed to be transported on a powered vehicle as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreation or vacation use, and which, in combination with the carrying vehicle, is eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for highway use;

               Utility Trailer. A vehicular structure without its own motive power not exceeding twenty feet in length, eight feet in width, and ten and one-half feet in height, designed and/or used primarily for the transportation of all manner of motor vehicles, goods or materials, and eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for highway use.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8992, effective 8-10-2005

 

§22-125.  Parking and Storing RVs
               Any owner, lessee, or bailee, of a recreational vehicle as defined in §22-124, may park or store such recreational vehicle on a single lot in a residential district, subject to the following:

  (1) Such recreational vehicle shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary state so as not to attract pests or vermin of any nature.

  (2) If such recreational vehicle is equipped with liquified petroleum gas containers, such containers shall meet the standards of the Interstate Commerce Commission or the Federal Department of Transportation or the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, as such standards existed on September 23, 1975. Further, the valves of such liquified petroleum gas containers must be closed when the recreational vehicle is not being readied for immediate use, and in the event that leakage is detected from such liquified petroleum gas containers, immediate corrective action must be taken.

  (3) At no time shall such parked or stored recreational vehicle be occupied or used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes, except as provided in subsection (4) of this section.

  (4) It shall be lawful for only nonpaying guests at a residence in a residential district to occupy one recreational vehicle parked or stored, subject to the provisions of this chapter, for sleeping purposes only for a period not exceeding one week. The total number of days during which a recreational vehicle may be occupied under this subsection shall not exceed 30 days in any calendar year.

  (5) Such recreational vehicle may be parked or stored in the following manner:

        (A) Parking is permitted inside any closed structure, which structure otherwise conforms to the zoning requirements of the particular zone where located;

        (B) Parking is permitted outside in the side yard or in the rear yard behind a required front yard;

        (C) Parking is permitted outside within the required front yard area on a driveway or a hard-surfaced pad adjacent to the driveway for one recreational vehicle, provided:

   (i) The recreational vehicle is parked perpendicular to the front curb;

   (ii) The recreational vehicle must be at least 10 feet in back of the front curbing;

   (iii) The sides of the recreational vehicle do not exceed 40 feet in length, eight feet in width, or 12 feet in height. For the purposes of determining external measurements:

        (a) Truck campers and recreational vessels shall be measured in conjunction with their carrying vehicles, with the whole being considered as one unit for measuring purposes; and

        (b) As to other recreational vehicles, the length restriction shall apply to the body measurement only.

  (6) The city council shall have the power to grant relief from any of the foregoing provisions in such selected instances as it may deem appropriate under the circumstances.

 

§22-126.  Exceptions
               Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the temporary parking of any recreational vehicle on a driveway within the front yard area, or upon the streets; provided, said temporary parking shall be for a period not to exceed 24 hours. Further, no recreational vehicle shall be parked on a driveway more than 24 hours in a weekly period.

 

 

Article X. School Safety Patrol

 

§22-127.  School Safety Patrol; Duties
               (1) The principal of any public or private school or institution of learning, in the City of Grand Island, shall with the approval of the chief of police, appoint or cause to be appointed from the student body students who shall be known as members of the school's Safety Patrol, who shall serve without compensation and at the pleasure of the authorities so making the appointment. The members of such school Safety Patrol shall wear a badge or other appropriate insignia when in performance of their duties. They are hereby authorized to assist school children in crossing public roadways at designated intersections. Members of the school Safety Patrol shall be subordinate to and obey the orders of any police officer present and having jurisdiction.

               (2) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to fail to stop such vehicle when approaching an intersection in which school children are crossing and being assisted by a member of the school's Safety Patrol who at the time is wearing or displaying appropriate insignia.

 

 

Article XI. Handicapped Parking

 

§22-128.  Definitions
               For the purpose of this Article, handicapped or disabled person shall mean any individual with a severe visual or physical impairment which limits personal mobility and results in an inability to travel unassisted more than two hundred feet without the use of a wheelchair, crutch, walker, or prosthetic, orthotic, or other assistant device, any individual whose personal mobility is limited as a result of respiratory problems, and any individual who has permanently lost all or substantially all the use of one or more limbs. Temporarily handicapped or disabled person shall mean any handicapped or disabled person whose personal mobility is expected to be limited in such manner for no longer than one year.

 

§22-129.  Handicapped Parking; Parking Spaces Designated
               The City and any person in lawful possession of any offstreet parking facility may designate parking stalls or spaces for the exclusive use of (a) handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the distinguishing license plates issued to such individuals pursuant to §60-311.14, R.R.S. Neb. 1943 (as amended); (b) such other handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the City, whose motor vehicles display the permit specified in §22-132; and (c) such other motor vehicles, as certified by the City, which display the permit specified in §22-133. All such permits shall be displayed by attaching the permit to the motor vehicle's rearview mirror so as to be clearly visible through the front windshield. When there is no rearview mirror, the permit shall be displayed on the dashboard.

               Designation of a stall or space for handicapped parking shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space a sign which is in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted pursuant to §60-6,118, R.R.S., Neb. 1943 (as amended). In addition to such sign, the space may also be indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to the space.

 

§22-130.  Removal of Unauthorized Vehicles
               The owner or person in lawful possession of an offstreet parking facility, after notifying the police or sheriff's department, as the case may be, and the City providing onstreet parking, or owning, operating, or providing an off-street parking facility, may cause the removal, from a stall or space designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, of any vehicle not displaying the permit specified in §22-132 or §22-133 or the distinguishing license plates specified in §60-311.14, R.R.S. Neb. 1943 (as amended) if there is posted immediately adjacent to and visible from such stall or space a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the area so designated as a tow-in zone.

 

§22-131.  Violation; Penalty; Persons Responsible
               A person who parks a vehicle in any onstreet parking space which has been designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, or in any so exclusively designated parking space in any offstreet parking facility, without properly displaying the permit specified in §22-132 or §22-133 or when the handicapped or disabled person to whom or for whom, as the case may be, the license plate or permit is issued will not enter or exit the vehicle while it is parked in the designated space shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and shall be fined: (1) Not more than one hundred dollars for the first offense, (2) not more than two hundred dollars for a second offense within a one-year period, and (3) not more than three hundred dollars for a third and subsequent offense within a one-year period.

               The display on a motor vehicle of a distinguishing license plate or permit issued to a handicapped or disabled person by and under the duly constituted authority of another state shall constitute a full and complete defense in any action for a handicapped parking infraction issued pursuant to this Article.

               If the identity of the person who parked the vehicle in violation of this Article cannot be readily determined, the owner or person in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation and shall be guilty and subject to the penalties and procedures described in this Article.

               In the case of a privately owned offstreet parking facility, the City shall not require the owner or person in lawful possession of such facility to inform the City of a violation of this Article prior to the City issuing the violator a traffic infraction citation.

 

§22-132.  Permits for Handicapped or Disabled Persons; Issuance; Procedure
               The city clerk may take an application from a handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person or his or her parent, legal guardian, or foster parent for a permit which will entitle the holder thereof or a person driving a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting such holder to park in those spaces provided for in this Article when the holder of the permit will enter or exit the motor vehicle while it is parked in such spaces. For purposes of this section, the handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person shall be considered the holder of the permit.

               A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit shall complete an application, shall provide proof of identity, and shall submit a completed medical form containing the statutory criteria for qualification and signed by a physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner certifying that the person who will be the holder meets the definition of handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person. In the case of a temporarily handicapped or disabled person, the certifying physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner shall indicate the estimated date of recovery or that the temporary handicap or disability will continue for a period of six months, whichever is less. A person may hold only one permit under this section and may hold either a permit under this section or a permit under section 21-133, but not both. The Department of Motor Vehicles shall provide applications, medical forms, and permits to the city clerk.

               The application form shall contain information listing the legal uses of the permit and that the permit is not transferable, is to be used by the party to whom issued or for the motor vehicle for which it is issued, is not to be altered or reproduced, and is to be used only when a handicapped or disabled person or a temporarily handicapped or disabled person will enter or exit the motor vehicle while it is parked in a designated parking space. It shall indicate that those convicted of handicapped parking infractions shall be subject to suspension of the permit for six months and possible fines. A copy of the completed application form shall be given to each applicant. Before issuing a permit, the city clerk shall enter all information required in the manner prescribed by §22-134. The city clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles the name, address, and license number of all persons receiving a permit pursuant to this section.

 

§22-133.  Permits; Motor Vehicles Transporting Handicapped or Disabled Persons; Issuance; Procedure
               The city clerk may take an application from any person for a motor vehicle permit which will entitle the holder thereof or a person driving the motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons to park in those spaces provided for in this Article if the motor vehicle is used primarily for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons.

               Such parking permit shall be used only when the motor vehicle for which it was issued is being used for the transportation of a handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person and such person will enter or exit the motor vehicle while it is parked in such designated spaces.

               A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit pursuant to this section shall apply for a permit for each motor vehicle used for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, shall complete such forms as are provided to the city clerk by the Department of Motor Vehicles and shall demonstrate to the city clerk that each such motor vehicle is used primarily for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons.

               The application form shall contain information listing the legal uses of the permit and that the permit is not transferable, is to be used by the party to whom issued or for the motor vehicle for which it is issued, is not to be altered or reproduced, and is to be used only when a handicapped or disabled person or a temporarily handicapped or disabled person will enter or exit the motor vehicle while it is parked in a designated parking space. It shall indicate that those convicted of handicapped parking infractions shall be subject to suspension of the permit for six months and possible fines. A copy of the completed application form shall be given to each applicant. No more than one such permit shall be issued for each motor vehicle. A person may hold either a permit under this section or a permit under section §22-132, but not both. The city clerk shall issue a permit, as provided to the city clerk by the Department of Motor Vehicles, to an approved applicant. Before issuing such permit, the city clerk shall enter all information required in the manner prescribed by §22-134. The city clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles the name, address, and license number of all persons receiving a permit pursuant to this section.

 

§22-134.  Permits; Contents; Issuance; Duplicate Permit
               (1) The permit to be issued pursuant to §22-132 or §22-133 shall be constructed of a durable plastic designed to resist normal wear or fading for the term of the permit's issuance and printed so as to minimize the possibility of alteration following issuance. The permit shall be of a design, size, configuration, color, and construction and contain such information as specified in the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the United States Department of Transportation in the Uniform System for Handicapped Parking, 23 C.F.R. part 1235.

               (2)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (1) of this section, the permit shall show such identifying information with regard to the handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person to whom it is issued as is necessary to the enforcement of this Article as determined by the Department of Motor Vehicles.

               (3)  No permit shall be issued to any person or for any motor vehicle if any parking permit has been issued to such person or for such motor vehicle and such permit has been suspended pursuant to §18-1741, R.R.S. Neb 1943 (as amended). At the expiration of such suspension, a permit may be renewed upon the payment of the permit fee.

               (4)  A duplicate permit may be provided without cost if the original permit is destroyed, lost, or stolen. Such duplicate permit shall be issued in the same manner as the original permit and shall be valid for the remainder of the period for which the original permit was issued.

 

§22-135.  Permit Fee; Renewal
               (1)  All permits authorized under §22-132 or §22-133 for handicapped or disabled parking prior to September 10, 1993, shall be issued for a period ending January 1 of the fourth year following the date of issuance. All permits authorized under such sections for handicapped or disabled parking after September 9, 1993 and before September 10, 1995, shall be issued for a period of three years Upon the expiration of a permanent permit, it may be renewed pursuant to the provisions of this section and §22-132 or §22-133. After September 9, 1995, all permanently issued permits authorized by this Article, shall be issued for a period ending on September 30 of the third year following the date of issuance and shall expire on that date, except that an application for the renewal of a permit filed with the issuing city or village clerk or designated county official within thirty days of the date after its expiration shall be deemed to have been filed prior to the date of its expiration.

               (2)  All permits authorized under this Article prior to September 10, 1995, for temporarily handicapped or disabled parking shall be issued for a period ending ninety days after the date of issuance but may be renewed for up to three additional ninety-day periods. All permits authorized under this Article after September 9, 1995, for temporarily handicapped or disabled parking shall be issued for a period ending not more than six months after the date of issuance but may be renewed for a one-time period not to exceed six months. For the renewal period, there shall be submitted an additional application with proof of a handicap or disability and the required permit fee.

 

§22-136.  Non Transferability of Permits
               Permits issued under this Article shall not be transferable and shall be used only by the party to whom issued or for the motor vehicle for which issued and only for the purpose for which it is issued. No person shall alter or reproduce in any manner a permit issued pursuant to this Article. Any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension of such permit for a period of six months and such other punishment as may be provided by local ordinance. In addition, the trial court shall impose a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars which may be waived by the court if, at the time of sentencing, all handicapped parking permits issued to or in the possession of the offender are returned to the court. At the expiration of such six-month period, a suspended permit may be renewed.

 

§22-137.  Reserved
§22-138.  Reserved
§22-139.  Reserved

 

 

Article XII.  Off-Street Parking
§22-140.  Definitions
               For the purpose of this Article, off-street parking shall be that as defined in §36-8 of this Code and any vehicles parked on such off-street parking spaces.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8992, effective 8-10-2005

 

§22-141.  Violations; Penalty; Persons Responsible
               (1) It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or  bailee or person to park a motor vehicle in a non-conforming off-street parking space as defined in §36-96 and 36-97.

               (2) If the identity of the person who parked the vehicle in violation of this Article cannot be readily determined, the owner or person in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facia responsible for such violation and shall be guilty and subject to the penalties and procedures described in this Article.

               (3) All violations of this Section shall be enforced by the Parking Violations Bureau and the provisions of Sections 22-101 through 22-104, inclusive.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8992, effective 8-10-2005

 

§22-141.1.  Parking In Front Yards

               It shall be unlawful for anyone to park a motor vehicle on any unimproved area of a front yard of any property in the city of Grand Island. The term "motor vehicle" shall mean every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated on rails, except mopeds or self-propelled invalid chairs. No front yard area shall be improved for parking unless it meets all of the requirements of the Grand Island City Code for off-street parking, including but not limited to, the provisions of Chapter 36.

Added by Ordinance 8828, effective 8-6-2003

Amended by Ordinance No. 9197, effective 11-12-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9458, effective 11-12-2013

§22-141.2.  Parking Busses In Yards                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                         It shall be unlawful for anyone to park a bus (as defined in §22-1), in the back yard, front yard or side yard of any residence (as defined in §36-8) in any zone of the City of Grand Island or its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.

Added by Ordinance 8992, effective 8-10-2005

 

§22-142.  Removal; Duty of Property Owner
               It shall be the duty of every owner, landlord or person in possession, charge or control of the real estate upon which any non-designated off-street parking is allowed, to remove or cause to be removed from the premises such vehicle parking in the non-conforming area.

               It shall be unlawful to allow such vehicle to remain in a non-conforming off-street parking area.

 

§22-143.  Non-Conforming Off-Street Parking; Public Nuisance
               It shall be unlawful and hereby declared a public nuisance to allow off-street parking in non-conforming areas, as described in §36-96 and 36-97 or to allow to remain on any property within the City such vehicles in non-conforming areas.

 

§22-144.  Penalty for Violation
               Any person violating §22-143 shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.  Each day shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as provided in this Code.

 

§22-145.  Notice to Remove; Non-Compliance with Notice; Procedure
               It shall be the duty of the Grand Island Police Department or the Code Compliance Officer in any case where a vehicle is allowed  to remain in a non-conforming area and in any non-conforming off-street parking space, to deliver or send a Notice to Abate and remove such nuisance to the owner of the real estate or the owner's duly authorized agent or person, in possession, charge or control, and to the occupant, if any, by personal service or ordinary first class mail.  Within five days after delivery or mailing of such notice, if the owner, agent or occupant of the real estate or piece of ground fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, or if such owner, agent or occupant cannot be notified by personal service or mail upon written request from the Grand Island Police Department or the Code Compliance Officer to the City Attorney, the City of Grand Island may proceed to abate said public nuisance pursuant to §20-15 of the Grand Island City Code.

 

§22-146.  Assessment; Levy; Collection
               If the costs and expenses of removing the vehicle from the nonconforming off-street parking area are not paid within the time provided, the City Council shall, and it does hereby empower to, levy and assess the costs and expenses of such removal upon the property so benefited.  The same shall be levied on all lots, tracts or parcels of land to the extent of the special benefit to such real estate, by reason of such improvement, such benefits to be determined by the City Council sitting as a board of equalization after publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the City and personal notice at least ten (10) days prior thereto. The assessment so levied shall be a lien on the property on which levied from the date of levy and shall be due and payable to the City Treasurer thirty (30) days after such levy and shall become delinquent fifty (50) days after such levy and shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum from the date they become delinquent; and, at the time of the next certification for general revenue purposes to the County Clerk, if not previously paid, this special tax shall be certified to the County Clerk, be placed upon the tax list and be collected as other real estate taxes are collected and be paid over to the City Treasurer.

 

 ARTICLE XIII

 

ANNUAL MOTOR VEHICLE FEE

 

§22-147.  Definitions

1)     For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall prevail, unless the context otherwise requires:

a)      Business - Business shall mean any corporation, partnership, limited liability company, sole proprietorship, firm, cooperative, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, activity, or entity.

b)      Construction - Construction shall include the inspecting, designing, actual building and expenses, including the cost of rights-of-way incidental to the construction of a street.

c)     Maintain - Maintain shall include all work, materials, and repairs necessary to keep streets, roads, alleys, public ways, or parts thereof in proper and sound condition, and shall also include the removal of snow and ice therefrom.

d)     Person - Person shall include every natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.

e)     Place of Business – Place of Business shall mean a fixed physical location owned, leased, or otherwise occupied by a business at which the activities of the business are conducted.

f)       Reside - Reside shall mean having a fixed place of abode occupied or intended to be occupied consistently over a substantial period of time and which is permanent rather than temporary.

g)     Resurfacing - Resurfacing shall mean and include the widening or rebuilding of the street or any portion thereof.

h)     Street Improvement - Street improvement shall include constructing, resurfacing, maintaining, or improving streets, roads, alleys, public ways, or parts thereof, or for the amortization of bonded indebtedness when created for such purposes.

 

2)     For purposes of this article, the terms motor vehicle, motorcycle, passenger car, farm truck, mini truck, bus, commercial vehicle, recreational vehicle, and dealer shall have such meanings as found in Nebraska Revised Statutes Chapter 60, Article 3.

 

§22-148.  Assessment Levied

Every person residing within the corporate limits of the city, and every business having a place of business within the corporate limits of the city, except those herein exempt from the provisions of this chapter, who is the owner of a vehicle, regardless of the county or state where registered, which is found or operated within the city, shall, at the time such person registers such vehicle or applies for a dealer's plate under the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-301 et seq. (Reissue 2010) and amendments thereto, pay to the County Treasurer of Hall County a vehicle fee for street improvements as hereinafter provided, which fee is hereby levied and assessed against such owner.

 

 

§22-149. Annual Fee; Collection;  Credit to Road Fund.

The official registration period and the period for which such vehicle fee is levied shall be a yearly period, each period ending on the first day of the month one year from the month during which the vehicle is required to be registered under the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-301 et seq. (Reissue 2010), and amendments thereto; provided, that for any vehicle registered on a calendar year basis under said state law, the period for which the vehicle fee is levied shall end on December 31 of each year; and provided, further, that for any vehicle registered for a period longer than twelve months in accordance with said state law, the period for which the vehicle fee is levied shall be for an equivalent and corresponding period, and the amount of the vehicle fee for such periods shall be increased in an amount proportionate to the number of months, or parts of such months, by which the registration period exceeds twelve months.

 

The fee shall be paid to the County Treasurer of Hall County, Nebraska when the registration fees as provided in the Nebraska Motor Vehicle Registration Act are paid. Such fees shall be credited by the County Treasurer to the Road Fund of the City. 

 

§22-150. Reduction of Fee

Except as herein provided, no reduction in such vehicle fee shall be made, regardless of the time when the application for registration is made or when the fee is paid. The fee levied upon an vehicle registered in accordance with Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-301 et seq. (Reissue 2010), and amendments thereto, for a period which will expire in less than six months from the first day of the month of such registration shall be one-half of the fee otherwise levied under Section §22-153, Fee Schedule, of this code, unless the fee is transferable as provided in Section §22-153, Fee Schedule, of this code.

 

§22-151. Refund of Fee

1)  Upon the transfer of ownership of any vehicle, the number of unexpired months remaining on the vehicle fee for street improvements paid pursuant to this chapter shall be credited or the money paid refunded to the transferor; provided, that when such vehicle is transferred within the same calendar month in which acquired, no refund shall be allowed for such month. Should such transferor acquire another vehicle at the time of such transfer, such transferor shall have the credit herein provided applied toward payment of the motor vehicle fee for street improvements then owing. Such vehicle fee, or any part of it, shall not be refunded for any cause or by any method except as prescribed herein.

 

2)  Partial refund of the City of Grand Island Motor Vehicle fee shall be paid by the City upon application and proof of payment of such fee for a registration period commencing prior to March 1, 2018 at an amount that exceeds the fee in effect commencing March 1, 2018.  Partial refunds provided hereby shall equal the difference between the fee paid and the fee effective March 1, 2018.  The City Finance Director may adopt such procedures, rules and forms necessary to implement the §22-151(2). 

Amended by Ordinance No. 9672, effective 3-1-2018

 

 

§22-152. Funds Created; Use

All monies derived from the payment of the vehicle fee for street improvements shall be used exclusively for constructing, repairing, maintaining, or improving streets, roads, alleys, public ways, or parts thereof or for the amortization of bonded indebtedness when created for such purposes as provided by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-1214 et seq.

 

§22-153. Fee Schedule

Commencing November 1, 2017, the fee provided for in this chapter shall be as follows:

 

Commencing November 1, 2017, the fee provided for in this chapter shall be as follows:

 

Any motor vehicle registered as a motorcycle and any

dealer motorcycle license plates................................................................................................................................... $12.50

 

Any motor vehicle registered as a passenger car, farm truck (any tonnage)

or minitruck and any dealer license plates................................................................................................................................... $22.50

 

Any motor vehicle registered as a bus, commercial vehicle (any tonnage),

or motor recreational vehicle................................................................................................................................... $52.50

 

Commencing March 1, 2018, the fee provided for in this chapter shall be as follows:

 

Any motor vehicle registered as a motorcycle and any

dealer motorcycle license plates................................................................................................................................... $12.50

 

Any motor vehicle registered as a passenger car, autocycle, farm truck (any tonnage), commercial vehicle 5 ton combined weight or less, or minitruck, and any dealer license plates (excluding dealer motorcycle plates)……………..$22.50

 

Any motor vehicle registered as a bus, commercial vehicle more than 5 ton combined weight, or motor recreational vehicle................................................................................................................................... $52.50

Amended by Ordinance No. 9672, effective 3-1-2018

 

 

§22-154.   Payment of Fee;  Penalty for Delinquencies
The annual motor vehicle fee shall be due and payable to the Hall County Treasurer at the same time as the state registration for vehicles under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-301 et seq. (Reissue 2010), and amendments thereto, and shall be delinquent thereafter. Such fee shall draw interest at the rate of one percent per month after delinquent; and, in addition, a penalty of five percent for failure to pay said fee within six months after due shall be collected. In any case, if any person shall fail to make payment of the fee herein provided, the City of Grand Island shall have the right and may sue any person in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the fee due and payable under the provisions of this chapter, together with interest and penalties.   The Hall County Treasurer shall not be responsible for collection of interest and penalties provided hereby.

 

§22-155. Exemptions

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

(a) Any vehicle owned by the United States of America or agency thereof;

(b) Any vehicle owned by the State of Nebraska;

(c) Any vehicle owned by any political subdivision of the State of Nebraska;

(d) Any vehicle is used or stored but temporarily within the city for a period of six months or less in a twelve-month period;

(e)  Any vehicle subject to Interstate Registration Proration (Neb.Rev.Stat. §60-3,198);

(f)   Any vehicle exempt under the provisions of the federal Servicemembers Civil Relief Act; and

(f) Any vehicle owned by a full-time student attending a postsecondary institution and is not registered in Hall County, Nebraska.

 

§22-156. Severability

If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable.

 

§22-157. Termination

Unless extended, the fee imposed by Sections 22-147 through 22-156 shall terminate on September 30, 2019.

 

§22-158. Penalty for Violations.

 

Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to pay the annual motor vehicle fee when due shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $100.00. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such.

Added by Ordinance 9646, effective 11-1-2017

 
CHAPTER 23

OCCUPATION TAXES

 

Article I. Gas Manufacturers, Distributors, Etc.

§23-1. Occupation Tax

                Except as provided in §23-2, any person engaged in the business of distributing, manufacturing or furnishing gas, either natural, manufactured or mixed gas, in the City, shall be required to pay to the City an occupation tax in an amount equal to three cents per therm of all such gas distributed or furnished to the inhabitants of the City.  Provided, however, the occupation tax shall be one cent per therm of all such gas transported within the city to transport customers.

 

§23-2. Federal and State Sales Exempt

                Any person engaged in the business of selling, distributing and furnishing natural, or manufactured, or mixed gas in the City shall not be required to pay the occupation tax provided for by §23-1 on the sale of such gas to the United States government, or any of its departments, or any sold to the state, or any of its departments, or any of the political subdivisions thereof, and no part or portion of the tax provided for in such section shall be levied upon or assessed against or taken from the United States government, the government of the state, or any of either of their departments or political subdivisions. 

 

§23-3. Tax Payable; Interest; Penalties
                The occupation tax levied pursuant to §23-1 shall be due and payable on the fifteenth day of each month for the gross receipts of the month preceding such date, and each and every payment shall be made on the fifteenth day of each month, and all deferred payments shall draw interest at the rate of one percent per month, and after payment has been in default six months, a penalty of five percent shall be added thereto in addition to such interest charge which shall be paid by any person subject to this occupation tax.

 

§23-4.  To Whom Payable; Receipt; Disposition
                All occupation taxes collected in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time specified in this article, who shall issue and deliver a receipt therefor upon payment thereof, and the amount so paid shall be credited by the city treasurer to the general fund of the City, unless otherwise directed by the city council.

 

§23-5.  Monthly Report of Therms

                                Any person engaged in the business described in §23-1 shall, on or before the tenth day of each month, file with the city clerk a full, complete and detailed statement of the number of therm units of all such gas distributed or furnished to the inhabitants of the City and all such gas transported within the city for transport customers for the preceding month, which statement shall be duly verified and sworn to by such person or by the managing officer of any gas company.

 

§23-6.  Adjustments
                Any person, when paying the occupation tax provided for by §23-1 may show on the reports accompanying such tax payments an adjustment in the payment of said tax made necessary by uncollectible accounts, or any other matters which may have resulted in either an excess or a deficiency in the amount of tax paid in any previous remittance.

 

§23-7.  Right of City to Inspect Records
                The City shall have the right at any time during business hours to inspect, through its officers, agents, or representatives, the books and records of any person engaged in the business described by §23-1 for the purpose of verifying any report submitted pursuant to §23-5.

 

§23-8.  When Tax Not Reported
                In case any person engaged in the business described by §23-1 shall refuse or fail or neglect to furnish or file a report pursuant to §23-5 at the time specified or shall refuse to permit the City, through its officers, agents, or representatives, to inspect the business books and records for the purpose of verifying any such report, then the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article for the preceding month shall be the sum of three thousand five hundred dollars, which amount shall draw interest at the rate of one percent per month after becoming due and payable, and in addition thereto a penalty of five percent shall be added for failure to pay such tax within six months.

 

§23-9.  Right of City to Sue
                If any person engaged in the business described by §23-1 shall fail to make payment of the occupation tax as provided by this article at the time specified for such payment, the City shall have the right to sue any such person in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of occupation tax due and payable under the terms and provisions of this article, and may recover therein a judgment against any such person for such amount due, together with interest and penalties, and may have execution thereon.

 

 

Article II. Telegraph Companies

 

§23-10.  Occupation Tax; Exemption
                Telegraph companies maintaining and operating stations and offices in the City are required to pay to the City as an occupation tax the sum of three percent of the gross receipts collected in the City, resulting from the business and occupation of receiving messages in the City from persons in the City and transmitting the same by telegraph from the City to persons and places within the state, and receiving in the City messages by telegraph, transmitted from persons and places in the state to persons within the City. There shall be excepted from the provisions of this article all receipts for telegraph service to the United States government or any of its departments and all receipts from the state or any of its departments, and no part of the tax provided for in this article shall be levied upon or assessed against or taken from the United States government, the government of the state or any of either of their departments.

 

§23-11.  Effective Date; Payment Periods
                The payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be in semiannual payments. This article shall take effect on October 1, 1958, and the first payment shall be for the succeeding six-month period, and the same shall be paid within forty-five days after April 1, 1959. The next payment of such tax shall be made within forty-five days after the first day of October 1959. The payment of such tax in the years following shall likewise be made as set forth in this section.

 

§23-12.  To Whom Payable; Receipt; Disposition
                The occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time provided by this article who shall issue and deliver a receipt therefor upon the payment thereof, and the amount of payment shall be credited by the city treasurer to the general fund.

 

§23-13.  Interest and Penalty
                All payments of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article which are made after the due date shall draw interest at the rate of one percent per month, and after payment thereof has been in default for six months, a penalty of five percent shall be added thereto in addition to such interest charges which shall be paid by any company subject to this occupation tax.

 

§23-14.  Adjustments
                Each succeeding semiannual payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article may include any adjustment which is shown on the report provided for by §23-15 which may be necessary for the consideration of uncollectibles or any other matters which may have resulted in either an excess or a deficiency in the amount of tax paid in any previous semiannual payment.

 

§23-15.  Report of Gross Receipts
                All telegraph companies shall, at the time they make their semiannual payments of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article, file with the city clerk a full, complete, and detailed statement of the gross receipts subject to such occupation tax which statement shall be duly verified and sworn to by the manager in charge of the business of the particular company in the City, or by a higher managerial employee of such company.

 

§23-16.  Right of City to Inspect Records
                The City shall have the right at any time to inspect, through its officers, agents or representatives, the books and records of any telegraph company, for the purpose of verifying any report submitted pursuant to the requirements of §23-15.

 

§23-17.  When Tax Report Not Filed
                In case any telegraph company shall refuse, fail or neglect to furnish or file any report required by §23-15 at the time required for such filing, or shall fail or refuse to permit the City to inspect the books and records of such company for the purpose of verifying such report, then the occupation tax for the preceding six months shall be the amount of one hundred dollars, and such amount shall be paid within forty-five days following the end of the six months period as required by §23-11, and such amount shall draw interest and be subject to penalties as provided by §23-13.

 

§23-18.  Right of City to Sue
                In case any telegraph company shall fail to make payment of the occupation tax provided for by this article at the time specified for such payment, the City shall have the right to sue any such company in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of such occupation tax due and payable under the terms and provisions of this article, and may recover judgment against any such company for such amount so due, together with interest and penalties, and may have execution thereon.

 

§23-19.  Railroad Companies; Exemption
                Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to include railroad companies sending messages by telegraph in connection with the operation of such railroad.

 

§23-20.  Other Fees and Taxes
                The occupation tax provided for by this article shall be in lieu of any other occupation, license, permit or franchise fee or tax assessed against telegraph companies under the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the City.

 

 

Article III. Telecommunication Tax

 

§23-21.  Occupation Tax; Exemption
                (A)          All telephone companies and mobile telecommunications services doing business in the City are required to pay an occupation tax to the City in an amount equal to three (3) percent of the gross receipts from the legally established basic monthly charges collected for local exchange telephone service to subscribers within the City, intrastate message toll telephone service and mobile telecommunications services for revenue in the City.

(B)          Effective September 1, 2016, in addition to the three (3) percent occupation tax provided by §23-21 (A) above, all telephone companies and mobile telecommunications services doing business in the City are required to pay a supplemental occupation tax to the City in an amount equal to two (2) percent, resulting in a total occupational tax of five (5) percent of the gross receipts from the legally established basic monthly charges collected for local exchange telephone service to subscribers within the City, intrastate message toll telephone service and mobile telecommunications services for revenue in the City.  The revenue received from the two (2) percent supplemental occupation tax shall be placed in a segregated account and shall be appropriated solely for payment of bonds for construction of a new primary 911 Emergency Operating facility and for other public safety purposes.

(C)    The supplemental occupation tax imposed pursuant to § 23-21(B) shall terminate on August 31, 2036, at which time the occupational tax rate imposed by this Article shall be three (3) percent as provided by §23-21(A), above.

(D)          As used in this section, mobile telecommunications services shall mean a wireless communication service carried on between mobile stations or receivers and land stations, and by mobile stations communicating among themselves, and includes:

                                 (i)           Both one-way and two-way wireless communications services;

                                (ii)           A mobile service which provides a regularly interacting group of base, mobile, portable and associated control and relay stations, whether on an individual, cooperative, or multiple basis for private one-way or two-way land mobile radio communications by eligible users over designated areas of operation; and

                                (iii)          Any personal communications service.

(E)           There shall be excepted from the provisions of this Article all receipts for telephone service to the United States government or any of its departments, and all receipts from the state or any of its departments, and no part or portion of the tax provided for in this Article shall be levied upon or assessed against or taken from the United States government, the government of the state, or any of either of their departments.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9106, effective 3-1-07

Amended by Ordinance No. 9593, effective 9-01-16

 

§23-22.  Payment Period and Due Date
                The payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be in quarterly payments, using the calendar quarter year as a basis for determining and computing the amount of tax payable. Each quarterly payment shall be due forty-five days after the termination of each calendar quarter year.

 

§23-23.  To Whom Payable; Receipt; Disposition
                The occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time provided by this article who shall issue and deliver receipt therefor upon the payment thereof, and the amount of payment shall be credited by the city treasurer to the general fund.

 

§23-24.  Interest and Penalty
                All payments of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article which are made after the due date thereof shall draw interest at the rate of one percent per month and, after payment thereof has been in default for six months, a penalty of five percent shall be added thereto in addition to such interest charges, which shall be paid by any company subject to this occupation tax.

 

§23-25.  Quarterly Report of Gross Receipts
                All telephone companies shall, at the time they make their quarterly payments of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article, file with the city clerk a full, complete and detailed statement of the gross receipts subject to such occupation tax, which statement shall be duly verified and sworn to by the manager in charge of the business of the particular company in the city or by a higher managerial employee of such company.

 

§23-26.  Adjustments
                Each succeeding quarterly payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article may include any adjustment which is shown on the report provided for by §23-25 which may be necessary for the consideration of uncollectibles or any other matters which may have resulted in either an excess or a deficiency in the amount of tax paid in any previous quarter.

 

§23-27.  Right of City to Inspect Records
                The City shall have the right at any time to inspect, through its officers, agents or representatives, the books and records of any telephone company, for the purpose of verifying any report submitted pursuant to the requirements of §23-25.

 

§23-28.  When Tax Report Not Filed
                In case any telephone company shall refuse, fail or neglect to furnish or file any report required by §23-25 at the time required for such filing, or shall fail or refuse to permit the City to inspect the books and records of such company for the purpose of verifying such report, than the occupation tax for the preceding quarter shall be the sum of five thousand dollars, and such amount shall be paid within forty-five days following the end of the calendar quarter as required by §23-22 and such amount shall draw interest and be subject to penalties as provided by §23-24.

 

§23-29.  Right of City to Sue
                In case any telephone company shall fail to make payment of the occupation tax provided for by this article at the time specified for such payment, the City shall have the right to sue any such company in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of such occupation tax due and payable under the terms and provisions of this article and may recover judgment against any such company for such amount so due, together with interest and penalties, and may have execution thereon.

 

§23-30.  Other Fees and Taxes
                The occupation tax provided for by this article shall be in lieu of any other occupation, license, permit or franchise fee or tax assessed against telephone companies under the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the City.

 

 

Article IV. Solicitors, Peddlers, Etc.

 

§23-31.  Occupation Tax
                All solicitors, peddlers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise, magazines, publications, wares, and services shall pay an occupation tax in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§23-32.  Proration
                No proration of the tax provided for by this article shall be permitted for less than one month.

 

§23-33.  Receipt and Card
                Upon payment of the tax required by this article, the solicitor, peddler or itinerant merchant shall be supplied with a card by the city clerk which is to be displayed in or about the vehicle or location used by such solicitor or peddler, and the receipt for such tax shall be carried on the person paying the same who goes from place to place.

 

§23-34.  To Whom Payable
                All solicitors, peddlers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise, magazines, publications, wares and services, desiring to display and sell goods, wares, merchandise, magazines and publications in the City shall pay the occupation tax provided by this article to the city clerk.

 

§23-35.  Registration Statement
                At the time of paying the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article, the solicitor, peddler, or other such person mentioned in §23-34 shall register his or her name, address, firms represented, products purveyed, the address of all firms represented and whether such firms have provided an agent for service in the state, and, if so, such name and address.

 

§23-36.  Applicability of Article
                Except as provided by §23-37, all persons who shall sell or offer for sale, barter or exchange any goods, merchandise, publications, wares and services, by going from place to place shall be required to pay the taxes set forth by this article, and the solicitation of orders shall be regarded as selling or offering for sale.

 

§23-37.  Exemptions
This article shall not apply to the following persons:

                (1) Persons selling to merchants and businessmen;

                (2) Persons having an established permanent place of business in the City;

                (3) Persons having an established place of residence in the county;

                (4) Persons living in the county or adjacent counties who are selling their own produce;

                (5) Persons selling under judicial sales or sales on foreclosures of mortgages.

 

 

Article V. Games of Chance, Lotteries, Etc.

 

§23-38.  Definitions
For the purposes of this article the following definitions shall apply:

        (A) The phrase "games of chance and/or lotteries" shall mean those forms of gambling authorized by the State of Nebraska pursuant to Article III, Section 24, of the Constitution of the State of Nebraska.

        (B) The phrase "gambling device" shall mean any and all machines or devices used by a person engaged in the occupation of conducting games of chance and/or lotteries.

        (C) The phrase "person engaged in the occupation of conducting games of chance and/or lotteries" shall mean any person who operates, owns or is the lessee of a place of business where any game of chance and/or lottery activity is conducted, whether or not any other type of business is conducted on the premises; or, any person who either directly controls or manages the games of chance and/or lotteries, or owns any machine or device used to engage in the occupation of games of chance and/or lotteries, but does not sell, lease, or deliver possession or custody of such a device to other persons.

        (D) The word "distributor" shall mean any person who engages in the business of selling, leasing, or delivering possession or custody of gambling devices for consideration to a person engaged in the occupation of conducting games of chance and/or lotteries.

 

§23-39.  Tax Imposed
                An occupation tax is hereby imposed on each person engaged within the City in the occupation of conducting games of chance and/or lottery activities and upon each person engaged in the occupation of distributing gambling devices. Every person conducting games of chance and lottery activities within the City shall pay the tax in the amount and manner specified in §23-40. Every person distributing gambling devices within the City shall pay the tax in the amount and manner specified in §23-41.

 

§23-40.  Games of Chance
                The occupation tax for each person engaging in the occupation of conducting games of chance and lottery activities within the City shall be 6 percent of the gross receipts received by said person in each quarter of a calendar year.

 

§23-41.  Gambling Devices
                The occupation tax for engaging in the occupation of distributing gambling devices within the City shall be six percent (6%) of the gross receipts received by a distributor in each quarter of a calendar year.

 

§23-42.  Unlawful Without License
                It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation of conducting games of chance or lottery activities without first obtaining a license to do so.

 

§23-43.  License Application
                Every person desiring a license required by the provisions of this article shall make application to the city clerk. Accompanying each application shall be:

        (A) A sworn statement by each designated supervising member that such member will be responsible for compliance with rules and regulations for each occasion of games of chance and/or lotteries which he supervises.

        (B) A sworn statement by the member designated as responsible for the proper utilization of gross receipts that no commission, fee, rent, seller profits, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any person or organization not sanctioned by the laws of the State of Nebraska and the City of Grand Island; and that all profits will be spent for a lawful purpose.

 

§23-44.  License Displayed
                Every license issued under the provisions of this division shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where the game of chance and/or lottery activity is conducted at all times during the conduct thereof.

 

§23-45.  License Fee
                The license fee for engaging in the occupation of conducting games of chance and lotteries within the City shall be Ten Dollars ($10.00) for each location wherein such activity is conducted.

 

§23-46.  Nonprofit Organizations
                Nonprofit organizations that desire to participate in games of chance and/or lotteries that are in compliance with the Small Lotteries and Raffles Act of the State of Nebraska, are exempt from the provisions of this article.

 

§23-47.  Lotteries
                Lotteries conducted pursuant to the Nebraska County and City Lottery Act which are operated in accordance with an agreement approved by the City Council providing for payment in lieu of the tax imposed by Article V of Chapter 23 of the City Code shall be exempt from the provisions requiring payment of said tax.

 

§23-48.  Reserved
§23-49.  Reserved
§23-50.  Reserved
§23-51.  Reserved
§23-52.  Reserved
§23-53.  Reserved
§23-54.  Reserved

 

Article VI.  Hotel Tax

 

§23-55.  Hotel Accommodations
                Each person engaged in the business of operating a hotel in the city shall pay an occupation tax in the amount of two percent (2%) of the basic rental rates charged per occupied room per night.

 

§23-56.  Hotel Defined
                Hotel shall mean any facility in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in any space ordinarily used for accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist hotels, campgrounds, courts, lodging houses, inns and nonprofit hotels; but "hotel" shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, chronic care centers, or dormitories or facilities operated by an educational institution and regularly used to house students.

 

§23-57.  Occupied Room; Defined; Exceptions
                (A)  Occupied Room shall mean any space ordinarily used for sleeping accommodations and for which any occupant has, for consideration, obtained the use or possession, or the right to use or possess, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) contiguous days. The term shall include camping space, trailer space or recreational vehicle space. The term does not include a function room such as a ballroom, banquet room, reception room, or meeting room, provided it is not used as temporary sleeping accommodations.

                (B)  The term "occupied room" shall not mean, and no tax imposed by this article shall be measured by or collected for:

                (1)  Complimentary or other sleeping accommodations for which no consideration is charged;

                (2)  Sleeping accommodations for which the consideration is paid by a person not subject to the sales and use tax imposed by the Nebraska Revenue Act of 1967, as it is amended from time to time; or

                (3)  Sleeping accommodations leased by an employer for use by its employees when a specific room is the subject of the lease, the lease extends for more than thirty (30) consecutive days, and consideration is actually paid for use during at least thirty (30) consecutive days.

 

§23-58.  Collection
                The tax imposed by this article shall be collected by the hotel operator from the occupant of each room to which the tax applies. The tax may be shown as an add-on to the charge for occupancy of the rooms and shall be collectible at the time the lodging is furnished, regardless of when the charge for the occupancy is paid. The operator shall remain responsible for payment of all taxes imposed whether or not the taxes are actually collected from the guests.

 

§23-59.  Records
                It shall be unlawful for any hotel operator subject to this article to fail to maintain or fail to make available to the city, upon seventy-two (72) hours notice, written records accurately and completely evidencing the number of rooms occupied, the dates the rooms are occupied, the amount of occupation tax due or paid under this article, and such other information as is required by the Director of Finance. Such records shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years after the occupation tax is due.

 

§23-60.  Due Date
                Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this chapter, the tax imposed by this article shall be due and payable on the first day of each calendar month next succeeding the month during which the room was occupied. All taxes not paid by the twenty-fifth day of the month in which they are due and payable shall be deemed to be delinquent. The operator shall be assessed a penalty of ten percent (10%) on all delinquent amounts as well as interest of one percent (1%) per month or fraction thereof from the first of the month in which such tax becomes due and payable until the date of payment.

 

§23-61.  Intent
                It is the intent of the City Council that the city shall use the revenue generated by the occupation tax imposed by this article to fund the design, construction, maintenance and operation of an agricultural exposition center to be built, owned and operated by Fonner Park Exposition and Events Center, Inc. for the purposes set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-315 (1997).

 

§23-62.  Sunset Provision
                The occupation tax imposed by this ordinance shall terminate and hotels shall cease collecting the tax at 12:00 a.m. (midnight) December 31, 2025. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the City Council from taking action by ordinance to renew or re-establish this tax before or after the effective date of such termination.

 

§23-63.Penalty
                Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of Sections 23-55 through 23-62 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-7 of this Code. Each distinct act or violation of the terms of Sections 23-55 through 23-62 shall constitute a separate offense.

 

 

Article VII.

FOOD AND BEVERAGE RETAILER OCCUPATION TAX

 

§23-64.  Definitions

                As used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

(A)          Beverage shall mean all substances, whether in liquid or frozen form, sold for ingestion by humans and are consumed for their taste or nutritional value and contain one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume.

(B)          City shall mean the City of Grand Island and the area within the corporate limits of the City of Grand Island.

(C)          Commercial Establishment shall mean any retail location in the City that sells food or beverages as herein defined.

(D)          Food shall mean substances, whether in liquid, concentrated, solid, frozen, dried, or dehydrated form, that are sold for ingestion or chewing by humans and are consumed for their taste or nutritional value, excluding beverages as defined herein and tobacco products.

(E)           Gross Receipts shall mean the total amount of consideration, donation, contributions, or monetary charges of any nature paid to obtain food or beverage without any deduction on account of expenses, taxes, or other costs. 

Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the term gross receipts shall not include: (i.) receipts from the sale of food or beverages exempt from or not otherwise subject to Nebraska Sales and Use Tax as provided by the Nebraska Revenue Act of 1967 as amended from time to time; (ii.) The value of food or beverages furnished by the commercial establishment to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee; and (iii.) Tips to an employee of a food services and drinking places when the amount of the tip is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, whether or not the tip is paid to the employee or added to the bill and if the amount of the tip is turned over to the employee.  Amounts that are added to the price of the meal and required to be paid by the purchaser, whether or not designated as a tip or a service charge, shall be exempt as a tip to the extent the mandatory amount does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the food and beverage sales price.

(F)           Finance Director shall mean the Finance Director of the City of Grand Island.

(G)          Person shall mean any natural person, individual, partnership, association, organization or corporation of any kind or character engaging in retail sales of food or beverages.

(H)          Retail shall mean sale for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.

(I)            Retail location shall mean any permanent, temporary or mobile place, location or facility where retail sales occur, including, but not limited to, brick and mortar locations, mobile trucks and temporary stands.

(J)            Sale or to sell shall mean any transfer of possession for consideration, donation, contributions, or monetary charges of any nature paid to obtain or for access to food or beverage.

(K)          Taxpayer shall mean any person operating a commercial establishment herein defined who is required to pay the tax herein imposed.

 

§23-65. Intent and Purpose of Article

(A)          Pursuant to the authority of Nebraska Revised Statute R.R.S. 1943, Section 16-205, the City Council finds, determines and declares that it is appropriate that a tax be imposed on commercial establishments that sell food and beverages as herein defined for the purpose of raising revenues. The foregoing determination is made with due consideration of business in the City and the relation of business to the municipal welfare, together with relation thereof, to expenditures required by the City, and with consideration of just, proper and equitable distribution of the tax burdens within the City and other properly associated matters.

(B)          That revenue derived from Grand Island City Code, Article VII - the Food and Beverages Tax shall be used for the following community enhancements:

(i)            To make the City’s quarterly payments to the Nebraska State Fair Support and Improvement Fund as required by Neb Rev. Stat. §§2-108-110;

(ii)           Promote entertainment, agricultural and livestock shows, trade shows and similar events that will attract visitors to Grand Island;

(iii)          Ongoing enhancement and development of recreation and athletic facilities such as hike, bike and recreational trails, ball fields and other community activity needs; and

(iv)          Invest in community development projects and activities that stimulate progress and growth for Grand Island.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9614, effective 12-07-2016

 

 §23-66.  Tax Imposed; Collection of Tax

(A)          On or after July 1, 2016 and in each calendar month thereafter there is hereby imposed a food and beverages retailer occupation tax upon each and every person operating a commercial establishment within the City for any period of time during a calendar month.  The amount of such tax shall be one and one-half percent (1½%) of all gross receipts for each calendar month derived from the sale of food and beverages subject to this tax.

(B)          The person engaged in the sale of food and beverages may but is not required to itemize the tax levied on a bill, receipt, or other invoice to the purchaser, but each person engaged in the sale of food or beverages shall remain liable for the tax imposed by this section.

(C)          Gross receipts subject to the tax shall include receipts from the sale of food and beverages but excluding receipts from the sale of food or beverages exempt from or not otherwise subject to Nebraska Sales and Use Tax as provided by the Nebraska Revenue Act of 1967 as amended from time to time.

 

§23-67.  Tax Imposed for Revenue Purposes; Tax Cumulative

 (A)         The tax imposed by this article is purely for revenue purposes to support the programs of the government of the City.  The levy of the tax under this article is in addition to all other fees, taxes, excises and licenses levied and imposed under any contract or any other provisions of this Code or ordinances of the City, in addition to any fee, tax, excise or license imposed by the state.

(B)          Payment of the tax imposed by this article shall not relieve the person paying the same from payment of any other tax now or hereafter imposed by contract or ordinance or by this Code, including those imposed for any business or occupation he or she may carry on, unless so provided therein. It is the intent of this Council that the occupational taxes imposed by this article shall be cumulative except where otherwise specifically provided.

 

§23-68.  Return

(A)          Each and every person operating a commercial establishment within the City for the calendar month beginning July 2016, and for each and every calendar month thereafter, shall prepare and file, on or before the 25th day of the month, or the next business day should the 25th fall on a Federal holiday or weekend, following on a form prescribed by the Finance Director, a return for the taxable calendar month, and at the same time pay to the Finance Director the tax herein imposed.  Any return that is remitted via the United State Postal Service shall be postmarked by the 25th day of the month to be considered an on time filing.

(B)          A commercial establishment may make reports and remittances quarterly in lieu of monthly if their monthly remittance would be $100.00 or less.

 

§23-69.  Suspension or Revocation of Other Licenses

(A)          No delinquency in payment of the tax herein provided for by this article and no revocation or conviction for violation of this article shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of any other license issued to any person engaged in business within the City by the Finance Director or any other official of the City under any licensing provisions of this Code or other ordinances, nor shall the same be grounds for the suspension or revocation of any other license issued by any licensing authority pursuant to the statutes enacted by the State of Nebraska.

 

§23-70.  Failure to File Return; Delinquency; Assessment by Finance Director
 

(A)          If any person neglects or refuses to make a return or payment of the taxes as required by this article, the Finance Director shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be reasonably available, of the amount of taxes due for the period or periods for which the taxpayer is delinquent, and upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in addition thereto a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) thereof, together with interest on such delinquent taxes, at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, or fraction thereof from the date when due.

(B)          The Finance Director shall give the delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated taxes, penalty, and interest, which notice must be served personally or by certified mail.

(C)          Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment, and such assessment shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the Finance Director ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing by certified mail; however, within such ten (10) day period the delinquent taxpayer may petition the Finance Director for a revision or modification of such assessment and shall, within such ten (10) day period, furnish the Finance Director the facts and correct figures showing the correct amount of such taxes.

(D)          Such petition shall be in writing, and the facts and figures submitted shall be submitted in writing and shall be given under oath of the taxpayer.

(E)           Thereupon, the Finance Director shall modify such assessment in accordance with the facts which he or she deems correct. Such adjusted assessment shall be made in writing, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the taxpayer within ten (10) days; and all such decisions shall become final upon the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of service, unless proceedings are commenced within that time for appeal in the District Court of Hall County, Nebraska by the filing of a petition with the Clerk of the Court. This appeal shall be conducted in conformance with the Nebraska Rules of Civil Procedure and Rules of the Court as may be adopted by the Court or enacted by the Legislature.

 

§23-71.  Jeopardy Assessment

(A)          If the Finance Director finds that the collection of the tax will be jeopardized by delay, in his or her discretion, he or she may declare the taxable period immediately terminated, determine the tax, and issue notice and demand for payment thereof, and, having done so, the tax shall be due and payable forthwith, and the Finance Director may proceed to collect such tax as hereinafter provided.

(B)          Collection may be stayed if the taxpayer gives such security for payment as shall be reasonably satisfactory to the Finance Director. 

 

§23-72.  Administration of Article; Miscellaneous Provisions

(A)          Administration by Finance Director. The administration of the provisions of this article are hereby vested in the Finance Director, who shall prescribe forms in conformity with this article for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the tax imposed hereunder, and for the proper administration and enforcement hereof.  The Finance Director shall adopt such rules and regulation as may be necessary or desirable for the administration and enforcement of this Article.

                (B)          Duties performed by others. Duties of the Finance Director herein provided may be performed by any qualified person designated by the Finance Director.

                (C)          Notices to be sent by registered or certified mail. All notices required to be given to the taxpayer under the provisions of this article shall be in writing, and if mailed postpaid by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to him or her at his or her last known address shall be sufficient for the purposes of this article.

                (D)          Duty to keep books and records. It shall be the duty of every taxpayer to keep and preserve suitable records and other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he/she is liable hereunder.

                                (i)            Records of the gross revenue by which this tax is measured shall be kept separate and apart from the records of other sales or receipts in order to facilitate the examination of books and records as necessary for the collection of this tax.

                                (ii)           It shall be the duty of every such taxpayer to keep and preserve for a period of four (4) years all such books, invoices and other records, which shall be open for examination at any time by the Finance Director or his or her duly designated persons. If such person keeps or maintains his books, invoices, accounts or other records, or any thereof, outside of the state, upon demand of the Finance Director he/she shall make the same available at a suitable place within the City, to be designated by the Finance Director, for examination, inspection and audit by the Finance Director or his or her duly authorized persons.

                                (iii)          The Finance Director, in his or her discretion, may make, permit or cause to be made the examination, inspection or audit of books, invoices, accounts or other records so kept or maintained by such person outside of the state at the place where same are kept or maintained or at any place outside the state where the same may be made available, provided such person shall have entered into a binding agreement with the City to reimburse it for all costs and expenses incurred by it in order to have such examination, inspection or audit made in such place.

                (E)           Investigation of taxpayer’s books. For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for the purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any person, the Finance Director or his or her duly authorized persons, may hold investigations and hearings concerning any matters covered by this article; and may examine any relevant books, papers, records or memoranda of any such person; and may require the attendance of such person, or any officer or employee of such person, or of any person having knowledge thereof; and may take testimony and require proof of his or her information. The Finance Director and his or her duly authorized persons shall have power to administer oath to such persons.

                (F)           Sale of business. Whenever any taxpayer sells his/her food services, drinking places business, or restaurant or quits engaging in such business, any tax payable under this article shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due.           (G)          Status of unpaid tax and bankruptcy and receivership. Whenever the business or property of any taxpayer subject to this article shall be placed in receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seized under distraint for property taxes, all taxes, penalties, and interest imposed by this article and for which the taxpayer is in any way liable under the terms of this article shall be a prior and preferred lien against the property of the taxpayer, except as to pre-existing claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser whose rights shall have attached prior to the filing of the notice as hereinafter provided on the property of the taxpayer, other than the goods, stock in trade, and business fixtures of such taxpayer; and no sheriff, receiver, assignee or other official shall sell the property of any person subject to this article under process or order of any court without first ascertaining from the Finance Director the amount of any taxes due and payable under this article; and if there be any such taxes due, owing and unpaid, it shall be the duty of such officer to first pay the amount of such taxes out of the receipts of such sale before making payment of any monies to any judgment creditor or other claimants of whatsoever kind or nature, except the cost of the proceedings and other pre-existing claims or liens as above provided.

                (H)          Release of liens. The tax imposed by this article, together with the interest and penalties herein provided and the cost of collection which may be incurred, shall be and, until paid, remain a first and prior lien, except as otherwise provided by the constitution or statute, superior to all other liens, on all the merchandise, furniture and fixtures, tools and equipment of the taxpayer within the City, and may be foreclosed by seizing under distraint and sale of so much of said merchandise, furniture and fixtures, tools and equipment, as may be necessary to discharge the lien. The lien created by this article shall apply only to tax obligations hereafter incurred. Any lien for taxes as shown on the records of the county clerks and recorders as herein provided shall, upon the payment of all taxes, penalties and interest covered thereby, be released by the Finance Director in the same manner as mortgages or judgments are released.

                (I)            Statute of Limitations. No suit for collection of any taxes imposed by this article for any interest thereon or penalties with respect thereto may be instituted, or any other action to collect the same shall be commenced, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, or distraint warrant be issued, more than four (4) years after the date on which the tax was or is payable. In case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, the tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be begun at any time. Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the Finance Director may agree in writing to an extension thereof; and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreement in writing.

 

§23-73.  Recovery of Unpaid Tax by Action at Law

(A)          The Finance Director may also treat any such taxes, penalties or interest due and unpaid as a debt due the City.

(B)          In case of failure to pay the taxes, or any portion thereof, or any penalty or interest thereon when due, the Finance Director may recover at law the amount of such taxes, penalties and interest in any court of Hall County, Nebraska or of the county wherein the taxpayer resides or has its principal place of business having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected.

(C)          The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the Finance Director, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due.

(D)          Such actions may be actions and attachments, and writs of attachment may be issued to the constable or sheriff, as the case may be; and in any such proceeding no bond shall be required of the Finance Director except as may be required by statute, nor shall any constable or sheriff require of the Finance Director an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution upon any judgment entered in such proceeding; and, in accordance with the procedure established by statute, if any, the Finance Director may prosecute appeals or writs of error in such cases without the necessity of providing bond therefor;

(E)           The city attorney, when requested by the Finance Director may commence an action for the recovery of taxes due under this article; and this remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies, or remedies provided in this article.

 

§23-74. City a Party to Title Actions for Determination of Lien

In any action affecting the title to real estate or the ownership or rights to possession of personal property, the City may be made a party defendant for the purpose of obtaining a judgment or determination of its lien upon the property involved therein.

               

§23-75.  Authority of Finance Director to Waive Penalty

The Finance Director is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty assessed as in this article provided; and any interest imposed in excess of six percent (6%) per annum shall be deemed a penalty.

 

§23-76. Penalty

(A)       Penalties for deficiencies caused by disregard of rules. If any part of the deficiency is due to negligence or intentional disregard of authorized rules and regulations with knowledge thereof, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the deficiency; and in such case interest shall be collected at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the deficiency from the time the return was due, from the person required to file the return, which interest in addition shall become due and payable within ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the Finance Director.

(B)          Penalties for deficiencies caused by fraud.  If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added fifty percent (50%) of the total amount of the deficiency, and in such case the whole amount of the tax that is unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the Finance Director, and an additional one percent (1%) per month, or fraction thereof, on said amounts shall be added from the date the return was due until paid.

 

§23-77. Severability

If any provisions, clause, sentence or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are declared to be severable.

 

§23-78.  Reserved

§23-79.  Reserved

Amended by Ordinance No. 9224, effective 07-15-2009

Amended by Ordinance No. 9588, effective 07-01-2016

 

 

Article VIII

OCCUPATION TAX OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE

 

§23-80. Occupation Tax Oversight Committee; Creation; Duties; and Composition

There is hereby created in and for the city an Occupation Tax Oversight Committee (“the Committee”). The Committee will be responsible for reviewing the revenues and expenditures of the city’s occupation tax imposed upon persons and entities engaging in the business of providing food services, drinking places, or restaurants (hereinafter referred to as “Food and Beverage Tax”).  The Committee shall advise the public and city officials with regard to the city’s Food and Beverage Tax, and shall confirm that the Food and Beverage Tax revenues are accounted for in the designated special revenue funds and are being expended on eligible projects as provided by city ordinances. The Committee shall be composed of five (5) members who shall be registered voters of the City of Grand Island. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council.

 

§23-81. Committee Members; Terms

When the Committee is first appointed, one (1) of its members shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, two (2) members for a term of two (2) years, and two (2) members for a term of three (3) years, and thereafter all regular terms shall be four (4) years. No member of the Committee shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms but may, however, be reappointed after a lapse of one (1) year.

 

§23-82. Ineligible Individuals

No member of the Committee shall be an elected or appointed city official or an employee of the city.

 

§23-83.  Meetings

The Committee shall hold regular meetings at least semi-annually in March and September and may hold special meetings as necessary to review the Food and Beverage Tax program of the city and to advise the governing body of the city with regard to the program. Special meetings of the Committee shall be held whenever called by the chairperson of the Committee or a majority of Committee members.  Each September, or more often as deemed appropriate by the Committee, the Committee shall provide a written report to the governing body on its findings and suggestions.

 

§23-84. Officers

The Committee shall elect its chairperson from its members and shall create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The term of the chairperson shall be two (2) years, with eligibility for reelection.

 

§23-85.  Committee Vacancies; Removal

Vacancies occurring in the membership of the Committee shall be filled by the Mayor, by and with the approval of the City Council for the remainder of the term. Any member of the Committee may be removed from office by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Council.

 

§23-86.  Administration

The City Finance Director or his/her designated representative shall be an ex-officio member of the Committee, and shall be responsible for assisting the Committee, providing it with necessary information and advice, and for providing financial information to the Committee.

Added by Ordinance No. 9582, effective 05/03/2016

 

 

Article IX

RENTAL CAR OCCUPATION TAX

 

§23-87. Purpose.

Pursuant to the authority of Nebraska Revised Statute R.R.S. 1943, Section 15-203, the City Council finds, determines and declares that it is appropriate that a tax be imposed on all car rental businesses as herein defined for the purpose of raising revenues. The foregoing determination is made with due consideration of business in the City and the relation of business to the municipal welfare, together with relation thereof, to expenditures required by the City, and with consideration of just, proper and equitable distribution of the tax burdens within the City and other properly associated matters.

 

§23-88. Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

(a)           “Car rental business” shall mean the business of renting cars, automobiles, vans, or trucks with three-fourths (3/4) ton or less manufacturer’s rated capacity without a driver, operator or chauffeur.  The tax will still apply to any business even if the above items are not their primary business.

(b)           “Person” shall mean any natural person, individual, partnership, association, organization or corporation of any kind or character engaging in the car rental business.

(c)           “Rent” shall mean to hire out vehicles at stipulated rates per mile, per hour, per day, per week, or per month; provided, however, that such term shall not include the act of hiring out vehicles for a period exceeding thirty (30) consecutive days, and no tax shall be collected pursuant to this section for any vehicle rental contract to the same renter for a period exceeding thirty (30) consecutive days.

(d)           “Taxpayer” shall mean any person engaged in a car rental business herein defined who is required to pay the tax herein imposed.

(e)           “Vehicle rental contract” shall mean each agreement with a car rental business to rent a vehicle for thirty (30) or fewer consecutive days and each vehicle rented under a single document shall be considered a separate vehicle rental contract. A vehicle rental contract shall be considered to be made within the city if the rental contract is executed by the renter within the city or the renter takes possession of the vehicle within the city.

                Exceptions. The tax imposed by this section shall not be measured by, and no tax shall be collected for:

(1) Any vehicle rental contract in which the vehicle is provided on a complimentary basis or for which no consideration is charged; and

(2) Any vehicle rental contract for which the consideration is paid by a person not subject to the sales and use tax imposed by the Nebraska Revenue Act of 1967, as it is amended from time to time.

(f)            “City Finance Director” shall mean the person appointed by the Mayor to that position or the individual designated by the City Finance Director to perform these duties for him or her

 

§23-89.  Tax Imposed;  Collection of Tax.

Beginning October 1, 2017, each person engaged in a car rental business shall pay an occupation tax in the amount of six percent (6%) of the actual rental rates charged for each vehicle rental contract made by that person within the city.

The tax imposed by this chapter may be shown as an add-on to the charge for renting a vehicle and shall be collectible at the time the vehicle is furnished, regardless of when the charge for the vehicle is paid. The car rental business operator shall remain responsible for payment of all taxes imposed, whether or not the taxes are actually collected from the customers.

 

§23-90.  Return.

Each and every person engaged in a car rental business within the City for the calendar month beginning October 2017, and for each and every calendar month thereafter, shall prepare and file, on or before the 25th of the month following on a form prescribed and furnished by the City Finance Director, a return for the taxable calendar month, and at the same time pay to the City the tax herein imposed. The return shall be verified and sworn to by the officer in charge of the business. The return shall be considered filed on time if mailed in an envelope properly addressed to the City Finance Department, postage prepaid and postmarked before midnight of the 25th of the appropriate month.

 

§23-91.  Tax Cumulative.

(a)           The levy of the tax under this chapter is in addition to all other fees, taxes, excises and licenses levied and imposed under any contract or any other provisions of this Code or ordinances of the City, in addition to any fee, tax, excise or license imposed by the state.

(b)           Payment of the tax imposed by this chapter shall not relieve the person paying the same from payment of any other tax now or hereafter imposed by contract or ordinance or by this Code, including those imposed for any business or occupation he or she may carry on, unless so provided therein. The occupational taxes imposed by this chapter shall be cumulative except where otherwise specifically provided.

 

§23-92.  Use of Revenue.

The six percent (6%) occupation tax imposed by this chapter shall be used for the purpose of leasing or purchasing equipment for the Public Works Streets Division.

 

§23-93.  Failure to File Return;  Delinquency; Assessment  by City Finance Director.

(a)           If any person neglects or refuses to file a return or make payment of the taxes as required by this chapter, the City Finance Director shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be reasonably available, of the amount of taxes due for the period or periods for which the taxpayer is delinquent, and upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in addition thereto (1) interest on such delinquent taxes, at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, or fraction thereof from the date when due and, (2) a late fee equal to ten percent (10%) thereof.  Any such interest due may be compounded quarterly.

(b)           The City Finance Director shall give the delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated taxes, late fees, and interest, which notice must be served personally or by certified mail.

(c)           Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment, and such assessment shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the City Finance Director ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing by certified mail; however, within such ten (10) day period the delinquent taxpayer may petition the City Finance Director for a revision or modification of such assessment and shall, within such ten-day period, furnish the City Finance Director the facts and correct figures showing the correct amount of such taxes.

(d)           Such petition shall be in writing, and the facts and figures submitted shall be submitted in writing and shall be given under oath of the taxpayer.

(e)           The City Finance Director may then modify such assessment in accordance with the facts which he or she deems correct. Such adjusted assessment shall be made in writing, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the taxpayer within ten (10) days; and all such decisions shall become final upon the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of service, unless proceedings are commenced within that time for appeal in the District Court.

 

§23-94.  Administration of Chapter;  Miscellaneous Provisions.

(a)           The administration of the provisions of this chapter are hereby vested in the City Finance Director who shall prescribe forms in conformity with this chapter for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the tax imposed hereunder, and for the proper administration and enforcement hereof.

(b)           All notices required to be given to the taxpayer under the provisions of this chapter shall be in writing. Notices shall be mailed by first class or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the taxpayer at his or her last known address.

(c)           It shall be the duty of every taxpayer to keep and preserve suitable records and other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he/she is liable hereunder.

(1)           Records of the gross revenue by which this tax is measured shall be kept separate and apart from the records of other sales or receipts in order to facilitate the examination of books and records as necessary for the collection of this tax.

(2)           It shall be the duty of every such taxpayer to keep and preserve for a period of four (4) years all such books, invoices and other records, which shall be open for examination at any time by the City Finance Director. If such person keeps or maintains their books, invoices, accounts or other records, or any thereof, outside of the state, upon demand of the City Finance Director he/she shall make the same available at a suitable place within the City, to be designated by the City Finance Director, for examination, inspection and audit by the City Finance Director. The taxpayer shall reimburse the City for the reasonable costs of the examination, inspection and audit if the City Finance Director determines that the taxpayer paid ninety percent or less of the tax owing for the period of the examination.

(3) The City Finance Director in his or her discretion, may make, permit or cause to be made the examination, inspection or audit of books, invoices, accounts or other records so kept or maintained by such person outside of the state at the place where same are kept or maintained or at any place outside the state where the same may be made available, provided such person shall have entered into a binding agreement with the City to reimburse it for all costs and expenses incurred by it in order to have such examination, inspection or audit made in such place.

(d)           For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for the purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any person, the City Finance Director, or his/her duly authorized persons, may conduct investigations concerning any matters covered by this chapter; and may examine any relevant books, papers, records or memoranda of any such person.

 

§23-95.  Recovery of Unpaid Tax  by Action at Law.

(a)           The City Finance Director may also treat any such taxes, penalties or interest due and unpaid as a debt due the City.

(b)           In case of failure to pay the taxes, or any portion thereof, or any late fee or interest thereon when due, the City may recover at law the amount of such taxes, penalties and interest in any court of Hall County, Nebraska or of the county wherein the taxpayer resides or has its principal place of business having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected.

(c)           The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the City Finance Director, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due.

(d)           The City Attorney may commence an action for the recovery of taxes due under this chapter and this remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies, or remedies provided in this chapter.

(e)           The City Finance Director may turn over any unpaid amount due to the City to a 3rd party collections agency, following any notice required by State law.

 

 

§23-96.  Reserved

§23-97.  Reserved

CHAPTER 24

PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, AND LAKES

 

Article I. Parks and Recreational Facilities

§24-1.  Rules and Regulations
               (1) The person or persons placed in charge of the various City parks and recreational facilities by the mayor may establish rules and regulations for the use of said parks and facilities by the general public, subject to approval by the mayor.

               (2) The mayor may submit any or all such approved rules and regulations to the city council for adoption under this section.

               (3) The violation of any rule or regulation adopted by the city council pursuant to this section shall be punished as a violation of the City Code.

               (4) Copies of the rules and regulations adopted by the city council under this section shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office, the Parks and Recreation Department office, and, where appropriate, shall be posted at the facility or facilities regulated thereby.

 

§24-2.  Reserved

 

§24-3.  Vehicles in Parks, Hike/Bike Trails, and Detention Cells
               It is unlawful for any person to operate or park any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, minibikes, and snowmobiles, in any city park, storm detention cell, hike/bike trail, or any portion thereof, except on the roads, paths, or areas established therein for such operation or parking.

 

§24-4.  Horses In Parks and Detention Cells
               It is unlawful for any person to tether, ride, walk, or otherwise permit, a horse or horses, in any city park, storm detention cell, or in any portion thereof, including the roads, streets, or paths therein, except upon the paths posted as bridle paths or trails.

 

§24-4.1.  Dogs On Leash
               No person owning or possessing a dog shall permit such dog on or along the hike/bike trails unless such dog is securely fastened on a leash, cord or chain.

 

§24-5.  Curfews In City Parks
               (1) The city council may, by resolution, establish, or alter, a curfew in any city park or playground, and prohibit access to, and the use of, such park or playground during the hours of the curfew so established.

               (2) Signs shall be posted in any park or playground for which a curfew has been established, indicating the hours of such curfew.

               (3) It shall be unlawful for any person to be in a park or playground during the curfew hours posted for such park or playground.

 

 


Article II. Lakes

 

§24-6.  Stocking Fish In City Lakes
               (1) For the purpose of providing fishing for citizens, Pier Park Lake, Eagle Scout Park Lake,  and other bodies of water capable of maintaining fish life may be stocked with fish.

               (2) The Parks and Recreation Director is authorized and directed to make application to the Nebraska Games and Parks Commission to obtain such fish.

 

§24-7.  Fishing In City Lakes
               (1) The public shall be permitted to fish in Pier Park Lake, L.E. Ray Lake, Eagle Scout Park Lake, and such other bodies of water that have been stocked with fish, subject to the limitations set forth in this Code section.

               (2) Fishing in Pier Lake will be limited to persons under sixteen years of age and persons over 65 years of age; or persons (2 maximum) between the ages of 16 and 62 when accompanying an actively fishing child. All other stocked lakes shall be open to fishing by persons of all ages.

               (3) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the above provisions or any state statute or regulation pertaining to fishing.

 

§24-8.  Swimming In City Lakes
               (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to swim at any hour in Pier Park Lake, L.E. Ray Lake, Eagle Scout Park Lake, or any other body of water owned and maintained by the City, except that swimming shall be allowed in the municipal pools.

               (2) Scuba diving shall be allowed at L.E. Ray Lake in accordance with Nebraska Game and Parks Commission regulations.

               (3) The Parks and Recreation Director shall cause all lakes and bodies of water wherein swimming is prohibited to be posted. Such posting shall not be mandatory for enforcement of this section if such person has actual or constructive notice of this prohibition.

(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions of §24-8(1) through (3), swimming at City lakes may be permitted for special events when approved by the Mayor and Parks Director under conditions and limitations as they may require.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8971, effective April 27, 2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9675, effective March 6, 2018

 

Article III. Miscellaneous

 

§24-9.  Destruction or Removal of Park Signs
               It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, vandalize, or otherwise interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant to this chapter.

 

§24-10.  Fees
               The city council shall, by resolution, establish the fees to be assessed any person or group for the reservation of any park area or recreational facility, and for the use of the various city recreational facilities regulated hereby.

 

 

Article IV. Trees in Public Right-of-Way

 

§24-11.  Trees as a Community Concern
                              The Mayor and Council, or their designated representative, hereby determine that the selection, planting, maintenance, and removal of trees within the public right-of-ways in the City of Grand Island substantially affects the degree of pedestrian and vehicular safety, the location and maintenance of utility services, tree maintenance costs, the incidence of tree diseases, and the general appearance and beautification of the City; that removal of trees due to disease, private development, or public works improvements has resulted in a loss of their important contribution to people and environment, and therefore it is determined that such selection, planting, maintenance and removal of trees in public right of ways are a community concern over which the City must exercise control.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018

 

§24-12.  Property Owners Have Primary Responsibility
               Abutting property owners have the primary responsibility of planting, maintaining and removal of trees within that portion of the public right-of-way known as the parking or terrace, but the City shall retain the right to recommend the variety and location of trees that may be planted, may implement a street tree planting program, and parks planting program, and control removal of existing trees.

 

§24-13.  Recommended Trees
               The City Tree Board is empowered to recommend trees to be placed in the public right-of-way.  The following trees are recommended by the City Tree Board for planting within public right-of-way because of their superior resistance to insects and disease, maximum ability to resist wind or storm breakage, desirable life spans, and minimal maintenance requirements. The full spread as indicated shall be used for spacing purposes:

(A) In all zoning districts except in locations where overhead utility lines are present.

 

Variety

Spread

Maple: sugar, black, red, Norway…………………..

40 feet

Hackberry…………………………………………...

40 feet

Honeylocust …………………………….

40 feet

Pear (Ornamental Pear Varieties)……………………………………….

25 feet

Oak: red, scarlet, English, bur, pin…………………

40 feet

Linden: American, European, Littleleaf……………

40 feet

Linden: Redmond…………………………………..

25 feet

 

 

Ginkgo: maidenhair (male variety)…………………

40 feet

Black Walnut……………………………………….

40 feet

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ohio Buckeye………………………………………

25 feet

Kentucky Coffee Tree………………………………

30 feet

Catalpa……………………………………………...

30 feet

Japanese Pagoda Tree………………………………

40 feet

 

(B) In business and manufacturing zoning districts, and in other districts in locations where overhead utility lines are present:

Variety

Spread

Maple: Trident, hedge, amur, tatarian………………

20 feet

East Redbud………………………………………...

20 feet

Hawthorn: lavelle, Washington…………………….

20 feet

 

 

Crabapple: fruitless…………………………………

20 feet

Purpleleaf Plum…………………………………….

20 feet

Flowering Cherry…………………………………..

20 feet

Ash: European or mountain………………………..

20 feet

Saucer Magnolia……………………………………

20 feet

Japanese Tree Lilac…………………………………

20 feet

Amur Cork Tree…………………………………….

20 feet

 

Trees not included on the above recommended lists are prohibited within public right-of-way.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018

 

§24-14.  Minimum Placement
               The following standards for minimum spacing, location, area requirement and minimum size of seedlings shall be utilized for the placement of trees within the public right-of-way, greenways, and city parks:

               (1) Recommended trees shall not be planted closer than twenty (20) feet measured from center to center of each tree.

               (2) Recommended trees shall not be placed closer than forty (40) feet from the corner of a curb at intersections or closer than three (3) feet to the edge of a driveway.

               (3) Recommended trees shall not be planted closer than the width of its full spread to a standard or pole, measured from the center of the tree to the center of the pole.

               (4) Recommended trees shall not be planted when at least six (6) feet of space between curb and sidewalk or other obstruction is not available.

               (5) Recommended trees shall generally be planted equidistant between the curb and street edge of a conventional sidewalk or equidistant between the property line and edge of a curb-type sidewalk, unless specifically directed differently on the required permit in order to avoid conflict with existing or proposed utilities.

               (6) Recommended trees shall be planted in an area containing at least nine square feet of ground for each tree and no impervious material shall be placed nearer than thirty inches to the center of a tree.

               (7) No tree shall be planted closer than ten (10) feet from any fire plug.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018

 

§24-15.  Unlawful to Top
               It shall be unlawful, as a normal practice, for any person, firm, or municipal department to top any tree within public right-of-way. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the Parks & Recreation director or his/her appointed representative.  Topping of trees within the public right-of-way shall comply with ANSI A300 pruning standards.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018

 

 

§24-16.  Violation of Selected Trees
               Is shall be a violation for any property owner to permit, allow, or maintain any dead or diseased trees within the right-of-way of streets within the corporate limits of the city, and said dead or diseased trees shall constitute an nuisance. Notice to abate and remove such nuisance and notice of the right to a hearing shall be given to each owner or owner's duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any, by personal, residential, publication, certified mail, or first class mail. If notice is given by first-class mail, such mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its importance. Within five days after receipt of such notice, the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground may request a hearing with the city to appeal the decision to abate or remove the nuisance by filing a written appeal with the office of the city clerk. A hearing on the appeal shall be held within fourteen days after the filing of the appeal and shall be conducted by the City Parks and Recreation Director. The hearing officer shall render a decision on the appeal within five business days after the conclusion of the hearing.

 

 If the appeal fails, the city may have the work done to abate and remove the dead or diseased trees. If the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing with the city within five days after receipt of such notice or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the city may have such work done. The city may levy and assess all or any portion of the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefited as a special assessment.

 

Diseased trees that are dead or dying shall be removed following disposal methods recommended by the Nebraska Forestry Service.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018

 

§24-17.  Penalty
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or recklessly cut down, destroy, by girdling or tapping, or otherwise injure any tree within the public right-of-way unless authorized to do so by the owner of the abutting property or by an authorized representative of the City.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018

 

Article V.  Tree Board

 

§24-18 [Reserved]

§24-19 [Reserved]

§24-20 [Reserved]

              

§24-21. Penalty
               Failure to comply with any section of this Article shall be unlawful, and shall be punishable in accordance with §1-7 of the Grand Island City Code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018

 

§24-22. Tree Board Established Membership

               There is hereby created and established a Tree Board for the City, which shall consist of seven (7) members, citizens and residents of the City, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.  The City Parks and Recreation Director and Hall County Extension Officer shall be ex officio members of the Tree Board.

Added by Ordinance No. 9583 effective 05-18-16

Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018

§24-23. Term of Office of Members of Tree Board
                              The terms of the seven (7) persons appointed to the City’s Tree Board shall be three (3) years, except that the term of two (2) of the members appointed to the first Board shall be for only one (1)year and the terms of two (2) members of the first Board shall be for two (2) years.  If a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018

§24-24. Compensation of Members of Tree Board
Members of the Tree Board shall serve without compensation.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018

 

§24-25. Duties of Tree Board..

The duties and responsibilities of the Tree Board shall be as follows:

(1) To promote and encourage responsible planting, care, replacement, and maintenance of trees in the City.

(2) To conduct fund raising activities, the proceeds of which shall be designated for the planting of trees, shrubs, and bushes.

(3) To plan and sponsor activities in celebration of Arbor Day.

(4) To provide educational materials and programs to the public concerning the planting and care of trees.

(5) To make recommendations to City Department Directors concerning landscape plans for any new or existing public facilities constructed by the City.

(6) When requested by the City Council, to consider, investigate, make finding, report, and recommend upon any special matter or question relating to trees.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018

 

§24-26. Organization and Meetings of Tree Board

               The Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings.  A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.              

Amended by Ordinance No. 9690, effective 06-12-2018

§24-27 [Reserved]

§24-28 [Reserved]

§24-29 [Reserved]

 
CHAPTER 25

PAWNBROKERS, TATTOOING and BODY PIERCING

 

Article I.  Pawnbrokers

§25-1.  License Generally
                All persons who shall engage in the business of pawnbroker are hereby required to make application to the mayor and city council for a license to operate such business and upon granting the same shall thereafter pay to the city treasurer an annual license fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, and the city treasurer shall give a receipt therefor, and no receipt shall run beyond the first day of May following the date of such payment. The license fee shall be paid in advance and shall be good for one year. The city council may at its discretion issue a license for a six months' period.

 

§25-2.  Bond
                Before any license to operate the business of a pawnbroker shall be granted, the person applying for such license shall give a bond to the City in the sum of five thousand dollars, with surety, to be approved by the mayor and council, conditioned on the faithful performance of the trust imposed by law or by usage upon pawnbrokers.

 

§25-3.  Occupation Tax
                There is hereby levied on all persons engaged in the business of pawnbroker an annual occupation tax in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, which occupation tax shall be paid to the city treasurer who shall give a receipt for such payment. If the city council in its discretion grants a license to operate as a pawnbroker for a six months' period to any person applying therefor, the occupation tax to be charged in such an event shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§25-4.  Only One Business Location Permitted
                No person shall do business as a pawnbroker in more than one place.

 

§25-5.  Record Book Generally
                All persons who shall engage in the business of pawnbroker shall keep a book in which shall be legibly written in ink any loan or purchase, an accurate account or description in the English language of the goods, articles or things pawned, pledged or purchased, the amount of money loaned or paid therefor, the time the same was received, and the name, residence, and place of residence of the person pawning or pledging such goods; and, when purchased or received from a minor, the name of the father and mother of such minor and where the father and mother reside, which book, together with the article pawned, shall be at all times open to the inspection of the mayor or any member of the police department.

 

§25-6.  Daily Report
                It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to make out and deliver to the chief of police every day before the hour of 12:00 Noon a legible and correct copy from the book required in §25-5 of all the personal property or other valuable things received, deposited or purchased during the preceding day, together with all the other matters required to be kept in such book pertaining to such articles purchased or pawned.

 

§25-7.  Ticket To Be Attached
                In addition to the record to be kept by persons engaged in the business of pawnbroker as set forth in §25-5, there shall be attached to each article pawned or pledged a ticket which shall plainly state the interest charged or to be charged, the amount of money advanced, and all other charges whatsoever necessary to be paid to redeem the property so put in pawn.

 

§25-8.  Sale of Pledged Articles
                No personal property received on deposit or purchased by any pawnbroker shall be sold or permitted to be redeemed from the place of business of such person for the space of twenty-four hours after the copy and statement required to be delivered to the chief of police shall have been delivered as required by §25-6.

 

§25-9.  Unlawful Receipts
                It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a pawnbroker to purchase from, or to take, or receive upon deposit, pawn, or pledge any personal property of any kind from a minor, unless such person shall be doing business wholly on his or her own account, which fact shall be noted upon the book or record required by §25-5; and it shall also be unlawful for any such licensed pawnbroker to knowingly receive on pawn or deposit any personal property of any kind from any person not being the owner thereof, or from any intoxicated person.

                Upon conviction for violation of any of the provisions of this section, the city council may at its option revoke the license of such pawnbroker.

 

§29-10.  Reserved

 

 

Article II.  Tattooing and Body Piercing

 

§25-11.  Tattoo / Body Piercing; License Required
                It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating a tattoo and/or a body piercing establishment without first obtaining a license to engage in such business in accordance with the provisions hereof.

 

§25-12.  License Application; Types; When Issued
                (A)  All applications for a new or renewal license shall be filed with the Central District Health Department accompanied by a fee established and adopted by the Board of Health. Upon payment of the license fee, receipt of the application, and receipt of the certificate of inspection, the Health Department Director shall issue a license to the applicant, which he/she shall keep displayed in his/her place of business at all times.

                (B)  Any change of ownership or change of location of the business licensed shall require a new application and license, with payment of fees therefor.

                (C)  Application for all licenses shall be made prior to the operation of any tattoo and/or body piercing work.

                (D)  Licenses shall be non-transferable.

                (E)  Type of Licenses:

   (1) Annual License: An annual license may be issued for businesses, valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. Renewals of such annual license shall be made by application prior to the expiration of the existing license.

   (2) Temporary License: A temporary license may be issued for businesses, valid for no more than three (3) consecutive days, such dates to be specified on the license. Licenses issued on a temporary basis requires compliance with this article and with the Temporary Tattoo/Body Piercing Event Regulations promulgated and adopted by the Board of Health.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 


§25-13.  Definitions
                For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:

   Certificate of Inspection: The term “certificate of inspection” shall mean written approval from the Central District Health Department that said tattooing and/or body piercing establishment has been inspected and meets all of the terms of this Article relating to operation, maintenance, physical facilities, equipment and layout for operation of such business.

   Body Piercing: The term “body piercing” shall mean the act of penetrating the skin, excluding the earlobes, to make generally permanent in nature, a hole, mark, or scar.

   Health Department Director: The term “Health Department Director” shall mean the Director of the Central District Health Department or his/her authorized representative.

   Operator: The term “operator” shall mean any individual, firm, company, corporation or association that owns or operates an establishment where tattooing and/or body piercing is performed and any individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing and/or body piercing on the person of another.

   Tattoo: The term “tattoo” shall refer to any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink or any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of needles or any other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 

§25-14.  Health and Sanitary Requirements
                Each person who operates a tattooing and/or body piercing establishment shall comply with the following requirements:

  (A) The room in which tattooing and/or body piercing is done shall have an area of not less than one hundred (100) square feet. The walls, floors and ceiling shall have an impervious, smooth and washable surface.

  (B) A toilet shall be located in the establishment and shall be accessible at all times that the tattooing and/or body piercing establishment is open for business. A separate lavatory will be accessible to the operator to wash his/her hands prior to applying a tattoo or body piercing to a patron. The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold running water, soap and sanitary towels, and shall be cleaned and sanitized at least daily.

  (C) All tables and other equipment shall be constructed of easily cleanable material, shall be painted or finished in a light color, with a smooth washable finish, and shall be separated from waiting customers or observers by a panel at least four (4) feet high or by a door.

  (D) The entire premises and all equipment shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and in good repair.

  (E) The operator shall wash his/her hands thoroughly with soap and water before starting to tattoo and/or body pierce; the hands shall be dried with individual, single-use towels. After washing his/her hands, the operator shall rinse his/her hands in seventy percent (70%) alcohol (Rubbing Alcohol) or in an antiseptic solution approved by the Central District Health Department. The operator will then don new disposable surgical gloves, and shall wear them while in contact with the customer. Upon completion of his/her work on each customer, the operator shall dispose of the gloves by incineration or autoclave. The operator shall not perform service on more than one (1) person at a time; that is, he/she shall commence and complete or terminate services with a customer, prior to commencing work on another individual.

  (F) No tattooing and/or body piercing shall be done on any skin surface that has rash, pimples, boils, infections or manifests any evidence of unhealthy conditions.

  (G) In the event a tattoo, blemish, birthmark or scar is changed, removed, camouflaged, or altered, a record must be made and kept in the client's record.

  (H) Only disposable razors with a new, single-service blade shall be used on each customer or patron and then shall be sterilized and disposed of as soon as possible by incineration.

  (I) The area to be tattooed and/or pierced shall first be thoroughly washed for a period of two (2) minutes with warm water to which has been added an antiseptic liquid soap. A sterile single-use sponge shall be used to scrub the area. After shaving and before tattooing and/or piercing is begun, a solution of seventy percent (70%) alcohol shall be applied to the area with a single-use sponge used and applied with a sterile instrument. Sponges shall be disposed of by sterilization and incineration.

  (J) Only sterile petroleum jelly in single-service disposable containers, if available, or collapsible metal or plastic tubes, or its equivalent as approved by the Central District Health Department, shall be used on the area to be tattooed and/or pierced and it shall be applied with sterile gauze which shall then be discarded and disposed of by incineration or autoclave. Petroleum jelly or an approved alternate substance shall not be applied directly with the fingers.

  (K) The use of styptic pencils, alum blocks or other solid styptics to check the flow of blood is prohibited.

  (L) Inquiry shall be made of each customer, and anyone giving a history of jaundice, hepatitis, lymphadenopathy or lymphadenitis (swelling of lymph nodes) Aids (HIV+) positive, or a history of blood donation exclusion (for other than hypertension and immediate illness) may not be tattooed and/or body pierced. Inquiry shall be recorded on an appropriate form which shall be executed by the customer and operator, and retained by the licensee for a period of not less than three (3) years.

  (M) Single-service individual containers of dye or ink shall be used for each patron, and the container therefor shall be discarded immediately after completing work on a patron and any dye in which the needles were dipped shall not be used on another person. Excess dye or ink shall be removed from the skin with an individual sterile sponge or a disposable paper tissue which shall be used only on one (1) person and then immediately discarded and disposed of with other hazardous medical waste. After completing work on any person, the tattooed and/or pierced area shall be washed with sterile gauze saturated with an antiseptic soap solution approved by the Central District Health Department, or a seventy percent (70%) alcohol solution. The tattooed and/or pierced area shall be allowed to dry and sterile petroleum jelly from a single-service disposable container, if available, or from collapsible metal or plastic tubes, shall be applied, using sterile gauze. A sterile gauze dressing shall then be fastened to the tattooed area with adhesive and/or the pierced area as needed.

  (N) All tattoo and/or body piercing work shall be performed with a single-service sterile needle, which shall be disposed of immediately after use on one (1) customer by sterilization and incineration. The operator shall not remove tattoos, nor shall they be done over the site of obviously recent hypodermic injections. A single-service tube should be used in conjunction with a new needle. After use the tube shall be sterilized.

  (O) Operator is responsible for issuing after-care instructions for each body piercing.

  (P) No animals may be kept or allowed in the place of business at any time.

  (Q) Private residences or dwelling units are prohibited in the place of business unless the tattooing and/or body piercing operation is conducted in a separate and distinct location from the normal living quarters of a residential dwelling.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 

§25-15.  Storing of Instruments
                All clean and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be kept in a closed glass or metal case or storage cabinet while not in use. Such cabinet shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times.

 

§25-16.  Sterilizing of Instruments
                A steam sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided for sterilizing all needles and similar instruments before use on any customer, person or patron. (Alternate sterilizing procedures may only be used when specifically approve by the Central District Health Department.) Sterilization of equipment will be accomplished by exposure to live steam for at least sixty (60) minutes at a minimum pressure of fifteen (15) pounds per square inch, temperature of two hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (250°) or one hundred twenty-one degrees Celsius (121°C).

                Preparation of Instruments for Sterilization. After each tattoo job, the tattoo machine shall be placed in an ultrasonic type machine to remove the excess dye from the tubes and needle bars. When this process is completed the tubes and needle bars shall be removed from the tattoo machines. They shall then be placed into a covered container for sterilization by autoclaving.

                Sterilizing of Instruments. Steam sterilizers, approved by the Central District Health Department, shall be provided for each establishment. All needle bars, grips, tubes and instruments which pierce the skin, directly and in piercing the skin or come in contact with instruments which pierce the skin shall be sterilized before using on each customer by autoclaving under fifteen (15) pounds pressure for fifteen (15) minutes. The temperature maintained in autoclaving shall not be less than two hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (250°F) or one hundred twenty-one degrees Celsius (121°C).

                Storing of Instruments. All tubes, grips and needle bars shall be left in the wrappers used during the autoclaving process. These wrapped articles shall be stored in a closed glass case or storage cabinet and shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times. The wrappers shall not be removed from the tubes, grips or needle bars until a tattoo and/or body piercing job is begun.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 

§25-17.  Use of Instruments
                The needles and instruments required to be sterilized shall be so used, handled and temporarily placed during tattooing and/or body piercing so that they will not be contaminated. Each operator should have a minimum of eight (8) sets of tubes. (A set consist of 1 outliner, 1 shade).

 

§25-18.  Incineration of Wastes
                All used items and equipment must be autoclaved at fifteen (15) PSI and two hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (250°F) for fifteen (15) minutes, and then discarded in double-lined plastic bags in clean closable receptacles, and shall be incinerated as soon as possible after use.

 

§25-19.  Records
                (A) Permanent records for each patron or customer shall be maintained by the licensee or operator of the establishment. Before the tattooing and/or body piercing operation begins, the patron or customer shall be required personally to enter, on a record form provided for such establishments, the date, his/her name, address, age, driver’s license number or other acceptable photo identification, the responses to the inquiries set forth in §25-14(L), and his/her signature. A copy of the driver's license or photo identification shall be attached to and retained with the permanent record.

                (B) Daily logs must be kept detailing sterilization of instruments.

                (C) All such records required to be retained shall be kept by the operator or licensee for a period of not less than five (5) years. In the event of a change of ownership or closing the business, all such records shall be made available to the Central District Health Department or law enforcement officer of the City upon request.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 

§25-20.  Infections
                No person, customer or patron having any skin infection or other disease of the skin or any communicable disease shall be tattooed and/or body pierced. All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing and/or body piercing which become known to the operator shall promptly be reported to the Central District Health Department by the person owning or operating the tattooing and/or body piercing establishment, and the infected client shall be referred to a physician.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 

§25-21.  Pigments and Dyes
                All pigments, dyes, colors, etc. used in tattooing shall be sterile and free from bacteria, virus particles and noxious agents and substances, and the pigments, dyes and colors used from stock solutions for each customer or patron shall be placed in a single-service receptacle and such receptacle and remaining solution shall be discarded and disposed of after use on each customer or patron.

 

§25-22.  Bandages and Surgical Dressings
                All bandages and surgical dressings used in connection with the tattooing and/or body piercing of a person shall be sterile.

 

§25-23.  Certificate of Inspection
                An applicant for a license to operate a tattooing and/or body piercing establishment shall first obtain a certificate of inspection from the Central District Health Department, indicated the establishment has been inspected and is in compliance with the provisions of this Article.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 

§25-24.  Inspections
                The Health Department Director shall conduct periodic inspections of any tattooing and/or body piercing establishment for the purpose of determining whether or not said establishment and the persons performing the art of tattooing and/or body piercing thereon are in compliance with all applicable health provisions contained within this Article and other pertinent ordinances at least once each calendar year. It shall be unlawful for any person or operator of a tattooing and/or body piercing establishment willfully to prevent or restrain the Health Department Director from entering any licensed establishment where tattooing and/or body piercing is being performed for the purpose of inspecting said premises, after proper identification is presented to the operator.

 

§25-25.  Tattooing and / or Body Piercing of Minors
                No person in the City shall tattoo and/or body pierce any unmarried minor under the age of eighteen (18) years unless the parent, guardian or other person having charge and custody of said minor shall first have given his/her written consent to such tattooing and/or body piercing of such minor. The identity of the consenting party shall be verified by drivers license number or other acceptable photo identification. The written consent must be signed at the tattooing and/or body piercing establishment by the parent, guardian or other person having charge and custody of said minor. A copy of the driver's license or photo identification shall be attached to and retained with the written consent. The burden for ensuring compliance with this section shall be on the operator.

 

§25-26.  Hours of Operation
                Operators of tattoo and/or body piercing businesses shall commence new tattoo and/or body piercing work only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M.

 

§25-27.  Penalty
                In addition to the revocation and suspension of any license, any person violating any provisions of this Article shall be punished in accordance with the penalties set forth in §1-7 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.

 
CHAPTER 26

PLUMBING

 

Article I. Uniform Plumbing Code

 

§26-1.  Uniform Plumbing Code Adopted

               The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is hereby adopted, together with Appendices as set forth hereafter, and any amendments thereto as may be made from time to time, except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by ordinance and set forth in this chapter of the Grand Island City Code. One copy of the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, and all supplements or amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the city clerk as provided by law.

The following appendices shall be used with the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by this section:
       1. Appendix A – Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System.
       2. Appendix B – Explanatory Notes on Combination Waste and Vent Systems.
       3. Appendix C – Alternative Plumbing Systems

       4. Appendix D – Sizing Storm Water Drainage Systems

Amended by Ordinance No. 9024, effective 03-01-2006

Amended by Ordinance No. 9118, effective 05-15-2007

Amended by Ordinance No. 9379, effective 05-15-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9487, effective 06-15-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9669, effective 01-01-2018

 

 

§26-2.  UPC - Certain Sections not Adopted

        It is especially provided that the following chapters, sections, and tables of the Uniform Plumbing Code are not adopted or approved, and the same shall be of no force and effect:

1. Table 104.5 - Plumbing Permit Fees.

2. Section 612.0 – Residential Fire Sprinkler Systems.

3. Chapter 13 – Health Care Facilities and Medical Gas and Vacuum Systems.

4. Chapter 15 – Alternative Water Sources for Nonpotable Applications.

5. Chapter 16  – Nonpotable Rainwater Catchment Systems.

6. Appendix E – Manufacture/Mobile Home Parks and Recreational Vehicle Parks.

7. Appendix F – Firefighter Breathing Air Replenishment Systems

8. Appendix G – Sizing of Venting Systems

9. Appendix H – Private Sewage Disposal Systems.

10. Appendix I –Installation standards.

11. Appendix J – Combination of Indoor and Outdoor Combustion and Ventilation Opening Design

12. Appendix K – Potable Rainwater Catchment Systems
13. Appendix L – Sustainable Practices

 

Amended by Ordinance No. 9024, effective 03-01-2006

Amended by Ordinance No. 9118, effective 05-15-2007

Amended by Ordinance No. 9379, effective 05-15-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9669, effective 01-01-2018

 

§26-3.  UPC - Public Copy

               Not less than one copy of the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted pursuant to §26-1 shall be kept on file by the city clerk for inspection by and use of the public.

 

§26-4.  UPC - Amendment of Section 101.1

Section 101.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

101.1. Title.

This document shall be known as the "Uniform Plumbing Code" together with Appendices and any amendments thereto, and shall be cited as such, and will be referred to when used herein or in Chapter 26 of the Grand Island City Code as "this Code".

 

§26-5.  UPC - Amendment of Subsection 103.1.1

Subsection 103.1.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to include the following:
  103.1.1. Permits Required.

  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any installation, alteration or repair any plumbing system regulated by this Code except as permitted in Subsections 103.1.2 of this section, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a permit to do such work from the Grand Island Building Department.

  (A) A permit is required for the installation or replacement of all fuel burning and other water heaters, heating potable water, together with all chimneys, vents and their connectors.

  (B) A permit is required for the installation, repair, or alteration of all fuel gas piping in or in connection with any building or structure or within the property lines of any premises, other than service pipe.
  (C) No device shall be installed for the prevention of backflow or back-siphonage, or be removed from use, or relocated, or other device substituted without a permit.

  A permit is required for lawn irrigation systems.

  (D) No water treating or conditioning equipment shall be installed without a permit.

  (E) A permit and inspection are required when repairing, replacing, or installing a sewer lateral, sewer tap, or sewer cap within five (5) feet of the City main, and when repairing or replacing fifty (50) percent or more of the sewer lateral.

  Any repair, replacement, or installation of a new sewer tap shall be done in compliance with the Grand Island City Code, Chapter 30, Articles IV and V.

  (F) A permit is required for the repair, replacement, or installation of a water service. A Plumbing Inspection Fee will be assessed on all water meter installations and replacements.

  (G) A separate permit shall be obtained for each building or structure.

  No person shall allow any other person to do or cause to be done any work under a permit secured by     a permittee except persons in his or her employ.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8882, effective 01-07-2004

Amended by Ordinance No. 9024, effective 03-01-2006

Amended by Ordinance No. 9118, effective 05-15-2007

 

§26-6.  UPC – Amendment of Subsection 103.1.3

Subsection 103.1.3 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to include the following:

  (A) No permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any work regulated by this Code, except to a person holding a valid unexpired and unrevoked plumbing license as required by this chapter, except when and as otherwise hereinafter provided in this section.

  (B) A permit may be issued to a properly licensed person not acting in violation of any current contractor licensing law.

  (C) Any permit by this code may be issued to do any work regulated by this code in a single family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings in the event that such person is the bona fide owner of any such dwelling and accessory buildings and quarters, and that the same are currently occupied by said owner, provided, that said owner shall personally purchase all material and shall personally perform all labor in connection therein. This, however, shall exclude all gas piping and venting of fuel combustion appliances.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9024, effective 03-01-2006

 

§26-7.  UPC - Amendment of Subsection 103.4.1

Subsection 103.4.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

  103.4.1  Permit Fees.

The fee for each permit identified in this chapter shall be set forth in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§26-8.  UPC - Amendment of Subsection 310.1

Subsection 310.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to include the following:

Workmanlike shall mean executed in a skilled manner; e.g. generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work.

 

§26-9.  UPC - Amendment of Subsection 313.11

Subsection 313.11 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to include the following:

Cutting, notching and boring of floor joists and studs shall comply with Table 26-3-1, which is attached and adopted herein.

 

§26-10.  UPC – Amendment of Subsection 604.1

   Subsection 604.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to delete the use of CPVC, and include the following:

Cross linked polyethylene water tubing may be used as water distribution systems inside buildings. All installers of the Pex systems must hold a certificate of training from the manufacturer.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9024, effective 03-01-2006

 

§26-11.  UPC - Amendment of Subsection 604.2

Subsection 604.2 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

  Copper tube for water piping shall have a weight of not less than Type L, except that Type M copper tubing may be used for water piping when piping is above ground in a building.

  Copper tube for underground water service piping shall have a weight of not less than Type K.

 

§26-12.  UPC - Amendment of Subsection 608.2

   Subsection 608.2 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to increase excessive water pressure from eighty (80) pounds per square inch to one hundred (100) pounds per square inch.

 

§26-13.  UPC - Amendment of Subsection 608.5

   Subsection 608.5 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to delete the use of CPVC.

 

§26-14.  UPC - Amendment of Section 717.0

Section 717.0 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

717.0  Size of Building Sewers

The minimum size of any building sewer shall be determined on the basis of the total number of fixture units drained by such sewer, in accordance with Table 7-8. No building sewer shall be smaller than the building drain and in no case less than four (4) inches.

 

§26-15.  UPC - Amendment of Subsection 722.1

Subsection 722.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

Every abandoned building (house) sewer or part thereof shall be plugged or capped in an approved manner at the city main.

 

§26-16.  Water Discharge Requirements

Subsection 1014.3.2.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

               Waste discharge in establishments from fixtures and equipment which contain grease, including but not limited to, scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks (3-compartment and 4-compartment sinks), dishwashers, soup kettles, and floor drains located in areas where grease-containing materials exist, shall be permitted to be drained into the sanitary waste through the interceptor when approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9379, effective 05-15-2012

 

 

§26-17.  UPC - Amendment of Chapter 14

Chapter 14 of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to including the following:

               Sewer Tap Saddle Model DFW-4T

                  Manufacturer DFW/HPI, Troup, TX

 

§26-18.  Reserved

§26-19.  Reserved

§26-20.  Reserved

§26-21.  Reserved

§26-22.  Reserved

§26-23.  Reserved

§26-24.  Reserved

§26-25.  Reserved

 

 

Article II. Plumbers, Contractors and Installers

Division 1. Plumbers Examining Board

 

§26-26.  Established; Appointment; Term

               There is hereby established a Plumbers Examining Board, hereinafter referred to as the Board, to consist of seven members. The chief building official shall be an ex-officio member of the Board and shall act as secretary thereof. One member shall represent the board of health, one member shall be a contracting master plumber, one member shall represent the general public, and three members shall be either master or journeyman plumbers. Each member of the board shall have had at least three years experience in his or her respective field.

               The members of the Board shall be appointed by the mayor. Upon expiration of the terms of the individuals currently serving on the Board, the mayor shall appoint three (3) members to serve for one (1) year and three (3) members to serve for two (2) years. Thereafter, each member shall serve a term of two (2) years.

 

§26-27.  Meetings; Chairman

               The Board shall hold its first meeting upon call by the chief building official, and within thirty days following the appointment of its members. The members shall select a chairman from their own number, but not the chief building official. Such chairman shall hold office until the December 31 following, or until his or her successor has been selected. The Board shall meet upon call by the chief building official at such intervals as may be necessary for the proper performance of its duties, but in any case not less than twice a year.

 

§26-28.  Duties; Examinations; Licenses

               The Board shall establish standards and procedures for the qualification, examination and licensing of master plumbers and journeyman plumbers, and shall issue an appropriate license to each person who meets the qualifications therefore and successfully passes the examination given by the Board.

 

§26-29.  Board of Appeals

               The duly appointed Board shall act as a Board of Appeals in making a correct determination of any appeal arising from actions of the chief building official or his authorized representative.

 

§26-30.  Quorum for Board

               Four (4) members of the Board of Appeals shall constitute a quorum.

 

§26-31.  Records

               The Board of Appeals shall keep an accurate record of all their official transactions and shall submit a copy to the office of the city clerk.

 

§26-32.  Procedures

               Appeals shall be made within thirty (30) calendar days from date of the chief building official's decision. Decisions of the Board shall be made within thirty (30) days of receipt of appeal. Decisions of the Board shall be in writing. A copy of the Board's decision shall be delivered to the appellant within 30 calendar days after receipt of original appeal.

 

§26-33.  Filing Fee

               Any person who is aggrieved by any decision of the chief building official or his authorized representative relating to the suitability of alternate materials or type of installation or interpretation of any provision of this Code may obtain review of such decision upon filing a written request for review by the Board in the office of the chief building official or his authorized representative within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision and payment of a filing fee as provided below:

  (1) A $50.00 fee for review of a decision of the chief building official or his authorized representative interpreting any provision or provisions of this Code.

  (2) A $50.00 fee for review of a decision of the chief building official or his authorized representative concerning the suitability of an alternate material or type of installation.

               Enforcement of any decision, notice or order of the chief building official or his authorized representative issued under this Code shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.

 

§26-34.  General Rules

        (1) All plumbing apprentices actively engaged under a master plumber will be required to register with the City Building Department.  Experience accrued towards taking the journeyman plumbers test will only be accepted as a registered apprentice.  Time accrued previous to registration will be approved and noted.
        (2) Time required for an apprentice to be actively engaged in the trade under the supervision of a master, journeyman, or qualified shop will be a minimum of three years. Proof of qualifications will be submitted to the Board in writing for consideration and approval for the journeyman examination. Any academical time to be considered by the Board in place of actual apprenticeship time in the trade must be from a State accredited college or Technical school.
        (3) Applicants must hold a journeyman license for a minimum of four years  before taking the Master exam, and be actively engaged in the trade for the full four years.  Proof of qualifications will be submitted to the Board in writing for consideration and approval for the master examination.

        (4) The minimum age limit for a Journeyman examination will be Twenty (20) years of age unless approved by the Board.

        (5) The allotted time for the Master and Journeyman examination will be four hours.

        (6) Request for Master and Journeyman examination will be filed in the City of Grand Island Building Department Office prior to the examination date for the consideration of the Board. Examination fee will be paid with the application. No exam fee will be refunded after taking the examination.

        (7) All applicants will submit, along with their request for examination, letters of proof of the required apprenticeship time actively engaged in the trade.

        (8) In the event that an applicant fails to pass the examination given, he may make application for a subsequent exam after eighty-five (85) days have passed.

        (9) At the discretion of the Board, experience gained at an industrial plant or outside the Grand Island jurisdiction may be considered as apprenticeship time to qualify for a Journeyman examination. Information considered by the Board shall include written proof of previous experience record and oral examination.

        (10) All examination papers are the property of the examining Board. Applicants will not be permitted to remain during grading or to review examination papers after they have been submitted for grading. Test results will be sent by mail.

        (11) Applicant must obtain a passing score on the exam.  A passing score for a Journeyman Plumber is 70% and for a Master Plumber is 80%.

        (12) An applicant with a passing score will have a 30 day grace period to pick up a new license dated from the test date.

        (13) An applicant must supply his own copy of this Code; the Grand Island Building Department will not supply copies to anyone during the test. Photocopies, reference books, or any other reference materials will not be allowed in the testing area during the test.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9118, effective 05-15-2007

Amended by Ordinance No. 9619, effective 02-14-2017

 

 

Division 2. Plumbing Contractors

 

§26-35.  Registration Required

               No person shall engage in the business of plumbing in the City until registered in the office of the chief building official as a contracting plumber.

 

§26-36.  Registration; Individual

               No person shall be registered as a contracting plumber unless he is licensed as a master plumber under the provisions of this section and has in force and effect one or more insurance policies as required by §26-41 below.

 

§26-37.  Registration; Firm, Corporation

               No firm, association or corporation shall be registered as a contracting plumber unless the proper officers of the concern shall certify to the chief building official that an identified master plumber, licensed under the provisions of this section, is an officer, member or regular employee of such concern, and that such master plumber will be in direct supervision of all of the plumbing work contracted and done by such concern, and unless such concern has in force and effect one or more insurance policies as required by §26-41 below.

 

§26-38.  Registration; Fee

               The fees to be collected by the chief building official for the registration of a plumbing contractor shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§26-39.  Registration; Certificate

               The chief building official shall issue a certificate of registration to any contracting plumber applying for such and qualifying under the provisions of this section, for a period beginning on the date thereof and expiring on December 31 of the same year. The holder of the certificate shall display same at the regular place of business of the holder.

               Renewal of a registration certificate may be obtained upon showing of qualifications as provided for in this section and payment of the proper fee.

 

§26-40.  Certificate; Revocation

               The Board may revoke any certificate of registration of any contracting plumber after hearing by the Board for any of the following reasons:

(1) Lack of competency or lack of knowledge in matters relevant to the certificate of registration;

(2) Certificate of registration being obtained by fraud;

(3) The lending of any certificate of registration or the obtaining of permits thereunder for any other person;

(4) Failure to comply with this Code and any rules issued by the chief building official or Board;

(5) Abandonment of any contract or undertaking without good cause or fraudulent departure from plans or specifications;

(6) Failure to obtain or cause to be obtained permits when the same are required by §26-6.

The chief building official shall serve notice of such action by registered mail to the holder of the certificate.

 

§26-41.  Insurance

(1) Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska, with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:

       (a) Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of the registrant including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.

       (b)  A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.

       (c) The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Building Department a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance coverage.

       (d)  Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy herein required to expire or lapse.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9118, effective 05-15-2007

Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010

§26-42.  Use of Licensee's Name by Another

            No person or concern who has obtained a contracting plumber's registration pursuant to this chapter shall allow his or her name to be used by another person or concern, either for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing business or work under such registration or license. Every person licensed pursuant to this section shall notify the Board of any change of street address. It shall be unlawful for any

person not licensed as a master plumber to use the words “master plumber”, “plumber” or “plumbing” in any advertising.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9118, effective 05-15-2007

 

 

Division 3. Master and Journeymen Plumbers

 

§26-43.  Examinations; Fee; Exemptions

               Any person desiring to be licensed as a master plumber or as a journeyman plumber pursuant to this chapter shall make written application for an examination to the Board. Examination fees shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

               Examination fees shall accompany such application and shall be accounted for and turned over to the City Treasurer. Examination fees are not returned but shall be forfeited in the event the applicant fails the examination.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9118, effective 05-15-2007

Amended by Ordinance No. 9379, effective 05-15-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9619, effective 02-14-2017

 

§26-44.  Examinations; Prior Experience

               An applicant for examination must have worked under the supervision of a licensed contracting master plumber for a minimum period of three years before being eligible to take a journeyman plumber examination. An applicant for examination must have been actively engaged in the plumbing trade for a minimum period of four years after being licensed as a journeyman plumber before being eligible to take a master plumber examination.

 

§26-45.  Re-Examination

               Any person desiring to become a master plumber or a journeyman plumber who fails to pass an examination pursuant to this chapter as prescribed by the Board may make written application for a subsequent examination 85 days after taking the examination.

 

§26-46.  Licenses; Term; Renewal; Fees

               (1) All licenses issued by the Board pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued, but may be renewed within thirty days thereafter upon application and payment of fees in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. Any license holder who does not renew his license within this thirty-day grace period shall automatically forfeit such license. In the event of forfeiture of a license in this manner, the holder may apply for and qualify to recover the lapsed license by passing an examination as required under the provisions of §26-43 above.

               (2) The annual fee for master and journeyman plumbers shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§26-47.  License; Revocation

               The city council by a majority vote shall have the power to revoke the license of any journeyman plumber or master plumber upon the recommendation of the Board, if the license was obtained through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is shown to be grossly incompetent, or has a second time willfully violated any of the provisions of this article or any other provisions of City of Grand Island Code related to plumbers. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to the penalties prescribed for the violation of the provisions of this article.

               Before a license may be revoked, the licensee shall have notice in writing, enumerating the charges alleged, and shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council not sooner than five days from receipt of the notice. The licensee shall be given an opportunity to present testimony, oral or written, and shall have the right of cross-examination. All testimony before the city council shall be given under oath. The city council shall have power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and compel the attendance of witnesses. The decision of the city council shall be based upon the evidence produced at the hearing, and such decision shall be final. A person whose license has been revoked shall not be permitted to reapply for another such license within one year from the date of such revocation.

 

§26-48.  Temporary Journeyman Plumber's License

               The chief building official may issue a temporary journeyman plumber's license pending examination; provided, that the applicant therefore holds a similar license from an equivalent board. Such permit shall be valid until the next examination by the Board.

 

§26-49.  Use of Licensee's Name by Another

               No person or concern who has obtained a plumber's license pursuant to this article, shall allow his or her name to be used by another person or concern, either for the purpose of obtaining permits, or for doing business or work under such registration or license. Every person licensed pursuant to this section shall notify the Board of any change of street address.

 

§26-50.  Renewal of License

               Any person licensed under the provisions of this article as a master plumber or a journeyman, who does not renew his license for a period of thirty days after the expiration of same, shall pay the examination fee required by this article, and shall submit himself to an examination by the Board for plumbers before such person can be again licensed hereunder.

 

 

Division 4. Water Conditioning Appliance Installers

 

§26-51.  Conformance with Article

               All connections made to a water supply system which are not connected to the drainage system for the purpose of installing, replacing, or relocating a water conditioning appliance, as defined by Section 26-52 shall be made in conformance with the provisions of this article and the city code.

 

§26-52.  Water Conditioning Appliance; Defined

               For the purposes of this chapter, the term "water conditioning appliance" shall mean apparatus and equipment which is designed to soften or filter or change the mineral content of water where such apparatus and equipment is connected to a water supply system and is not connected to the drainage system.

               The term "connected to a water supply system" shall not be considered to include connections to existing faucets.

 

§26-53.  Water Conditioning Contractor

  (1) No person shall engage in the water conditioning appliance business in the city of Grand Island without first obtaining a certificate of registration as a water conditioning contractor.

  (2) In case of any firm of more than one person or partnership engaged in the business of installing water conditioning appliances, only one of such persons shall be required to qualify for a contractor's license. In case of corporations, only one officer shall be required to qualify for such license.

  (3) No license as a water conditioning contractor shall be issued by the City of Grand Island unless the applicant therefore first shall have passed the examination for water conditioning installer as prescribed by this article, and shall have a regularly established place of business wherein he or she shall have posted in a conspicuous place the license issued pursuant to this article.

  (4) Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska with the following coverages, amounts, and provisions:

  (a) Comprehensive General Liability Insurance covering the operations of the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.

  (b)               A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction.

  (c) The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Building Department a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance coverage

  (d)               Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy herein required to expire or lapse.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010

 

§26-54.  Water Conditioning Installer

               Any person other than a water conditioning contractor or master or journeyman plumber, desiring to engage in the occupation of a water conditioning installer must take an examination and obtain a license from the Board and be employed by a water conditioning contractor.

 

§26-55.  License Required; Exception

               No person shall install, replace, or relocate a water conditioning appliance without first having obtained the necessary license from the Board to do so; provided, that a master plumber and a journeyman plumber licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may perform such work without securing an additional license.

 

§26-56.  Examinations

               The Board shall, prior to issuing any license under this chapter, examine the applicant as to his or her technical knowledge and ability to install water conditioning appliances, and knowledge of water supply piping and fittings as related to the installation of water conditioning appliances. The examination shall not include the applicant's knowledge of plumbing, house drainage, ventilation or sanitation to the extent required to meet the standards applied in licensing master plumbers or journeymen plumbers.

 

§26-57.  Re-Examination

               In case any application for a license to install a water conditioning appliance shall be denied for failure to pass an examination satisfactory to the Board, the applicant therefore may take another examination any time after the expiration of thirty days.

 

§26-58.  Application Fee

               Each applicant for a water conditioning installer license shall pay an examination fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§26-59.  License; Application

               All applications for water conditioning licenses shall be filed with the Board and shall contain the following information:

(1) The name and residence and business address of the applicant.

(2) The trade name used by the applicant or applicant's employer.

(3) The name of persons acquainted with applicant's qualifications.

(4) The qualifications possessed by the applicant.

(5) Any additional relevant information requested by the Board.

 

§26-60.  License; Fees

               The fee to be collected by the building department for the registration of water conditioning contractors shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§26-61.  Licenses; Suspension and Revocation

               Licenses issued pursuant to this article may be revoked or suspended by the city council upon recommendation of the Board for the following reasons:

  (1) Failure to comply with this article or any rules issued by the Board hereunder.

  (2) Abandonment of any contract or undertaking without good cause or fraudulent departure from plans or specifications.

  (3) Failure to obtain or cause to be obtained permits when same are required by this chapter.

 

§26-62.  Licenses; Expiration

               All licenses granted under this section shall expire on the last day of the year issued, and such licenses shall not be transferable.

 

§26-63.  Temporary Installer's License

               The chief building official may issue a temporary water conditioning installer license pending examination before the Board; provided, that the applicant therefore holds a similar license from an equivalent board, or, if the person applying for the same in the judgement of the chief building official has demonstrated his or her ability to make such installation.

 

§26-64.  Inspection of Installations

               Within ten (10) days after notice by any water conditioning contractor of the completion of an installation, the chief building official shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, such installations for which permits have been issued under this section, and such official shall indicate in writing that such installation has been approved or disapproved.

 

 

Article III. Violations

 

§26-65.  Violations of Chapter

               Any person who shall violate or who shall refuse, neglect or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction.

               Any person holding a license under the supervision and authority of the Board who is convicted of having violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall have such license revoked by the city council, and any person having their license revoked for such cause shall not be granted a new license for a period of one year thereafter.

               Any person who shall have been convicted for having done any work in a manner prohibited by this Chapter, and who shall fail, neglect or refuse to correct the same within ten days after such conviction shall be guilty of an independent and separate offense for each day thereafter during which such work is permitted to remain in such improper condition.

 

 

 

 

§26-66.  Discretionary Action

               In the case of discretionary actions and determinations of the chief building official or of the Board, relevant facts shall be considered and determinations made in the exercise of reasonable discretion, and all such determinations shall be final in the absence of abuse of discretion.


CHAPTER 27

PROCUREMENT

 

Article I. General Provisions

§27-1.  Purpose
                The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in public purchasing by the City to maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity.

 

§27-2.  Application
                This chapter applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies, services, and construction, entered into by the City after August 1, 1991, unless the parties agree to its application to contracts entered into prior to the effective date. It shall apply to every expenditure of public funds by a public agency for public purchasing, irrespective of the source of the funds. When the procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with any mandatory applicable federal law and regulations. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any public agency from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, or bequest that is otherwise consistent with law.

 

§27-3.  Definitions
                Architect, Engineer and Land Surveying Services. Those professional services within the scope of the practice of architecture, professional engineering, or land surveying, as defined by the laws of the State of Nebraska.

                Blind Trust. An independently managed trust in which the employee-beneficiary has no management rights and in which the employee beneficiary is not given notice of alterations in, or other dispositions of, the property subject to the trust.

                Brand Name or Equal Specification. A specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance, and other salient characteristics needed to meet City requirements, and which provides for the submission of equivalent products.

                Brand Name Specification. A specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers.

                Business. Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any other private legal entity.

                Change Order. A written order signed and issued by the purchasing agent, directing the contractor to make changes which the "Changes" clause of the contract authorizes the purchasing agent to order without the consent of the contractor.

                Contract Modification (bilateral change). Any written alteration in specifications, delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or other provisions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract.

                Confidential Information. Any information which is available to an employee only because of the employee's status as an employee of the City and is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request.

                Construction. The process of building, altering, repairing, improving, or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. It does not include the routine operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of existing structures, buildings, or real property.

                Contract. All types of City agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement of supplies, services, or construction.

                Contractor. Any person having a contract with the City or a using agency thereof.

                Cost Analysis. The evaluation of cost data for the purpose of arriving at costs actually incurred or estimates of costs to be incurred, prices to be paid, and costs to be reimbursed.

                Cost Data. Factual information concerning the cost of labor, material, overhead, and other cost elements which are expected to be incurred or which have been actually incurred by the contractor in performing the contract.

                Cost-Reimbursement Contract. A contract under which a contractor is reimbursed for costs which are allowable and allocable in accordance with the contract terms and the provisions of this chapter, and a fee or profit, if any.

                Direct or Indirect Participation. Involvement through decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, preparation of any part of a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity.

                Disadvantaged Business. A small business which is owned or controlled by a majority of persons, not limited to members of minority groups, who have been deprived of the opportunity to develop and maintain a competitive position in the economy because of social disadvantages.

                Employee. An individual drawing a salary or wages from the City, whether elected or not; any noncompensated individual performing personal services for the City, or any department, agency, commission, council, board, or any other entity established by the executive or legislative branch of the City; and any noncompensated individual serving as an elected official of the City.

                Financial Interest. (a) Ownership of any interest or involvement in any relationship from which, or as a result of which, a person within the past year has received, or is presently or in the future entitled to receive, more than $100 per year, or its equivalent; (b) ownership of 1% of any property or business; or (c) holding a position in a business such as officer, director, trustee, partner, employee, or the like, or holding any position of management.

                Gratuity. A payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, service, or anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is received.

                Immediate Family. A spouse, children, parents, brothers, and sisters.

                Invitation for Bids. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids.

                Person. Any business, individual, union, committee, club, other organization, or group of individuals.

                Price Analysis. The evaluation of price data, without analysis of the separate cost components and profit as in cost analysis, which may assist in arriving at prices to be paid and costs to be reimbursed.

                Pricing Data. Factual information concerning prices for items substantially similar to those being procured. Prices in this definition refer to offered or proposed selling prices, historical selling prices and current selling prices. The definition refers to data relevant to both prime and subcontract prices.

                Procurement. The buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise acquiring of any supplies, services, or construction. It also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service, or construction, including description of requirements, selection, and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration.

                Public Agency. A public entity subject to or created by the City.

                Qualified Products List. An approved list of supplies, services, or construction items described by model or catalogue numbers, which, prior to competitive solicitation, the City has determined will meet the applicable specification requirements.

                Request for Proposals. A document, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals.

                Responsible Bidder or Offeror. A person who has the capability in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements, and the tenacity, perseverance, experience, integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment, and credit which will assure good faith performance.

                Responsive Bidder. A person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids.

                Services. The furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor, not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely incidental to the required performance. The term shall not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.

                Small Business. A United States business which is independently owned and which is not dominant in its field of operation or an affiliate or subsidiary of a business dominant in its field of operation.

                Specification. Any description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of a supply, service, or construction item. It may include a description of a requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a supply, service, or construction item for delivery.

                Supplies. All property, including but not limited to equipment, materials, printing, insurance, and leases of real property, excluding land or a permanent interest in land.

                Using Agency. Any department, commission, board, or public agency requiring supplies, services, or construction procured pursuant to this chapter.

 

§27-4.  Public Access To Information
                Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent provided in Neb. R.R.S. §84-712 to §84-712.09, as amended, and shall be available to the public as provided in such statutes.

 

§27-5.  Purchasing Agent
                There is hereby created an Office of the Purchasing Agent, headed by the Chief Purchasing Agent. The Chief Purchasing Agent shall be a person with demonstrated executive and organizational ability with knowledge of public procurement law and contracts.

                The City Attorney shall perform the duties of purchasing agent during any period that such office shall be vacant.

 

§27-6.  Reserved


§27-7.  Delegation To Other Officials
                With the approval of the city council and the mayor, the purchasing agent may delegate authority to purchase certain supplies, services, or construction items to other City officials, if such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective procurement of those items. Procurement authority with respect to certain supplies, services, or construction may be delegated to other City officials by the mayor with the approval of the city council, when such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective procurement of these supplies, services, or construction.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9298, effective 07-05-2011

 

§27-8.  Competitive Sealed Bidding
                Conditions for Use. All contracts of the City shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as otherwise provided in §27-9 (Competitive Sealed Proposals), §27-10 (Designated Professional Services), §27-11 (Small Purchases), §27-12 (Sole Source Procurement), §27-13 (Emergency Procurements), and §27-35 (Architects, Engineers, Surveyors) of this chapter.

                Invitation for Bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include specifications, and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. Invitations for bids on public works contracts shall require a statement of compliance with fair labor standards as required by Neb. R.R.S. 73-102.

                Public Notice. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given a reasonable time, not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. Such notice may include publication in a newspaper of general circulation a reasonable time prior to bid opening. The public notice shall state the place, date, and time of bid opening.

                Bid Opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as the purchasing agent deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded; the record and each bid shall be open to public inspection in accordance with §27-4 (Public Access to Information).

                Bid Acceptance and Bid Evaluation. Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this chapter. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs. The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that are not set forth in the invitation for bids.

                Correction or Withdrawal of Bids; Cancellation of Awards. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written or telegraphic notice received in the office designated in the invitation for bids prior to the time set for bid opening. After bid opening, corrections in bids shall be permitted only to the extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the City or fair competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if:

(A)  The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or

(B)  The bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made. All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination made by the purchasing agent.

                Award. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by appropriate written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids, subject to the requirements of Neb. R.R.S. 73-101.01 for resident bidder preference. In the event the low responsive and responsible bid for a construction project exceeds available funds as certified by the city treasurer, and such bid does not exceed such funds by more than five percent, the purchasing agent is authorized, when time or economic considerations preclude resolicitation of work of a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with the low responsive and responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds. Negotiated adjustments shall be based upon eliminating independent deductive items specified in the invitation for bids or upon adjustments to unit prices or project prices.

                Multi-Step Sealed Bidding. When it is considered impractical to prepare initially a purchase description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers have been determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation.

                Local Bidder Preference. In case of tied low bids, all other things being equal, preference shall be given in the following order:

(A)  To those bidders who manufacture their products within the limits of the City of Grand Island;

(B)  To those bidders who manufacture their products within the limits of the County of Hall;

(C)  To those bidders who package, process, or through some other substantial operation have employees and facilities for these purposes in the City of Grand Island;

(D)  To those bidders who package, process, or through some other substantial operation have employees and facilities for these purposes in the County of Hall;

(E)  To those bidders who maintain a bona fide business office in the City of Grand Island, whose products may be made outside the confines of the County of Hall;

(F)  To those bidders who maintain a bona fide business office in the County of Hall, whose products may be made outside of the confines of the County of Hall;

(G)  To those bidders whose commodities are manufactured, mined, produced, or grown within the State of Nebraska, and to all firms, corporations, or individuals doing business as Nebraska firms, corporations, or individuals when quality is equal or better and delivered price is the same or less than the other bids received;

(H)  To those bidders whose commodities are manufactured, mined, produced, or grown within the United States of America, and to all firms, corporations, or individuals doing business as firms registered in states other than Nebraska, when quality is equal or better and delivered price is the same or less than the other bids received.

 

§27-9.  Competitive Sealed Proposals
                Conditions for Use. When the purchasing agent determines in writing that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the City, a contract may be entered into by use of the competitive sealed proposals method.

                Request for Proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals.

                Public Notice. Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided in §27-8 (Competitive Sealed Bidding); provided, the minimum time shall be fifteen (15) calendar days.

                Receipt of Proposals. No proposals shall be handled so as to permit disclosure of the identity of any offeror or the contents of any proposal during the process of negotiation including meetings and interviews with any of the offerors. The register of proposals containing the name and address of the offerors shall be open for public inspection. All proposals shall be open for public inspection after the award of the contract.

                Evaluation Factors. The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors.

                Discussion with Responsible Offerors and Revisions to Proposals. As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussion, there shall be no disclosure of the identity of competing offerors or of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors.

                Award. Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the City, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8961, effective 3-9-2005

 

§27-10.  Designated Professional Services
                Authority. For the purpose of procuring the services of accountants, clergy, physicians, lawyers, dentists, as defined by the laws of the State of Nebraska, any using agency requiring such services may procure them on its own behalf, in accordance with the selection procedures specified in this section. A using agency procuring such services shall consult with the purchasing agent. No contract for the services of legal counsel may be awarded without the approval of the city council.

                Selection Procedure:  

        (A)  Conditions for Use. Except as provided under §27-12 (Sole Source Procurement) or §27-13 (Emergency Procurements), the professional services designated in this section shall be procured in accordance with this section. 

        (B)  Statement of Qualifications. Persons engaged in providing the designated types of professional services may submit statements of qualifications and expressions of interest in providing such professional services. A using agency using such professional services may specify a uniform format for statements of qualifications. Persons may amend these statements at any time by filing a new statement.

        (C)  Public Announcement and Form of Request for Proposals. Adequate public notice of the need for such services shall be given by the using agency requiring the services through a request for proposals. Such notice may include publication in a newspaper of general circulation not less than seven (7) days prior to the final date for receipt of proposals. The request for proposals shall describe the services required, list the types of information and data required of each offeror, and state the relative importance of particular qualifications.

        (D)  Discussions. The head of a using agency procuring the required professional services or a designee of such officer may conduct discussions with any offeror who has submitted a proposal to determine such offeror's qualifications for further consideration. Discussions shall not disclose any information derived from proposals submitted by other offerors.

        (E)  Award. Award shall be made to the offeror determined in writing by the head of the using agency procuring the required professional services or a designee of such officer to be best qualified based on the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals, and negotiation of compensation determined to be fair and reasonable. If compensation cannot be agreed upon with the best qualified offeror, then negotiations will be formally terminated with the selected offeror. If proposals were submitted by one or more other offerors determined to be qualified, negotiations may be conducted with such other offeror or offerors, in the order of their respective qualification ranking, and the contract may be awarded to the offeror then ranked best qualified if the amount of compensation is determined to be fair and reasonable.

 

§27-11.  Small Purchases
                General. Any contract not exceeding $20,000, or in the case of utility power plant fuel contracts, any contract not exceeding $40,000, or for the purchase of equipment used for such enlargement or improvement of the electric system, any contract not exceeding $40,000, may be made in accordance with the purchase by quotation and small purchase procedures authorized in this section. Contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a purchase by quotation or a small purchase under this section.

                Public Works General Improvement Projects.  In any contract not exceeding $20,000 for enlargement or general improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating systems, bridges, work on streets, or any other work or improvement when the cost of such enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property, no less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations.  Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation shall be recorded and maintained as a public record.

                Utility Power Plant Fuel Contracts. In all purchases of utility power plant fuel not exceeding $40,000 per contract, no less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations. Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of businesses submitting quotations and the date and amount of each quotation shall be recorded and maintained as a public record.

                Municipal Electric Utility Enlargement or Improvement.  In any contract by the municipal electric utility for the enlargement or improvement of the electric system or for the purchase of equipment used for such enlargement or improvement, when said contract does not exceed $40,000, no less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations.  Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation.  The names of businesses submitting quotations and the date and amount of each quotation shall be recorded and maintained as a public record.

                Purchases by Quotation. Insofar as it is practical for materials, supplies and equipment purchases in excess of $2,500, and services and services/materials purchases in excess of $7,500, no less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations. Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of the businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record.

                Small Purchases. The purchasing agent shall adopt operational procedures for making small purchases of materials, supplies and equipment in an amount of $2,500 or less, and for making purchases of services and labor, including materials in an amount of $7,500 or less. Such operational procedures shall provide for obtaining adequate and reasonable competition for the supply, service, or construction being purchased. Further, such operational procedures shall require the preparation and maintenance of written records adequate to document the competition obtained, properly account for the funds expended, and facilitate an audit of the small purchase made.

 

§27-12.  Sole Source Procurement
                A contract may be awarded without competition when after advertising for bids the city council determines that there is only one source for the required supply, service, or construction. The purchasing agent shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery, and terms. A record of sole source procurements shall be maintained as a public record and shall list each contractor's name, the amount and type of each contract, a listing of the items procured under each contract, and the identification number of each contract file.

 

§27-13.  Emergency Procurements
                Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, the city council may as authorized by State Statutes make or authorize others to make emergency procurements of supplies, services, or construction when there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety; provided, that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. As soon as practicable, a record of each emergency procurement shall be made and shall set forth the contractor's name, the amount and type of the contract, a listing of the items procured under the contract, and the identification number of the contract file.

 

§27-14.  Cancellation Of Requests
                An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other solicitation may be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is for good cause and in the best interests of the City. The reasons therefor shall be made part of the contract file. Each solicitation issued by the City shall state that the solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in whole or in part when it is for good cause and in the best interests of the City. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. The notice shall identify the solicitation, explain the reason for cancellation and, where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on any resolicitation or any future procurements of a similar nature. Reasons for rejection shall be provided upon request by unsuccessful bidders or offerors.

 

§27-15.  Responsibility Of Bidders
                Determination of Nonresponsibility. If a bidder or offeror who otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found nonresponsible, a written determination of nonresponsibility, setting forth the basis of the finding, shall be prepared by the purchasing agent. The failure of a bidder or offeror to supply promptly information in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be grounds for a determination of nonresponsibility with respect to such bidder or offeror. A copy of the determination shall be sent promptly to the nonresponsible bidder or offeror. The final determination shall be made part of the contract file and be made a public record.

                Right of Nondisclosure. Information furnished by a bidder or offeror pursuant to this section shall not be disclosed by the City outside of the office of the purchasing agent, or using agency, without prior written consent by the bidder or offeror.

 

§27-16.  Cost Or Pricing Data
                Required Submission Relating to the Award of Contracts. A prospective contractor shall submit cost and/or pricing data when the contract is expected to exceed $100,000 and is to be awarded by competitive sealed proposals (§27-9, Competitive Sealed Proposals), or by sole source procurement authority (§27-12, Sole Source Procurement).

Exceptions. The submission of cost or pricing data relating to the award of a contract is not required when:

(A)  The contract price is based on adequate price competition;
(B)  The contract price is based on established catalogue prices or market prices;
(C)  The contract price is set by law or regulation; or
(D)  It is determined in writing by the purchasing agent that the requirements of this section may be waived, and the determination states the reasons for such waiver.

                Required Submissions Relating to Change Orders or Contract Modifications. A contractor shall submit cost and/or pricing data prior to the pricing of any change order or contract modification, including adjustments to contracts awarded by competitive sealed bidding, whether or not cost or pricing data was required in connection with the initial pricing of the contract, when the change or modification involves aggregate increases or aggregate decreases in costs plus applicable profits that are expected to exceed $100,000.

Exceptions. The submission of cost and/or pricing data relating to the pricing of a change order or contract modification is not required when:

(A)  Unrelated and separately priced adjustments for which cost or pricing data would not be required are consolidated for administrative convenience; or

(B)  It is determined in writing by the purchasing agent that the requirements of this section may be waived, and the determination states the reasons for such waiver.

                Certification Required. A contractor, actual or prospective, required to submit cost and/or pricing data in accordance with this section, shall certify that, to the best of its knowledge and belief, the cost or pricing data submitted was accurate, complete, and current as of a mutually specified date prior to the award of the contract or the pricing of the change order or contract modification.

                Price Adjustment Provision Required. Any contract award, change order, or contract modification under which the submission and certification of cost or pricing data are required shall contain a provision stating that the price to the City, including profit or fee, shall be adjusted to exclude any significant sums by which the City finds that such price was increased because the contractor-furnished cost or pricing data was inaccurate, incomplete, or not current as of the date agreed upon between the City and the contractor.

 

§27-17.  Cost Or Price Analysis
                A cost analysis or a price analysis, as appropriate, may be conducted by the Purchasing Agent and using department prior to award of the contract other than one awarded under §27-8 (Competitive Sealed Bidding). A written record of such cost analysis or price analysis shall be made a part of the contract file.

 

§27-18.  Bid And Performance Bonds
                Bid, payment, and performance bonds or other security may be requested for supply, service or construction contracts as the Purchasing Agent or head of a using department deems advisable to protect the City's interests, or required by law. Any such bonding requirements shall be set forth in the solicitation. Bid, payment, or performance bonds shall not be used as a substitute for a determination of a bidder or offeror's responsibility.

 

§27-19.  Types Of Contracts
                General Authority. Subject to the limitations of this section, any type of contract which is appropriate to the procurement and which will promote the best interests of the City may be used, provided that the use of a cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract is prohibited. A cost reimbursement contract may be used only when a determination is made in writing, that such contract is likely to be less costly to the City than any other type or that it is impracticable to obtain the supply, service, or construction item required except under such a contract.

                Multi-Term Contracts.

        (A)  Specified Period. Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for supplies or services may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interests of the City, provided, the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment and performance obligations, for succeeding fiscal periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds therefor.

        (B)  Determination Prior to Use. Prior to the utilization of a multi-term contract, it shall be determined in writing:

  (i)  That estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and are reasonably firm and continuing; and

  (ii)  That such a contract will serve the best interests of the City by encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economics in City procurement.

        (C)  Cancellation Due to Unavailability of Funds in Succeeding Fiscal Periods. When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be canceled and the contractor shall be reimbursed for the reasonable value of any non-recurring costs incurred but not amortized in the price of the supplies or services delivered under the contract. The cost of cancellation may be paid from any appropriations available for such purposes.

                Multiple Source Contracting.

        (A)  General. A multiple source award is an award of an indefinite quantity contract for one or more similar supplies or services to more than one bidder or offeror. The obligation to order the City's actual requirements is limited by the provision of Uniform Commercial Code Section 2-306(1).

        (B)  Limitations on Use. A multiple source award may be made when award to two or more bidders or offerors for similar products is necessary for adequate delivery, service, or product compatibility. Any multiple source award shall be made in accordance with the provisions of §27-8 (Competitive Sealed Bidding), §27-9 (Competitive Sealed Proposals), §27-11 (Small Purchases), and §27-13 (Emergency Procurements), as applicable. Multiple source awards shall not be made when a single award will meet the City's needs without sacrifice of economy or service. Awards shall not be made for the purpose of dividing the business, making available product or supplier selection to allow for user preference unrelated to utility or economy, or avoiding the resolution of tie bids. Any such awards shall be limited to the least number of suppliers necessary to meet the valid requirements.

        (C)  Contract and Solicitation Provisions. All eligible users of the contract shall be named in the solicitation, and it shall be mandatory that the actual requirements of such users that can be met under the contract be obtained in accordance with the contract, provided that:

  (i)  The City shall reserve the right to take bids separately if a particular quantity requirement arises which exceeds its normal requirement or an amount specified in the contract; and

  (ii)  The City shall reserve the right to take bids separately if the purchasing agent approves a finding that the supply or service available under the contract will not meet a nonrecurring special need of the City.

        (D)  Intent to Use. If a multiple source award is anticipated prior to issuing a solicitation, the City shall reserve the right to make such an award and the criteria for award shall be stated in the solicitation.

        (E)  Determination Required. The purchasing agent shall make a written determination setting forth the reason for a multiple source award, which shall be made a part of the procurement file.

 

§27-20.  Contract Clauses
                Contract Clauses. All City contracts for supplies, services, and construction shall include provisions necessary to define the responsibilities and rights of the parties to the contract. The purchasing agent may issue clauses appropriate for supply, service, or construction contracts, addressing among others the following subjects:

(A)  The unilateral right of the City to order in writing changes in the work within the scope of the contract;

(B)  The unilateral right of the City to order in writing temporary stopping of the work or delaying performance that does not alter the scope of the contract;

(C)  Variations occurring between estimated quantities of work in contract and actual quantities;

(D)  Defective pricing;

(E)  Liquidated damages;

(F)  Specified excuses for delay or nonperformance;

(G)  Termination of the contract for default;

(H)  Termination of the contract in whole or in part for the convenience of the City;

(I)  Suspension of work on a construction project ordered by the City; and

(J)  Site conditions differing from those indicated in the contract, or ordinarily encountered, except that a differing site conditions clause need not be included in a contract:

I.  When the contract is negotiated;

II.  When the contractor provides the site or design; or

III.  When the parties have otherwise agreed with respect to the risk of differing site conditions.

                Price Adjustments.

(A)  Adjustments in price resulting from the use of contract clauses required by Subsection 1. of this section shall be computed in one or more of the following ways:

I.  By agreement on a fixed price adjustment before commencement of the pertinent performance or as soon thereafter as practicable;

II.  By unit prices specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;

III. By the costs attributable to the events or situations under such clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;

IV.  In such other manner as the contracting parties may mutually agree; or

V.  In the absence of agreement by the parties, by a unilateral determination by the City of the costs attributable to the events or situations under such clauses with adjustment of profit or as computed by the City or as accounted for with reference to cost principles and subject to the provisions of §27-40 (Contract Claims).

(B)  A contractor shall be required to submit cost and/or pricing data if any adjustment in contract price is subject to the provisions of §27-16 (Cost or Pricing Data).

                Standard Clauses and Their Modification. The purchasing agent may establish standard contract clauses for use in City contracts. Any standard clauses may be varied, provided, that any variations are supported by a written determination that states the circumstances justifying such variations, and provided, that notice of any such material variation be stated in the invitation for bids or request for proposals. Contracts for public works shall include a provision for the maintenance of fair labor standards as required in Neb. R.R.S. 73-102.

 

§27-21.  Contract Administration
                A contract administration system designed to insure that a contractor is performing in accordance with the solicitation under which the contract was awarded, and the terms and conditions of the contract, shall be established and maintained.

 

§27-22.  Accounting System
                Except with respect to firm fixed-price contracts, no contract type shall be used unless it has been determined in writing by the purchasing agent that:

(A)  The proposed contractor's accounting system will permit timely development of all necessary cost data in the form required by the specific contract type contemplated; and

(B)  The proposed contractor's accounting system is adequate to allocate costs in accordance with generally accepted cost accounting principles.

 

§27-23.  Right To Inspect Plant
                The City may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant, place of business, or worksite of a contractor or subcontractor at any tier which is pertinent to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the City.

 

§27-24.  Right To Audit Records
                Audit of Cost or Pricing Data. The City may at reasonable times and places, audit the books and records of any contractor who has submitted cost or pricing data pursuant to §27-16 (Cost or Pricing Data) to the extent that such books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent to such cost or pricing data. Any person who receives a contract, change order, or contract modification for which cost or pricing data is required, shall maintain such books, documents, papers, and records that are pertinent to such cost or pricing data for three years from the date of final payment under the contract.

                Contract Audit. The City shall be entitled to audit the books and records of a contractor or a subcontractor at any tier under any negotiated contract or subcontract other than a firm fixed-price contract to the extent that such books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent to the performance of such contract or subcontract. Such books and records shall be maintained by the contractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the prime contract and by the subcontractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the subcontract.

 

§27-25.  Anticompetitive Practices
                When for any reason collusion or other anticompetitive practices are suspected among any bidders or offerors, a notice of the relevant facts shall be transmitted to the State Attorney General and the Hall County Attorney.

 

§27-26.  City Procurement Records
                Contract File. All determinations and other written records pertaining to the solicitation, award, or performance of a contract shall be maintained for the City in a contract file by the purchasing agent.

                Retention of Procurement Records. All procurement records shall be retained and disposed of by the City in accordance with records retention guidelines and schedules consistent with applicable state and federal law.

 

§27-27.  Specifications; Competition
                All specifications shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the purpose intended and encourage competition in satisfying the City's needs, and shall not be unduly restrictive. The policy enunciated in this section applies to all specifications including but not limited to, those prepared for the City by architects, engineers, designers, and draftsmen.

 

§27-28.  Specifications; Brand Name Or Equal
                Use. Brand name or equal specifications may be used when the purchasing agent determines in writing that any of the following circumstances exist:

(A)  No other design or performance specification or qualified products list is available;

(B)  Time does not permit the preparation of another form of purchase description, not including a brand name specification;

(C)  The nature of the product or the nature of the City's requirements makes use of a brand name or equal specification suitable for the procurement; or

(D)  Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the City's best interests.

                Designation of Several Brand Names. Brand name or equal specifications shall seek to designate three, or as many different brands as are practicable, shall include an "or equal" reference and shall further state that substantially equivalent products to those designated will be considered for award.

                Required Characteristics. Unless the purchasing agent determines in writing that the essential characteristics of the brand names included in the specifications are commonly known in the industry or trade, brand name or equal specifications shall include a description of the particular design, functional, or performance characteristics which are required.

                Nonrestrictive Use of Brand Name or Equal Specifications. Where a brand name or equal specification is used in a solicitation, the solicitation shall contain explanatory language that the use of a brand name is for the purpose of describing the standard of quality, performance, and characteristics desired and is not intended to limit or restrict competition.

 

§27-29.  Specifications; Brand Name
                Use. Since use of a brand name specification is restrictive of product competition, it may be used only when the purchasing agent makes a written determination that only the identified brand name item or items will satisfy the City's needs.

                Competition. The purchasing agent shall seek to identify sources from which the designated brand name item or items can be obtained and shall solicit such sources to achieve whatever degree of price competition is practicable. If only one source can supply the requirement, the procurement shall be made under §27-12 (Sole Source Procurement).

 

§27-30.  Construction Management
                The purchasing agent shall have discretion to select the appropriate method of construction contracting management for a particular project. In determining which method to use, the purchasing agent shall consider the City's requirements, its resources, and the potential contractor's capabilities. The purchasing agent shall execute, and include in the contract file a written statement setting forth the facts which led to the selection of a particular method of construction contracting management for each project.

 

§27-31.  Bid Security
                Requirement for Bid Security. Bid security shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for construction contracts when the price is estimated by the purchasing agent to exceed $100,000. Bid security shall be a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska, or the equivalent in cash, or otherwise supplied in a form satisfactory to the City. Nothing herein shall prevent the requirement of such bonds on construction contracts under $100,000 when the circumstances warrant.  Amount of Bid Security. Bid security shall be in an amount equal to at least 5% of the amount of the bid.

                Rejection of Bids for Noncompliance with Bid Security Requirements. When the invitation for bids requires security, noncompliance by a bidder requires that the bid be rejected unless it is determined that the bid fails to comply only in a nonsubstantial manner with the security requirements.

                Withdrawal of Bids. If a bidder is permitted to withdraw its bid before award as provided in §27-8 (Competitive Sealed Bidding), no action shall be had against the bidder or the bid security.

 

§27-32.  Performance And Payment Bonds
                When Required; Amounts. When a construction contract is awarded in excess of $25,000, the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the City and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract:

(A)  A performance bond satisfactory to the City, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the City, in an amount equal to 100% of the price specified in the contract; and

(B)  A payment bond satisfactory to the City, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the City, for the protection of all persons supplying labor and material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of the work provided for in the contract. The bond shall be in an amount equal to 100% of the price specified in the contract.

                Reduction of Bond Amounts. After ten (10) days written notice to the Mayor and City Council, the purchasing agent is authorized to reduce the amount of performance and payment bonds to 50% of the contract price for each bond when a written determination is made that it is in the best interests of the City to do so.

                Authority to Require Additional Bonds. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the City to require a performance bond or other security in addition to those bonds, or in circumstances other than specified in this section.

                Suits on Payment Bonds; Right to Institute. Unless otherwise authorized by law, any person who has furnished labor or material to the contractor or subcontractors for the work provided in the contract, for which a payment bond is furnished under this section, and who has not been paid in full within 90 days from the date on which that person performed the last of the labor or supplied the material, shall have the right to sue on the payment bond for any amount unpaid at the time the suit is instituted and to prosecute the action for the amount due that person. However, any person having a contract with a subcontractor of the contractor, but no express or implied contract with the contractor furnishing the payment bond, shall have a right of action upon the payment bond upon giving written notice to the contractor within 90 days from the date on which that person performed the last of the labor or supplied the material. That person shall state in the notice the amount claimed and the name of the party to whom the material was supplied or for whom the labor was performed. The notice shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to the contractor at any place the contractor maintains an office or conducts business.

                Suits on Payment Bonds; Where and When Brought. Unless otherwise authorized by law, every suit instituted upon a payment bond shall be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction for the county or district in which the construction contract was to be performed.

 

§27-33.  Copies Of Bond Forms
                Any person may request and obtain from the City a certified copy of a bond upon payment of the cost of reproduction of the bond and postage, if any. A certified copy of a bond shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, execution, and delivery of the original.

 

§27-34.  Fiscal Responsibility
                Every contract modification, change order, or contract price adjustment under a construction contract with the City in excess of $300 shall be subject to prior written certification by the head of the department responsible for the project or the contract, or other official responsible for monitoring and reporting upon the status of the costs of the total project budget or contract budget, as to the effect of the contract modification, change order, or adjustment in contract price on the total project budget or the total contract budget. In the event that the certification discloses a resulting increase in the total project budget and/or the total contract budget, the purchasing agent shall not execute or make such contract modification, change order, or adjustment in contract price unless sufficient funds have been appropriated therefor, or the scope of the project or contract is adjusted so as to permit the degree of completion that is feasible within the total project budget and/or total contract budget as it existed prior to the contract modification, change order, or adjustment in contract price under consideration; provided, however, that with respect to the validity, as to the contractor, of any executed contract modification, change order, or adjustment in contract price which the contractor has reasonably relied upon, it shall be presumed that there has been compliance with the provisions of this section.

 

§27-35.  Architects; Engineers; Surveyors
                Public Announcement. It is the policy of the City to announce publicly all requirements for architects, engineers, and land surveying services and to negotiate such contracts on the basis of demonstrated competence and qualifications at fair and reasonable prices. In the procurement of architect, engineer, and land surveying services, the purchasing agent shall request firms to submit a statement of qualifications and performance data.

                Selection Process. A selection committee composed of the purchasing agent, the director of public works and the head of a using agency in need of the architect, engineer, or land surveying services shall conduct discussions with no less than three firms regarding the proposed contract and the relative utility of alternative methods of approach for furnishing the required services and shall select from among them no less than three of the firms deemed most qualified to provide the required services. The selection shall be made in order of preference, based on criteria established and published by the selection committee.

                Negotiation. The purchasing agent shall negotiate a contract with the firm considered to be the most qualified for architect, engineer, or land surveying services at compensation which the purchasing agent determines in writing to be fair and reasonable to the City. In making this decision, the purchasing agent shall take into account the estimated value, the scope, the complexity, and the professional nature of the services to be rendered. Should the purchasing agent be unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the firm considered to be the most qualified at a price the purchasing agent determines to be fair and reasonable to the City, negotiations with that firm shall be formally terminated. The purchasing agent shall then undertake negotiations with the second most qualified firm. Failing accord with the second most qualified firm, the purchasing agent shall formally terminate negotiations. The purchasing agent shall then undertake negotiations with the third most qualified firm. Should the purchasing agent be unable to negotiate a contract at a fair and reasonable price with any of the selected firms, the selection committee shall select additional firms in order of their competence and qualifications, and the purchasing agent shall continue negotiations in accordance with this section until an agreement is reached.

 

§27-36.  Authority To Debar
                After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the purchasing agent is authorized to debar a person for cause from consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall be for a period of not more than three years. The purchasing agent is authorized to suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts if there is probable cause to believe that the person has engaged in any activity which might lead to debarment. The suspension shall be for a period not to exceed three months. The causes for debarment include:

(A)  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract;

(B)  Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects responsibility as a City contractor;

(C)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals;

(D)  Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the purchasing agent to be so serious as to justify debarment action:

I.  Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or

II.  A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment.

(E)  Any other cause the purchasing agent determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a City contractor, including debarment by another governmental entity for any cause listed in this chapter; or

(F)  For violation of the ethical standards set forth in Chapter 27, Article II.

 

§27-37.  Decision To Debar
                The purchasing agent shall issue a written decision to debar or suspend. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform the debarred or suspended person involved of its rights concerning judicial or administrative review. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred or suspended person.

 

§27-38.  Finality Of Decision
                A decision under §27-37 (Decision to Debar) shall be final and conclusive, unless the debarred or suspended person within 10 days after receipt of the decision takes an appeal to the city council or commences a timely action in court in accordance with applicable law.

 

§27-39.  Bid Protests
                Right to Protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the city council. Protestors are urged to seek resolution of their complaints initially with the purchasing agent. A protest with respect to an invitation for bids or request for proposals shall be submitted in writing prior to the opening of bids or the closing date of proposals, unless the aggrieved person did not know or reasonably would not have known of the facts giving rise to such protest prior to bid opening or the closing date for proposals. The protest shall be submitted within three calendar days after such aggrieved person knows or reasonably would have known of the facts giving rise thereto.

                Stay of Procurements During Protests. In the event of a timely protest under this section, the purchasing agent shall not proceed further with the solicitation or award of the contract until all administrative and judicial remedies have been exhausted or until the city council makes a determination on the record that the award of a contract without delay is necessary to protect substantial interests of the City.

                Entitlement to Costs. In addition to any other relief, when a protest is sustained and the protesting bidder or offeror should have been awarded the contract under the solicitation but is not, then the protesting bidder or offeror shall be entitled to the reasonable costs incurred in connection with the solicitation, including bid preparation costs other than attorney's fees.

 

§27-40.  Contract Claims
                Decision of the Purchasing Agent. All claims by a contractor against the City relating to a contract, except bid protests, shall be submitted in writing to the purchasing agent for a decision. The contractor may request a conference with the purchasing agent on the claim. Claims include, without limitation, disputes arising under a contract, and those based upon breach of contract, mistake, misrepresentation, or other cause for contract modification or recision.

                Notice to the Contractor of the Purchasing Agent's Decision. The decision of the purchasing agent shall be promptly issued in writing, and shall be immediately mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested or otherwise furnished to the contractor. The decision shall state the reasons for the decision reached.

                Finality of Purchasing Agent's Decision. The purchasing agent's decision shall be final and conclusive unless the contractor files a timely claim under Neb. R.R.S. 16-726.

                Failure to Render Timely Decision. If the purchasing agent does not issue a written decision regarding any contract controversy within 10 days after written request for a final decision, or within such longer period as may be agreed upon between the parties, then the aggrieved party may proceed as if an adverse decision had been received.

 

§27-41.  Authority To Settle Protests or Claims
                The purchasing agent is authorized to settle any protest regarding the solicitation or award of a City contract, or any claim arising out of the performance of a City contract, prior to an appeal to the city council or the commencement of an action in a court of competent jurisdiction.

 

§27-42.  Remedies For Violations
                Prior to Bid Opening or Closing Date for Receipt of Proposals. If prior to the bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the purchasing agent determines that a solicitation is in violation of federal, state, or municipal law, then the solicitation shall be canceled or revised to comply with applicable law.

                Prior to Award. If after bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the purchasing agent determines that a solicitation or a proposed award of a contract is in violation of federal, state, or municipal law, then the solicitation or proposed award shall be canceled.

                After Award. If, after an award, the purchasing agent determines that a solicitation or award of a contract was in violation of applicable law, then:

(A)  If the person awarded the contract has not acted fraudulently or in bad faith:

(I.)  The contract may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined that doing so is in the best interests of the City; or

(II.)  The contract may be terminated and the person awarded the contract shall be compensated for the actual costs reasonably incurred under the contract, plus a reasonable profit, prior to the termination; or

(B)  If the person awarded the contract has acted fraudulently or in bad faith the contract may be declared null and void or voidable, if such action is in the best interests of the City.

 

Article II. Ethics in Public Contracting
 

§27-43.  Criminal Penalties
                To the extent that violations of the ethical standards of conduct set forth in this article constitute violations of Nebraska or federal law, they shall be punishable as provided therein. Such penalties shall be in addition to the civil sanctions set forth in this part.

 

§27-44.  Employee Conflict Of Interest
                It shall be unethical for any City employee to participate directly or indirectly in a procurement contract when the City employee knows that:

(A)  The City employee or any member of the City employee's immediate family has a financial interest pertaining to the procurement contract; or

(B)  Any other person, business, or organization with whom the City employee or any member of a City employee's immediate family is negotiating or has an arrangement concerning prospective employment is involved in the procurement contract.

                A City employee or any member of a City employee's immediate family who holds a financial interest in a disclosed blind trust shall not be deemed to have a conflict of interest with regard to matters pertaining to that financial interest.

                The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Mayor, members of the City Council, and members of appointed boards and commissions of the City, provided the participating person:

(A)  Makes a declaration on the record of the governing body, board or commission responsible for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent of his or her interest prior to official consideration of the contract;

(B)  Does not vote on the matter of granting the contract, except that if the number of members of the governing body, board or commission declaring an interest in the contract would prevent the body with all members present from securing a quorum on the issue, then all members may vote on the matter; and

(C)  Does not act for the governing body, board or commission which is party to the contract as to inspection or performance under the contract in which he or she has an interest.

                If such participating person's parent, spouse, or child is an employee of the City, the participating person may vote on all issues of the contract which are generally applicable to (1) all employees or (2) all employees within a classification and do not single out his or her parent, spouse, or child for special action.

                Any contract entered into with such participating person shall be subject to applicable competitive bidding requirements and shall be fair and reasonable to the City.

                The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and selling of warrants and bonds of indebtedness of the City by a financial institution shall not be considered a contract for purposes of this section.

 

§27-45.  Gratuities And Kickbacks
                Gratuities. It shall be unethical for any person to offer, give, or agree to give any City employee or former City employee, or for any City employee or former City employee to solicit, demand, accept, or agree to accept from another person, a gratuity or an offer of employment in connection with any decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, or preparation of any part of a program requirement or a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity in any proceeding or application, request for ruling, determination, claim or controversy, or other particular matter, pertaining to any program requirement or a contract or subcontract, or to any solicitation or proposal therefor.

                Kickbacks. It shall be unethical for any payment, gratuity, or offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor or any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order.

                Contract Clause. The prohibition against gratuities and kickbacks prescribed in this section shall be conspicuously set forth in every contract and solicitation therefor.

 

§27-46.  Contingent Fees
                It shall be unethical for a person to be retained, or to retain a person, to solicit or secure a City contract upon an agreement or understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage or contingent fee, except for retention of bona fide employees or bona fide established commercial selling agencies for the purpose of securing business.

 

§27-47.  Contemporaneous Employment
                It shall be unethical for any City employee who is participating directly or indirectly in the procurement process to become or to be, while such a City employee, the employee of any person contracting with the governmental body by whom the employee is employed.

 


§27-48.  Waivers; Conflicts Of Interest
                The city council may grant a waiver from the employee conflict of interest provision (§27-44; Employee Conflict of Interest) or the contemporaneous employment provision (§27-47; Contemporaneous Employment) upon making a written determination that:

(A)  The contemporaneous employment or financial interest of the City employee has been publicly disclosed;

(B)  The City employee will be able to perform its procurement functions without actual or apparent bias or favoritism; and

(C)  The award will be in the best interests of the City.

 

§27-49.  Confidential Information
                It shall be unethical for any employee or former employee knowingly to use confidential information for actual or anticipated personal gain, or for the actual or anticipated personal gain of any other person.

 

§27-50.  Sanctions
                Employees. The mayor may impose any one or more of the following sanctions on a City employee for violations of the ethical standards in this article:

(A)  Oral or written warnings or reprimands;

(B)  Suspension with or without pay for specified periods of time; or

(C)  Termination of employment.

                Nonemployees. The city council may impose any one or more of the following sanctions on a nonemployee for violations of the ethical standards:

(A)  Written warnings or reprimands;

(B)  Termination of contracts; or

(C)  Debarment or suspension as provided in §27-36 (Authority to Debar).

 

§27-51.  Recovery Of Value Upon Breach
                General Provisions. The value of anything transferred or received in breach of the ethical standards of this chapter by a City employee or a nonemployee may be recovered from both City employee and nonemployee.

                Recovery of Kickbacks by the City. Upon a showing that a subcontractor made a kickback to a prime contractor or a higher tier subcontractor in connection with the award of a subcontract or order thereunder, it shall be conclusively presumed that the amount thereof was included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the City and will be recoverable hereunder from the recipient. In addition, that amount may also be recovered from the subcontractor making such kickbacks. Recovery from one offending party shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties.

 

 

Article III. Contracts Funded with Federal Funds
 

§27-52.  Contractor Records
                If a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, then the contract shall include provisions:

(A)  Requiring the contractor and subcontractors at any tier to maintain for three years from the date of final payment under the contract all books, documents, papers, and records pertinent to the contract; and

(B)  Requiring the contractor and subcontractor at any tier to provide to the City, the federal grantor agency, the Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their duly authorized representatives access to such books, documents, papers, and records for the purposes of examining, auditing, and copying them.

 

§27-53.  Patents
                If a contract involving research and development, experimental, or demonstration work is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, then the contract shall include provisions:

(A)  Giving notice to the contractor of the applicable grantor agency requirements and regulations concerning reporting of, and rights to any discovery or invention arising out of the contract; and

(B)  Requiring a contractor to include a similar provision in all subcontracts involving research and development, experimental, or demonstration work.

 

§27-54.  Copyrights
                If a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, then the contract shall include a provision giving the contractor notice of the applicable regulations concerning the rights of the United States to any plans, drawings, specifications, computer programs, technical reports, operating manuals, and similar work products developed and paid for under the contract.

 

§27-55.  Federal Policy Requirements
                If the contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, and the contract is subject to one or more federal public policy requirements, such as:

(A)  Equal employment opportunity;
(B)  Fair labor standards;
(C)  Energy conservation;
(D)  Environmental protection; or

(E)  Other similar socioeconomic programs, then, the purchasing agent shall include contract provisions giving the contractor notice of these requirements, and where appropriate, including in those contract provisions the requirement that the contractor give a similar notice to all of its subcontractors.

 

§27-56.  Buy American
                If a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, then the City shall adhere to the appropriate "Buy American" requirements of the federal agency providing the assistance.

 

§27-57.  Energy Conservation
                If a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, then the City's solicitation shall seek to promote energy conservation and shall comply with any mandatory standards and policies which are contained in the state energy conservation plan issued in compliance with the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (Public Law 94-163).

 

§27-58.  Favored Business Enterprises
                Expand Participation. If a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, the purchasing agent shall take affirmative steps to assure that small, women-owned, and minority businesses are utilized when possible as sources of supplies, services, and construction items.

                Examples of Affirmative Steps. Affirmative steps to be taken shall include:

(A)  Including qualified small, women-owned, and minority businesses on solicitation lists;

(B)  Assuring that small, women-owned, and minority businesses are solicited whenever they are potential sources;

(C)  When economically feasible, dividing total requirements into smaller tasks or quantities so as to permit maximum small, women-owned, and minority business participation;

(D)  Where the requirement permits, establishing delivery schedules which will encourage participation by small, women-owned, and minority business; and

(E)  Using the services and assistance of the Small Business Administration, or the Office of Minority Business Enterprise of the Department of Commerce, as required.

                Pass-Through to Subcontracts. A contractor awarded a federally funded contract shall take the affirmative steps, as listed in this section, in awarding its subcontracts.

 

§27-59.  Labor Surplus Area Business
                If a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, the purchasing agent is encouraged to procure supplies, services, and construction items from businesses located in labor surplus areas.

 

 

Article IV. Miscellaneous Expenditure Act
 

§27-60.  Authorized Expenditures
                The mayor and city council shall be authorized to approve the expenditure of funds in accordance with the Local Government Miscellaneous Expenditure Act, subject to the following:

(A) Authorized expenses may include:

  (i) Registration costs, tuition costs, fees, or charges;

  (ii) Mileage at the then current rate allowed by Neb. R.R.S. §81-1176, or actual travel expense if travel is by commercial or charter means.  When travel mode is optional, the lower of the reimbursable cost is authorized; and

  (iii) Meals and incidental (M&I) expense at the then current rate of the applicable federal per diem for M&I; and

  (iv) When travel is a partial day, the federal per diem rate for meals will apply at the rate of 20% for breakfast, 30% for lunch and 50% for supper.  Departures must occur prior to 6:00 a.m. for breakfast and return must be after 8:00 p.m. for supper; and

  (v)Lodging at a rate not exceeding the then current applicable federal per diem rate unless lodging is at a location hosting the function in which case the actual lodging rate is allowed but no additional transportation costs shall be paid for commuting during the lodging stay.

(B) Authorized expenditures shall not include expenditures for meals of city council members provided while attending a public meeting of the city council unless such meeting is a joint meeting with one or more other governing bodies.

(C) Authorized expenditures shall not include expenditures for any expenses incurred by a spouse of an elected or appointed official, employee, or volunteer unless the spouse is also an elected or appointed official, employee, or volunteer of the City.

 

§27-61.  Beverages; Service Recognition
The expenditure of public funds is hereby authorized for the following purposes:

(A) Nonalcoholic beverages provided to individuals attending public meetings of the city council.

(B) Nonalcoholic beverages and meals:

  (i) Provided for any individuals while performing or immediately after performing relief, assistance, or support activities in emergency situations, including but not limited to, tornado, severe storm, fire or accident;

  (ii) Provided for any volunteers during or immediately following their participation in any activity approved by the city council, including but not limited to, mowing parks, picking up litter, removing graffiti, or snow removal;

  (iii) Provided at one recognition dinner each year held for elected and appointed officials, employees, or volunteers. The maximum cost per person for such dinner shall be nineteen dollars ($19.00). The annual recognition dinner may be held separately for employees of each department or separately for volunteers, or any of them in combination.

(C) Plaques, certificates of achievement, or items of value awarded to elected or appointed officials, employees, or volunteers, including persons serving on local government boards or commissions, subject to the following dollar limit on value:

                        Volunteer Service                                                             $25.00
                        Board, Commission, Council Service                         $100.00
                        Award Ceremony/Farewell Tribute                               $50.00
                        1 year employment                                                              0.00 plus service pin
                        5 years employment                                                            0.00 plus service pin/clip
                        10 years employment                                                        50.00 plus service pin
                        15 years employment                                                        75.00 plus service pin
                        20 years employment                                                     100.00 plus service pin
                        25 years employment                                                     125.00 plus service pin
                        30 years employment                                                     150.00
                        35 or more years employment                                       175.00

Added by Ord. No. 7978, 1-24-1994

 

§27-62.  Business Travel
The following procedures shall be used for business travel:

(A) Transportation Method

I.  When travel is by air, advance ticketing by purchase order will be utilized whenever possible to obtain the lowest available coach fare.

II.  All refunds, travel coupons, and other promotions in connection with business travel shall be returned to the City.

III.  When ground travel is required, City vehicles shall be used whenever possible.

(B) Lodging

I.  Reimbursement for non-commercial lodging is not permitted.

II.  When personnel are accompanied by non-City personnel, only the costs attributed to the City personnel are reimbursable.

(C) Expenses

I.  The following expenses are reimbursable upon affidavit of expenditure and receipts are not required: parking fees; taxi and bus fares; and highway tolls.

II.  The following expenses are reimbursable upon submission of paid receipts:

(a)  registration, tuition, and fees for official functions related to the travel;
(b)  supplies or equipment required for travel or training;
(c)  rental cars; and
(d)  traveler's checks fees.

III.  The following expenses are not reimbursable:

(a)  entertainment, including television rentals;
(b)  personal expenses, e.g. hygiene items, magazines;
(c)  travel insurance; and
(d)  alcoholic beverages.

(D) Travel Advances. Travel advances are not authorized, except under special circumstances with written prior approval of the finance director. The use of credit cards and advance purchase order payment of lodging and transportation expenses are encouraged.

(E) Expense Claims.  Personnel on authorized travel must submit expense claims to the Finance Department immediately upon return, but not later than four (4) work days after return to duty. All receipts, unexpended City funds and funds due the City, shall be returned at that time. All expenses (including prepaid expenses) shall be summarized and accounted for.

 

Article V. Cooperative Purchasing

§27-62. Nebraska State Contract List

City departments are not required to advertise for bids when purchasing items from the Nebraska State Contract list as all statutory bidding requirements have been met in approving this list.

 

§27-63. Cooperative Purchasing Agreements

                City departments will be allowed to use local, state or national Cooperative Purchasing Agreements.

The Chief Purchasing Agent shall review all agreements to determine that they meet statutory bidding requirements before approval by the City Council.

The City Council shall approve all said agreements prior to use.

Use of Cooperative Purchasing will preclude the requirement of advertising for bids.

Added by Ordinance No. 9431, effective 6-18-2013

 

 
CHAPTER 28

RAILROADS

 

§28-1.  Warning Signals
                All vehicles entering or crossing railroad crossings on which stop signs are erected shall come to a full stop as near the right-of-way line as possible before entering or crossing such railroad crossing, and regardless of direction, shall give the right-of-way to trains upon the tracks to be crossed. All vehicles entering or crossing railroad crossings on which are installed traffic signals or traffic lights shall come to a stop as indicated by the traffic signal or traffic light. No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.

 

§28-2.  Injuring Signal Devices
                It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, mar, break, or interfere in any manner with any gates, bars, gongs, lights, signals, or any other devices installed at any railroad crossing for the purpose of giving warning of the approach of an engine or cars.

 

§28-3.  Signal Equipment Required
                It shall be the duty of the Union Pacific Railroad Company to erect, establish, and continuously maintain at the crossings of its railroad at Walnut, Pine, Oak, and Elm Streets in Grand Island, Nebraska, flashing light signals, complete with bells and short arm gates, said gates to cover one-half of the traveled thoroughfare, with appropriate time-out sections or circuits.

 

§28-4.  Trains Obstructing Streets
            It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or corporation, its agents, servants, or employees to permit a train of cars or any car or engines to stand or remain upon any public street of the City in such a manner as to obstruct travel or passage of vehicles or prevent or obstruct the use of the streets or sidewalks by pedestrians for the space of more than five minutes at any one time.

                Any officer, employee, or agent of any railroad corporation or company who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, that in the case of a wreck or other unforeseen or unavoidable accident which shall cause any street to be obstructed, the mayor may allow a reasonable time to such corporation or company to clear the same.

 

§28-5.  Boarding Train When In Motion
                It shall be unlawful for any person to board or enter on to any train, engine, or car in motion, or for any person to loiter about any train, car, depot or depot grounds, or tracks of any railway company within the City; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed as to interfere with the rights of any person holding a railroad ticket, or any person being at such place on business and for business purposes only, or employees of any railway company.

 


 
CHAPTER 29

RESTAURANTS AND FOOD SERVICE

 

§29-1.  Nebraska Pure Food Act Enforcement
The Central District Health Department shall enforce the Nebraska Pure Food Act, together with any amendments thereto as may be made from time to time, in the inspection of food service establishments, the issuance, suspension and revocation of permits to operate food service establishments, the collection of fees for food service establishment permits, and the prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink.  One copy of the Nebraska Pure Food Act, and all supplements or amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the city clerk as provided by law.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 

§29-2.  Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

Bakery.  An establishment whose primary operation is the manufacture and sale of baked goods, i.e. donuts, cakes, and breads.

Cafeteria. A self service establishment with little to no table service in an education institution.

Caterer. A person who transports ready to eat food from a permitted food service establishment to another location or building for service on a per event basis for hire, and does not include a temporary food service event.

Commissary.  A food establishment where food, food containers, or food supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged, or stored for use in mobile food units, pushcarts, or vending machines.

Food Establishment.  An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption. The term does not include:

(1) An establishment or vending machine operation that offers only prepackaged soft drinks, carbonated or noncarbonated, that do not contain a primary dairy product or dairy ingredient base or that contain less than fifteen percent natural fruit or vegetable juice; candy; chewing gum; potato or corn chips; pretzels; cheese puffs and curls; crackers; popped popcorn; nuts and edible seeds; and cookies, cake, pies, and other pastries, that are not potentially hazardous.

(2) A produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fruits and vegetables.

(3) A food processing plant.

(4) A salvage operation.

(5) A private home where food is prepared or served for personal use, a small day care in the home, or a hunting lodge, guest ranch, or other operation where no more than ten paying guests eat meals in the home.

(6) A private home or other area where food that is not potentially hazardous is prepared: (a) for sale or service at a function as a religious, charitable, or fraternal organization's bake sale or similar function; or (b) for sale directly to the consumer at a farmers market if the consumer is informed by a clearly visible placard at the sale location that the food was prepared in a kitchen that is not subject to regulation and inspection by the regulatory authority.

(7) The location where food prepared by a caterer is served so long as the caterer only minimally handles the food at the serving location.

(8) A pharmacy as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. §71-425 if the pharmacy only sells prepackaged pharmaceutical, medicinal, or health supplement foods that are not potentially hazardous or foods described in subsection (1) of this section.

Food Processing Plant.  A commercial operation that manufactures, packages, labels, or stores food for human consumption and does not provide food directly to the consumer.

Licensed Beverage Establishment.  An establishment that serves alcoholic beverages and may or may not provide limited food service, e.g. frozen prepackaged sandwiches, frozen pizza, hot dogs, popcorn.  Any item not requiring preparation on site.

Limited Food Service Establishment.  An establishment that serves or otherwise provides only snack items or commercially prepared and wrapped foods that require little or no preparation.

Mobile Food Unit or Pushcart.  A vehicle mounted food establishment designed to be readily movable that returns to a commissary daily for clean up and service, unless self-contained.

Nonprofit Organization. An organization holding a certificate of federal tax exemption under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code or an organization that conducts its major activities for charitable or community betterment purposes.

Retail Food Store.  Any store, location or place of business occupied or used for the sale at retail to the public of groceries, fruits, vegetables, materials for human consumption or articles ordinarily and commonly sold from a grocery, fruit or vegetable store or stand not coming within the definition of the term “restaurant,” the term “milk,” the term “frozen dessert,” or the term “meat.”

Seasonal Food Service.  The act of selling or offering for sale food items on a seasonal basis, for a period of six months or less, at a concession stand, hot dog stand, ice cream truck, etc. 

Separate Facility: Additional facility types operating within the scope of a permitted establishment.

Temporary Food Establishment.  A food establishment that operates for a period of no more than three (3) consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9046, effective 6-7-2006

Amended by Ordinance No. 9160, effective 4-15-2008

 

§29-3.  Inconsistencies
                If there is an inconsistency between the Nebraska Pure Food Act and this chapter, the requirements of this chapter shall control except where pre-empted.

 

§29-4.  Permit; Required
                It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment without first having obtained a permit from the Central District Health Department. More than one type of permit may be required in one establishment.  Permits are issued based on the type of operations conducted within an establishment. The permit shall be displayed at the place of business at all times.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005
Amended by Ordinance No. 9046, effective 6-7-2006

 

§29-5.  Annual Permits; Types; When Issued; Term
                The following permits shall be issued on an annual basis on May 1 of each year and shall be valid until April 30, regardless of when issued:

Bakery Permit

Cafeteria Permit

Catering Permit

Food and Drink Service Permit

Food Manufacturing/Warehouse/Storage Permit

Licensed Beverage Establishment (Drink Only) Permit

Limited Food Permit

Mobile Food Unit/Pushcart Permit

Retail Food Permit

Separate Facility Permit

Application for all permits shall be made prior to the operation of any food establishment.  Permits shall be non-transferable.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9046, effective 6-7-2006

Amended by Ordinance No. 9160, effective 4-15-2008

 

§29-6.  Temporary Permit; Types; When Issued; Term
                The following permits shall be issued on a temporary basis pursuant to this chapter and shall be issued for the day or days specified in the application upon payment of the applicable permit fee.

Temporary Food Service Permit

Seasonal Food Permit

                Applications involving three or fewer vendors require a one (1) week application processing time.

                Renewals of a temporary permit shall be permitted, however no more than three (3) renewals will be allowed within a calendar year.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9046, effective 6-7-2006

 

§29-7.  Inspections
                All food establishments must be inspected by an authorized representative of the Central District Health Department, or its designated representative,  prior to obtaining a permit pursuant to this chapter.  Inspections of food establishments thereafter shall be conducted periodically by the Central District Health Department.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 

§29-8.  Fees

Except as otherwise provided by §29-9, any person applying for an annual permit under the provisions of this chapter shall annually pay a permit fee established and adopted by the Board of Health.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 

§29-9.  Proration of Permit Fee
                Any applicant applying for an annual permit after November 1 of the license year under the provisions of Section 29-5 of this chapter, shall be required to pay only one-half of the applicable annual fee.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9160, effective 4-15-2008

 

§29-10.  Fees; To Whom Paid
                All permit fees paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be paid to the Central District Health Department.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 

§29-11.  Delinquent Permit Fee
                Renewal of the annual permits identified in this chapter shall be made prior to the expiration of the current permit.  Permit fees for annual renewals shall be delinquent if the payment has not been received by the Central District Health Department by May 15 for the permits identified in Section 29-5.  Establishments shall be assessed a delinquent food permit fee established by the Board of Health if the permits are not paid by these dates.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9160, effective 4-15-2008

 

§29-12.  Penalty Fee
                A fee established and adopted by the Board of Health will be assessed for operating a food service establishment without a permit, and each day of operation shall be considered a separate offense.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 

§29-13.  Reinstatement Fee
                Any person whose permit shall be temporarily suspended under any provision of this chapter shall pay a reinstatement fee established and adopted by the Board of Health before such permit is reinstated. Reinstatement shall not be effective until such reinstatement fee has been paid.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 

§29-14.  Temporary Food Sales by Nonprofit Organizations

                The following operations do not require a permit:

                (1)  Bake sales not including potentially hazardous food.

                (2)  Sales of manufactured, prepackaged food prepared in an approved food preparation facility except potentially hazardous food.

                (3)  Food service limited to the members and guests of the organization.

                (4)  Food service by an approved catering operation.

                (5)  Food service on the organization’s own premises or at a location where a permanent food service facility is located and used by said organization. Permanent food service shall mean a kitchen facility located at a church, school, meeting hall, or other place of public assembly that is specifically equipped for food service to large numbers of people.

Nonprofit organizations that sell food to the public at a location where there is no permanent food service facility shall obtain a temporary food service permit.  Exempted operations shall not be relieved of any other obligation to provide, store, hold, and serve food under safe and sanitary conditions.

Adopted by Ordinance No. 9160, effective 4-15-2008


§29-15.  Reserved
§29-16.  Reserved

 

§29-17.  Building Plans
                A copy of all building plans for new construction and/or remodeling projects for any food establishment covered by Chapter 29 of the Grand Island City Code shall be submitted to the Central District Health Department prior to the commencement of such work.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8960, effective 3-9-2005

 

§29-18.  Homestyle Equipment Prohibited
                Commencing May 1, 1998, or in the case of existing restaurants, at the time of a transfer of  ownership, the replacement or acquisition of equipment, or the commencement of any remodeling project requiring the permit holder or its landlord to obtain a building permit, commercial equipment will be recommended for use in food service establishments.  It is recommended that all equipment  be designed for commercial use, and approved by the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF), or its equivalent.

 

§29-19.  Catering Operations
                All catering operations must be conducted from commercially licensed facilities.  Catering from private residences or dwelling units is prohibited unless the catering operation is conducted in a separate and distinct location from the normal living quarters of a residential dwelling.

 

CHAPTER 30

SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL

 

Article I. Generally

 

§30-1.  Definitions 
The definitions of certain words and phrases used in this chapter shall be as follows:

               Act shall mean the Clean Water Act of 1977 (PL 95-217), and any amendments thereto, as well as any guidelines, limitations, and standards promulgated by EPA, pursuant to the Act.

               Ammonia shall mean the chemical combination of hydrogen and nitrogen occurring in nature expressed as NH3, NH2, or any of its derivatives as contained in the wastewater flow.

               BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter by weight. BOD shall be determined by standard methods as hereinafter defined.

               Biodegradable Oils and Grease shall mean fats, oils, and greases of animal or vegetable origin contained in the wastewater flow.

               Building Sewer shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the lateral sewer. The building sewer shall extend two feet outside the building wall.

               Chloride shall mean the anion CL– (Negative Charge at top of CL)

               City shall mean the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

               Compatible Wastes shall mean wastes containing pollutants for which the water pollution control plant was basically designed to treat and which are identified in the NPDES permit that is applicable to this treatment plant.

               Composite shall mean the makeup of a number of individual samples, so taken as to represent the nature of wastewater or industrial wastes.

               Constituents shall mean the combination of particles, chemicals, or conditions which exist in industrial wastes.

               Conductivity shall mean the measure of the ability of an aqueous solution to carry an electric charge

               Cooling Water shall mean the cleaned wastewaters discharged from any system of heat transfer such as condensation, air conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration.

               Department shall mean the City's Department of Public Works.

               Director shall mean the Director of the Department of Public Works or his or her authorized representative.

               EPA shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

               ICR shall mean industrial cost recovery.

               Industrial Plant shall mean any facility which discharges industrial wastes as defined in this ordinance.

               Industrial User shall mean:

(A) any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of the City's treatment works which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary waste, or a volume of process waste, or combined process and sanitary waste, equivalent to 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary waste and which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual under Divisions A, B, D, E, and I; or

(B) any nongovernmental user of the City's treatment works which discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works.

         Industrial Wastes shall mean the liquid wastes resulting from the processes employed in industrial, manufacturing, trade or business establishments, as distinct from domestic wastes.

         Lateral Sewer shall mean the sanitary sewer that extends from the building sewer to the public sanitary sewer system.

               Major Contributing Industry shall mean an industrial user that:

(A) has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day; or

(B) has a waste strength greater than 5 percent of the plant design capacity; or

(C) has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts; or

(D) is found to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the water pollution control plant, or upon the quality of the plant effluent.

        mg/L shall mean milligrams per liter.

        Natural Outlet shall mean any natural outlet extending to a water course, pond, or other body of surface or groundwater.

        Normal Strength Wastewater shall mean wastewater with pollutant strength values not exceeding the following:

                              TKN..............................................................................................................    30mg/L
                              Biochemical Oxygen Demand...................................................................... 250 mg/L
                              Hydrogen Sulfide..........................................................................................      0mg/L
                              Suspended Solids........................................................................................... 250 mg/L
                              Biodegradable Oils and Grease..................................................................... 100 mg/L
                              Chloride……………………………………………………………………. 230 mg/L
                              Nitrate………………………………………………………………………   25 mg/L

                                Total Nitrogen…………………………………………………………….....   25 mg/L
Where the nature of the wastewater does not permit BOD determination, COD shall be substituted according to the relation BOD = (K) (COD), where "K" is a constant to be determined by the Department.

               NPDES Permit shall mean the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit as established by the Act. All municipalities, industries, and commercial enterprises that discharge to surface watercourses are required to have NPDES permits approved by EPA and in Nebraska by the Department of Environmental Quality.

               Owner shall have the same meaning as Person defined in this section.

               Planning Area shall mean the Grand Island planning area as adopted by the Regional Planning Commission.

               Person or Owner shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, developer, corporation, or group.

               pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

               Pollution shall mean the placing of any noxious or deleterious substance in any waters of the City in quantities which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or aquatic life, or property, or unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation.

               Pretreatment shall mean the application of physical, chemical and biological processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in or alter the nature of the pollutant properties in a wastewater prior to discharge into a sanitary sewer.

               Public Sewer shall mean the sanitary and/or storm sewers owned by the people of Grand Island and controlled and maintained by the Department of Public Works.

               Residential Strength Wastewater shall mean wastewater with pollutant strength values which average 250 mg/L of BOD and 250 mg/L of SS.

               Sanitary Sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sanitary wastewater and industrial wastes and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.

               Sanitary Sewerage System shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, and transporting wastewater to the water pollution control plant.

               Sanitary Wastes or Wastewater shall mean the water carried wastes discharged from building sewers by reason of human occupancy.

               Shall is mandatory; May is permissive.

               Standard Methods shall mean those procedures or methods established by the latest edition of the "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association and the American Water Works Association.

               Storm Sewer or Storm Drain shall mean a sewer which carries storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters and drainage, but which excludes sanitary wastewater and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.

               Suspended Solids (SS) shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L).

               Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN)  shall mean the sum of organic nitrogen, ammonia (NH3), and ammonium  (NH4+)

               Total Sulfides  shall mean the chemical combination of dissolved hydrogen sulfide gas (H2S); dissolved ionic sulfide in the form of HS- and S-2 and acid-soluble metallic sulfide present in suspended matter

               Toxic shall mean constituents of wastes which adversely affect the organisms involved in wastewater treatment.

               Unpolluted Water or Drainage shall mean water to which no pollutants have been added, either intentionally or accidentally.

               Wastewater Treatment Facility shall mean the wastewater treatment facility owned and operated by the City for the benefit of all persons located within the City's planning area.

               Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.

               Wastewater shall mean the liquid and water carried domestic or industrial wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into or permitted to enter the City's treatment works.

               Wastewater Treatment Works shall mean the sanitary sewers, pumping, and other equipment and their appurtenances, and other facilities which are an integral part of the wastewater collection and treatment processes and treatment residue disposal system.

 

§30-2.  Supervision of Sewers and Drains 
                The director shall control and supervise the construction, repair, and maintenance of all sewers and drainage systems in the planning area, whether the sewers are publicly or privately owned.

 

§30-3.  Wastewater Treatment Facility  
                The City may continue operating the existing water pollution control plant and may enlarge or expand the plant from time to time. The City may also construct other similar plants and employ other methods of treating wastewater sufficiently to comply with all applicable federal and state regulations.

 

§30-4.  Authority to Enter Private Property 
                The director and other duly authorized employees of the Department bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties to which a proper easement is on record for the purpose of surveying, inspection, maintenance, operation, repair, and reconstruction of any portion of the sanitary and storm sewer systems under the management of the Department subject to the terms of the easement.

 

§30-5.  Violation Notices 
                The Department shall have authority to serve persons discharging in violation of this ordinance with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. No person may continue discharging in violation of this ordinance beyond the time limit provided in the notice.

 

§30-6.  Damage to Wastewater Treatment Works 
                No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with, any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the wastewater treatment works. Any person violating this provision shall be punished according to law.

  

Article II. Sewer and Drainage Districts

 

§30-7.  Establishment 
                The City may by ordinance divide the area within the planning area into suitable districts for the purpose of establishing sewer and drainage systems.

 

§30-8.  Levy of Special Taxes or Assessments 
                The City may by ordinance levy special taxes or assessments for the purpose of constructing or extending public sewers. The City may provide for the payment of the construction costs by annual installments for the number of years stated in the ordinances. The taxes or assessments levied upon the real estate located within the sewer district in which the sewers are to be constructed shall be to the extent such property is benefitted.

 

§30-9.  Sewer District Bonds 
                The City may by ordinance issue bonds designated as "District Sewer Bonds of District No. . . ". The City may establish the bond repayment period and interest rates and levy an assessment against the property owners within the district to provide funds for the annual repayment of the bonds and interest. In the event the levy assessment shall be insufficient to pay the bond and interest payments for any cause, the City shall make a relevy to pay such deficiency.

 

Article III. Construction of Public, Private Sewer Mains by Other Persons

 

§30-10.  Connection of New Buildings 
                Any new buildings located within 200 feet of a public sanitary sewer main shall be required to connect to it.

 

§30-11.  Connection Upon Failure of Private Sewage System 
                Any existing buildings located within 200 feet of a public sanitary sewer main shall be required to connect to it upon failure of the private septic disposal system serving the building.  An interceptor does not qualify as a sanitary sewer main.  An interceptor is defined as a primary transport line usually larger than 15”.

 

§30-12.  Sewers to Meet Department Standards 
                The design and construction of all sanitary sewers connected, either directly or indirectly, to the existing sanitary sewer system shall meet all standards and specifications established by the Department.

                Private sewer mains shall comply with adopted model plumbing codes and be constructed by licensed plumbing contractors.

 

§30-13.  Plans Signed by Engineer 
                All sewer construction plans shall bear the signature and seal of the registered professional engineer who has prepared them.

 

§30-14.  Cost to Review Plans 
                The Department may charge to review plans submitted by persons proposing to construct sewers in the planning area. The charge shall be at a rate per hour established and published from time to time by the Department.

 

§30-15.  Plans Submitted to State 
                Plans requiring the approval of the State Department of Environmental Quality will be submitted to them by the Director following his or her approval of the plans.

 

§30-16.  Construction Permit 
                The property owner, owner's agent or contractor, shall obtain a construction permit from the director after the engineering reports, plans, and specifications have been approved by the director, and before any sewer construction work has started.

 

§30-17.  Workmanship and Materials 
                All workmanship and materials shall comply fully with the requirements of the approved plans and specifications. If at any time within one year after the date of the final inspection any defect should appear, which in the opinion of the director is due to inferior materials or workmanship, the contractor shall do whatever is necessary to remedy the defects at no cost to the City. The Department will notify the contractor in writing of the defects and repairs to be made. If the contractor fails to begin repairs within ten days, the Department may cause the defects to be remedied and charge the cost and expense involved to the contractor or contractor's surety. The contractor's surety shall not be relieved until the defects or repairs are corrected and approved and a written release is furnished the surety by the Department.

 

§30-18.  Sewer Inspection and Approval 
                The director shall investigate and approve or reject the laying of all sewers and drains. The director shall have the right to enter property containing sewers or drains at all reasonable hours for inspection and investigation purposes.

 

§30-19.  Certificate of Inspection 
                No architect, owner, agent, or contractor shall accept any sewer laying or drain laying of any description prior to the issuance of a certificate of inspection and approval by the director.

 

§30-20.  Conforming Plans 
                Before sewers which are constructed by others and connected to the City's sanitary sewerage system will be accepted, plans that conform to construction records must be presented to the Department. Data shown on the plans shall be as specified by the Department.

 

Article IV. Lateral Sewers

 

§30-21.  Owner Responsibilities 
                All costs and expense associated with the installation and connection of lateral sewers shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly result from installing lateral sewers.

                Lateral sewers shall be connected, as required by Chapter 30, Article III; to a public sewer system where available or a private sewer system in accordance with adopted model plumbing code and State of Nebraska regulations.

 

§30-22.  Lateral Sewer to Serve Each Building 
                One sewer tap shall be provided for every tract or parcel of land, except, upon written request to the director or the administrative authority for an exception.

 

§30-23.  Prohibited Connections 
                No person shall connect interior or exterior roof downspouts, interior or exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a lateral sewer or a building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.

                The Public Works Director may inspect or cause to be inspected any residential, commercial and/or industrial facility for prohibited connections at any reasonable time.

                Any cross-connection between a potable water supply and a sanitary sewer shall be prohibited.

 

 §30-24.  Connection Regulations 
                The connection of any lateral sewer into the public sanitary sewer system shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. All such connections shall be made gas tight and water tight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation.

 

§30-25.  Construction Regulations 
                The kind and size of materials, slope and alignment of a lateral sewer, and the methods used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the City.

 

§30-26.  Reserved

 

§30-27.  On-Site Requirements 
                All excavations for lateral sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work, shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the director.

 

Article V. Connecting to Existing Public Sewers

 

§30-28.  Connections by Licensed Plumbers 
                No person shall make any opening in, addition to, alterations of, connections with, or tap any public sewer or associated appurtenances unless they are a licensed plumber and have complied with all the conditions and requirements of the City.

 

§30-29.  Permit Required 
                Before connecting with, tapping, modifying, altering or repairing any public sewer in the City a plumber shall first obtain a written permit from the director. The permit shall be posted upon the premises at all times during the progress of the work.

 

§30-30.  Applications for Permits 
                Applications for permits to connect, tap, construct, modify or make attachments to public sewers shall be made to the director upon forms provided by the City. Such applications shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule to cover the cost of inspection, recording, and other expenses. The application shall show the exact location of the proposed work, and when requested by the director, the plumber shall provide plans or specifications of the proposed work. When required, an application shall be on file with the director twenty-four hours before the issuance of a permit. If work is commenced prior to application for the permit, an investigation fee in addition to the permit fee in the same amount as the permit fee shall be assessed. Each permit shall expire six (6) months from date of issuance.

 

§30-31.  Connections When Property Not Assessed 
                No person shall connect with or tap any sanitary or storm sewer in the City when the property to be served has not been assessed for lateral services. In this event, no plumber or other person shall make any connection with or tap any sewer, nor shall the director grant a connection permit until the owner of the property to be served or the person desiring such connection first makes formal application to the director for permission to tap or connect with the public sewers, and complies with the conditions and requirements of the City which may include the payment of an equitable amount for lateral service. The director reserves the right to refuse to grant a permit to any person who shall desire to connect with the public sewers, where the property to be served has not been assessed for lateral service, or, if assessed, has not made such payment for any reason whatever.

 

§30-32.  Excavations In Streets 
                Excavations in streets and alleys for the purpose of constructing, repairing, altering or tapping sewers shall be made in a manner that will impede travel as little as possible. The director may determine and limit the time such excavations remain open and when unnecessarily delayed, may direct that the number of workmen be increased. Warning lights shall be maintained at all unfinished work, from dark to daylight. All work is to be done in accordance with OSHA rules and regulations.  After the work has been completed, the streets or alleys shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the director. Within one year of the excavation, the director may require the excavation to be refilled if settling has occurred.

 

§30-33.  Sewer Trenches 
                Sewer trenches shall be braced in accordance with industry standards and OSHA rules and regulations.

 

§30-34.  Exposure of Sewer Pipe to Frost 
                No person shall dig up or uncover any public sewer so as to expose it to frost, except under the direction of the director.

 

§30-35.  Materials and Construction Procedures 
                All connections with the public sewers must be made with the kind and size of materials approved by the director. When a connection is made to a public sewer a saddle shall be used and the connection shall be made under the supervision of the director.

                A maximum of only one connection may be made on each length of public sewer pipe. Additional connections may be made only after written authorization is granted by the director. Said authorization shall be noted on the permit required pursuant to §30-27.

 

§30-36.  Disconnection of Drains 
                The director shall have the right to disconnect any drain from the public sewers which is found to be used contrary to the provisions of this Article.

 

§30-37.  Revocation of Plumber's License 
                The city council may at any time revoke the license of any plumber found guilty of violating this Article or refusing to cooperate with the director in performing his or her duties.

 

§30-38.  Violations of this Article 
                Any owner, architect, agent, plumber, contractor, or other persons failing, neglecting, omitting, resisting, or refusing to comply with any of the rules or regulations of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

Article VI. Private Wastewater and Septic Tank Waste Disposal

 

§30-39.  Outside Water Closets 
                The construction of outside water closets, known as the "frost-proof" type, shall be prohibited.

 

§30-40.  Privies Prohibited in Dwellings 
                Privies are prohibited within City limits.

 

§30-41.  Community and Private Disposal Systems 
Community Disposal Systems

                The owner of a private wastewater treatment system (lagoon, mechanical, etc.) within City limits, providing service to multiple buildings and operating under an NPDES (National Pollution Discharge Elimination System) Permit issued by the NDEQ (Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality) shall connect to a public sanitary sewer within 12 months after it becomes available.  Availability is defined when the building is located within 200 feet of a public sanitary sewer main.

 

Private Disposal Systems

                Where a public sanitary sewer is not available to a building, the lateral sewer shall be connected to an individual private wastewater disposal system complying with appropriate rules and regulations in this ordinance and the State of Nebraska.  The definition of available shall be found in the adopted model plumbing code.

                The owner shall, at owner's own expense, operate and maintain such private wastewater disposal facility to the satisfaction of the director.

 

§30-42.  Unlawful Connection to Public Sewers 
                It shall be unlawful for any private residential wastewater disposal facility to be connected to any public sewer.

 

§30-43.  Disposal of Septic Tank Waste 
                No person shall discharge septic tank waste into any watercourse or storm sewer.  This type of waste may be discharged into the City’s wastewater treatment works only at hose locations and in a manner designated by the director.

 

§30-44.  Permits for Discharge of Septic Wastes 
                Permits for discharge of septic tank waste shall be required. The permits may be obtained by filling out an application form furnished by the director.

 

§30-45.  Discharge Fee 
                Any person discharging septic tank waste into the wastewater treatment works shall pay the Department at a rate per one hundred gallons of tank capacity (or fraction thereof) as a wastewater disposal charge, the rate to be established by the city council.

 

Article VII. Prohibited Discharges

 

§30-46.  Storm Water and Unpolluted Drainage 
                Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into sewers specifically designed and designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet.

                No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, either directly or indirectly, to the sanitary sewer system any surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsoil or sub-surface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water. Any such connections made either before or after the effective date of these rules and regulations shall be considered illegal and shall be subject to immediate removal by the owner and at the owner's expense.

                Should the owner of an illegal connection fail to remove it within ninety days after being notified by the director to do so, the director may cause the connection to be removed and the cost billed to the owner of the property served by the illegal connection.

 

§30-47.  Sanitary and Other Polluted Waters 
                No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet or storm sewer any sanitary wastewater or other polluted waters. Effluent from privately-owned individual household disposal devices shall not be discharged to storm sewers.

 

§30-48.  Other Prohibited Discharges 
                No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged to, any sanitary sewer, any of the following described substances, water, or wastes unless authorized by the Public Works Director:

  (1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 65 degrees Celsius (150 degrees Fahrenheit).

  (2) Wastes containing oil or grease of petroleum origin shall be prohibited.

  (3) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral spirits, commercial solvent, motor oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, or any other petroleum derivative.

  (4) Any water or wastes containing dissolved gases (such as hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and ammonia) in concentrations sufficient to cause poisonous or toxic fumes or waste-water, or a malodorous or harmful condition.

  (5) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, asphaltic materials, cement or concrete, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, beer or distillery spent grains, chemical residues, paint residues, cannery waste, bulk solids, or any other solid or viscous substances, in amounts capable of causing obstructions to flow in sewers or interference with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment works.

  (6) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9 at any time, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or being a hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater treatment works.

  (7) Any waters or wastes containing pollutants in the form of compounds or elements, in solution or suspension, in concentrations exceeding the following:

Pollutant                                                                                        Maximum Concentration in mg/L

Arsenic (AS)..................................................................................................................................... 0.050
Barium (BA)..................................................................................................................................... 1.000
Cadmium (Cd).................................................................................................................................. 0.100
Chromium (Cr) (Total)..................................................................................................................... 3.000
Copper (Cu)...................................................................................................................................... 1.000
Cyanides (CN).................................................................................................................................. 2.000
Lead (Pb).......................................................................................................................................... 0.100
Manganese (Mn).............................................................................................................................. 1.000
Mercury (Hg)................................................................................................................................... 0.005
Nickel (Ni)........................................................................................................................................ 1.000
Selenium (Se)................................................................................................................................... 0.030
Silver (Ag)........................................................................................................................................ 0.100

The maximum concentrations shown for the above metals may be used as a guide in design and plant control, but may be altered by the director in the event of accumulative overload on the water pollution control plant.

  (8) Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals and toxic materials in concentrations prohibited by state or federal rules, including but not limited to:

Antimony                                    Strontium
Beryllium                                    Tellurium
Bismuth                                       Fungicides
Boron                                           Herbicides
Cobalt                                          Pesticides
Molybdenum                             Uranyl ion
Rhenium

Unless the permit required for discharge of industrial wastes specifies conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, and volumes.

  (9) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry into sewers for their inspection, maintenance, and repair.

  (10) Any waters containing quantities of radium, naturally occurring, or artificially produced radioisotopes in excess of presently existing or subsequently accepted limits for drinking water as established by the national committee on radiation protection and measuring.

  (11) Any concentrated dye wastes, spent tanning solutions, or other wastes which are highly colored, or wastes which are of unusual volume, concentration of solids, or composition that may create obstruction to the flow in sewers or interference with the wastewater treatment processes without proper pretreatment and written approval of the director.

  (12) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to the degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the NPDES permit.

  (13) Any water or wastes containing more than 2,000 mg/L total solids, maximum of 100,000 gallons.

   (14) Any water or wastes containing more than 230 mg/L chlorides monthly average concentration, 380 mg/L chlorides daily maximum concentration (November 1 – February 28 (29), 389 mg/L chlorides daily maximum concentration (June 1 – October 31) and 390 mg/L daily maximum concentration (March 1 – May 31).

   (15) Any water or wastes containing Conductivity greater than 2,000 umhos/cm monthly average (April 1 – September 30)

  (16) Wastes at a flow rate and/or pollutant discharge rate which is excessive over short periods of time so that there is a treatment process overload and subsequent loss of treatment efficiency.

 

§30-49.  Dilution 
                The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes in volumes, or with constituents, such that existing dilution conditions in the sewers or at the treatment plant would be adversely affected, shall be subject to review and approval of the director. Where necessary, in the opinion of the director, pretreatment or equalizing units may be required to bring constituents or volume of flow within an acceptable level, and to hold or equalize flows so that no peak flow conditions may hamper the operation of any unit of the sewer system. The equalization or holding unit shall have a capacity suitable to serve its intended purpose, and be equipped with acceptable outlet control facilities to provide flexibility in operation and accommodate changing conditions in the waste flow.

 

§30-50.  Deleterious Discharges 
                If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to the public sewers, which contain substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in the preceding sections of this article, and which in the judgment of the director or the local, state, and federal agencies having jurisdiction, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may:

(1) Reject the wastes;

(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;

(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;

(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by sewer user charges.

                In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of wastes, the director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. Any waters or wastes having a BOD concentration greater than 250 mg/L or a SS concentration greater than 250 mg/L or an average daily flow greater than 5 percent of the average total sewage flow of the City shall be subject to the review of the director.

                If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the director, and the local, state, and federal agencies having jurisdiction and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, resolutions, and laws. See §30-54.

                In the event of an accidental spill or unavoidable loss to the drains of any deleterious materials, the owner shall promptly notify the director of the nature of the spill, the quantity, and time of occurrence.

 

§30-51.  Wastes from Garbage Grinders 
                Food Waste Grinders installed in dwellings shall be regulated by the Plumbing Code.

No business establishment shall install any garbage grinder or replace an existing garbage grinder after the effective date of this ordinance, without approval of the City Engineer in conformance with the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the City.

                All garbage grinders shall shred the waste to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing in the public sewer. Garbage grinders shall not be used for grinding plastic, paper products, inert materials, or garden refuse.

                All waste is subject to Section 30-48 regarding Deleterious Discharges and the latest edition of the fee schedule for extra strength waste.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9506, effective 11/04/2014

 

§30-52.  Grease, Oil, and Sand Traps 
                Grease (animal), oil, and sand interceptors, or traps, shall be provided by the owner when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.

                Interceptors will be maintained at appropriate intervals and proof of maintenance will be maintained for at least three (3) years.  Manifests showing the material removed from the interceptors was disposed of in a proper manner will be maintained for at least three (3) years.

§30-53.  Unlawful Use of Manholes 
                Opening or entering manholes for any purpose whatever is strictly prohibited, except by persons duly authorized to do so.

                No person shall discharge any substance directly into a manhole or other opening in the public sewers other than through an approved building sewer, unless upon written application to the director and payment of the applicable user charges and fees, and the director issues a permit for such direct discharges.

 

Article VIII. Industrial Wastes and Discharge Permits

 

§30-54.  Major Contributing Industries 
                All major contributing industries proposing to directly or indirectly connect to or discharge wastes into the sanitary sewers shall obtain a discharge permit before connecting to or discharging into these sewers.

 

§30-55.  Industrial Wastes; Requirements 
                Persons proposing to or who actually discharge industrial wastes which contain none of the prohibited ingredients or characteristics set forth in Article VII of this ordinance, other than excessive concentrations of BOD, suspended solids and grease, hydrogen sulfide, or TKN shall be required to pretreat their wastes to meet the requirements of "Normal Strength Wastewater" with the exception that wastes may be accepted for treatment if all the following requirements are met:

(1) The wastes will not cause damage to the sanitary sewer system;

(2) The wastes will not impair the wastewater treatment process;

(3) The discharger of the waste agrees to pay a surcharge over and above the published sewer rates when the waste strength exceeds that of "Normal Strength Wastewater." See Article IX.

 

§30-56.  Pretreatment Requirements 
                When the Director determines that any industrial waste will be harmful to the structures, treatment processes or operation of the wastewater treatment works, or detrimental to the water pollution control plant effluent, the person discharging the waste shall provide, at his or her own expense, preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be determined by the director as necessary to make the waste acceptable for admission to the public sanitary sewers.

                When the director determines that an industrial waste must be pretreated, the owner shall submit plans and specifications of the proposed pretreatment facilities, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities by an approved registered professional engineer authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska to the  to the director for review, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. After the plans and specifications are reviewed as submitted, or as amended by the director, the owner shall proceed to provide pretreatment facilities. If the pretreatment facilities are completed according to the plans and specifications, and the owner provides a proper sewer connection permit from the plant to the sanitary sewers, the director will issue the owner an industrial waste discharge permit authorizing such connection and permitting the owner to discharge waste into the sanitary sewers at the rate, quantity, quality and other conditions stated in the permit. These pretreatment facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner's expense.

 

§30-57.  Discharge Permit; Application 
               Persons requiring a discharge permit shall complete and file with the Department an application in the form prescribed by the director and accompanied by applicable fees. Except as otherwise agreed in writing by the director, the applicant shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:

(1) Name, address, and Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) number of applicant.

(2) Volume of waste to be discharged.

(3) Waste constituents and characteristics including BOD, suspended solids, pH, biodegradable oils and grease, total sulfides, TKN, nitrates, ammonia, and total nitrogen, and any others required by the director.

(4) Time and duration of discharge.

(5) Average and thirty minute peak waste flow rates, including daily, weekly, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any.

(6) Ground plan or plat sufficient to indicate locations of building sewers, building drains, process waste sewers, monitoring facilities and pretreatment facilities with respect to buildings, property lines, streets, public sewers, and industrial process facilities.

(7) Description of plant activities, facilities, and processes, including all types of waste which are or could be discharged.

(8) Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of production when required to determine compliance with pretreatment standards.

(9) Number and type of employees, and hours of work.

(10) Any other information the director may feel is necessary to evaluate the permit application.

               The Department will evaluate the data furnished and may require additional information. After evaluation of the data furnished, the director may issue a discharge permit subject to the terms and conditions of this ordinance. Wastewater constituents and characteristics shall not be recognized as confidential information.

 

§30-58.  Discharge Permit; Requirements 
               Discharge permits may contain any or all of the following conditions and requirements:

(1) The average and maximum waste pollutant concentrations permitted to be discharged into the sanitary sewers.

(2) The maximum daily amounts of BOD, suspended solids, pH, biodegradable oils and grease, total sulfides, TKN, nitrates, ammonia, total nitrogen, chlorides, conductivity and any others required by the director, permitted to be discharged into the sanitary sewers.

(3) Limits on rate and time of discharge and requirements on flow regulations and equalization.

(4) Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities.

(5) Pretreatment requirements.

(6) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and methods of sampling and the number, types, and standards for tests and reporting schedule.

(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.

(8) Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to waste discharges as specified by the director and making the records available to the Department.

(9) Additional requirements as may be determined by the director.

 

§30-59.  Discharge Permit; Term 
                Permits shall be issued for a specified period of time but in no event shall a permit extend beyond five (5) years from the date of issuance. Ninety days prior to the expiration of the permit, the owner shall apply to the Department for a renewal of the permit.

                The owner shall be notified in writing of any proposed changes in the permit at least thirty days prior to the effective date of change. The notice shall include a specified time schedule for compliance. This time schedule shall be based on practical delivery and construction time requirements, and shall become part of the permit.

 

§30-60.  Discharge Permit; Not Transferable 
                Waste discharge permits are issued to a specific owner for a specific operation. A waste discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner. A waste discharge permit shall not be transferred to a new or significantly changed operation.

 

§30-61.  Discharge Permit; Revocation
                Any owner who violates any of these rules and regulations, or applicable state and/or federal regulations, or any of the following conditions which are hereby made part of every permit, whether stated therein or not, is subject to having owner's permit revoked:

(1) The owner shall factually report the waste constituents and characteristics of the discharge.

(2) The owner shall report significant changes in operation, or in waste constituents and characteristics.

(3) The owner shall allow reasonable access to owner's plant or facilities for the purpose of inspection or monitoring.

(4) The owner shall comply with each and every term and condition of the permit.

                Before a permit is revoked, the owner shall be sent written notice fifteen days in advance of the date of a hearing by the director. The owner shall have the opportunity to present evidence at the hearing. The director shall notify the owner in writing of the decision by no later than fifteen days after the hearing.

 

§30-62.  Monitoring Facilities 
                The director may require any industrial plant owner to construct, at the owner's expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the lateral sewer or internal drainage systems, and may also require sampling or metering equipment to be provided, installed, and operated at the owner's expense.

                The monitoring facility shall be situated on the owner's property and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.

                The personnel of the Department shall have access to the monitoring facilities at all times for inspection and sample collection. If the facilities are locked, special arrangements shall be made to allow access. The Department's personnel shall also have the right to set up monitoring devices at the facilities. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facilities to allow adequate sampling and composition of samples for analysis. The monitoring facilities, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the owner.

                The sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Department's requirements, standards and specifications. Unless a time extension is otherwise granted by the director, construction shall be completed within ninety days following the issuance of written notification by the Department.

 

§30-63.  Access to Owner's Property 
                The owner of any industrial plant where waste is created or discharged shall allow the employees of the Department ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the property for the purposes of inspection or sampling or for the performance of their duties. The Department shall have the right to set up on the owner's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where an owner has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the facilities, the owner shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Department will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. While performing the work, the Department personnel shall observe all safety rules established by the owner and applicable to the plant or facilities. The Department shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or facilities for waste treatment.

 

§30-64.  Reliability of Monitoring Facilities 
                Approval of proposed monitoring facilities or equipment by the director does not, in any way, guarantee that those facilities or equipment will function in the manner prescribed by their constructor or manufacturer; nor shall they relieve a person of the responsibility to enlarge or otherwise modify such facilities to accomplish the intended purpose.

 

§30-65.  Sampling Methods 
                All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of industrial wastes shall be determined in accordance with EPA approved methods published in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published by the American Health Association and American Water Works Association, or Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes published by the Environmental Monitoring and Support Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and shall be determined at the monitoring facilities or from samples taken at the monitoring facilities. In the event no special monitoring facility has been installed, the sampling shall be done at the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewers to the point at which the building lateral sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effects of waste constituents upon the wastewater treatment works and to determine the existence of possible hazards to life, limb and property.

 

§30-66.  Special Contracts or Agreements 
                No statement contained in these rules and regulations shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Department for transport and/or treatment, subject to applicable fees or payments.

 

§30-67.  Excessive Pollutant Penalty 
                               If a person discharges amounts of permissible pollutants in excess of the amounts permitted in the discharge permit, as stated in §30-71, a charge for “Excessive Pollutant Penalty” in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, per day of violation shall be imposed and paid by the person discharging wastes in violation of the permit.

 

§30-68.  Indemnity 
                In the event a person does discharge excessive amounts of pollutants in violation of the discharge permit, said person shall agree to indemnify and hold the City harmless against and from any and all loss, damage, claims, demands, actions, causes of action, penalties, judgments, costs, and expenses of whatsoever nature which may result from injury to or death of persons whomsoever, or from loss or destruction of or damage to property whatsoever, or results in the City being in violation of state or federal regulatory agency requirements, when such violation, injury, death, loss, destruction, or damage arises in any way in connection with or incident to a person depositing amounts of industrial waste in excess of those permitted in the discharge permit into the City's sanitary sewers. It must be proved, on an individual case basis, that a person's depositing of excessive amounts of pollutants, on a daily basis, was in fact the cause of a violation, injury, death, loss, destruction, or damage, and that the excessive discharge was not due to force majeure.

 

§30-69.  Charges to Major Industries 
                Each major contributing industry shall be assessed a monthly charge that reflects the City's cost of owning, operating, and maintaining the facilities used to serve these customers. The monthly charges shall be determined from time to time based upon analysis of the costs of capital and operation and maintenance costs associated with the facilities used to provide service.

 

Article IX. Industrial Waste Surcharge

 

§30-70.  When Surcharge Is Applicable 
                An industrial waste surcharge shall be assessed against any person discharging industrial wastes into the City's sanitary sewer system where the contributed waste strength exceeds that of "Normal Strength Wastewater" as defined in §30-1. Persons subject to the industrial waste surcharge shall be subject to the regular sewer user charges.

 

§30-71.  Pollutants Subject to Surcharge 
               The monthly amount of pollutants subject to the surcharge will be based on the average loading per plant operating day, times the number of operating days in the month the limits are exceeded. The pollutants limits that shall be subject to a surcharge are as follows:

BOD………………………………………….........250 mg/L

Suspended Solids or TSS…………………….........250 mg/L

Fats, Oils, and Grease…………………….…..........100 mg/L

Total Nitrogen  (Organic & Inorganic)………...…....25 mg/L

Hydrogen Sulfide……………………………......……0 mg/L

pH……………………………………………..less than 6 S.U.

pH………………………………………….greater than 9 S.U.

 

§30-72.  Amount of Surcharge 
                The industrial waste surcharge to be assessed each month will be determined by application of the rates then in effect.

                The surcharge amount shall be determined by calculating the average number of pollutant pounds per operating day based on the average of periodic grab or composite samples obtained and tested as described in §30-63.

                In computing the surcharge amount, no credit will be allowed because a pollutant strength is less than that allowed in "Normal Strength Wastewater."

 

§30-73.  Review of Surcharge Rates 
                The director shall review the surcharge rates each August and adjust them, if necessary, to reflect the actual cost to treat the pollutants subject to the surcharge.

 

§30-74.  Monitoring Facilities 
                When a person discharges a waste that is subject to the industrial waste surcharge, the director may require monitoring facilities be provided. The installation and use of the monitoring facilities shall be in compliance with §30-60 and §30-63.

 

§30-75.  Surcharge for Class Groups 
                The director may classify certain commercial and industrial establishments which routinely discharge BOD and suspended solids concentrations exceeding those established for "Normal Strength Wastewater," into the following classes:

(1) Eating Places: Includes restaurants, bars, lounges, and other establishments which engage in the preparation of food or beverage which is served directly to the consumer.

(2) Food and Kindred Products Processing: Includes commercial establishments which engage in the preparation, packaging, processing, or distribution of food, food products, grains, or produce, and which discharge less than 200,000 gallons of wastes per month.

(3) Equipment Service Facilities: Includes establishments which perform washing, cleaning, or servicing of automobiles, trucks, buses, machinery, or equipment; this class to include public facilities, facilities limited to specific companies, and attended or coin-operated establishments.

                The director shall assess an industrial waste surcharge for each class based on waste strength determinations established by averaging grab or composite samples or both, taken from a representative number of establishments in each class and shall apply this surcharge to the water consumption or metered wastewater of the establishment. If the establishment is within a larger facility for which water usage is determined from a master meter, the director shall determine an estimated volume for the establishment on which the surcharge is applied. The director shall then add the appropriate industrial surcharge to billings for regular water and sanitary sewer service for each establishment included in one of the classes.

                If an establishment contains operations from more than one of the classes, and the director determines that the surcharge for a particular class would not adequately compensate the City for its cost of treatment, the director may assess a surcharge based on a proportional average of the class surcharges involved, or may require the establishment to be billed under the requirements of §30-70.

                The owner of an establishment classified into one of the classes may elect to have the industrial surcharge billed under §30-70 rather than this section, by making application to the director and paying the required sampling costs.

                The director may revise the class surcharges in the future to reflect a change in the average strength of the wastes discharged or to reflect a change in the costs to treat these wastes.

 

§30-76.  Contract for Reserved Capacity 
                The director may, with the approval of the council, enter into a contract with persons discharging industrial wastes who desire to reserve a portion of the design capacity of the sanitary sewer system or water pollution control plant. The contract shall contain a provision stating that an annual amount, representing the person's proportionate share of the City's net annual capital investment cost in the facilities reserved, shall be paid by the person signing the contract. The contract shall also contain a provision that if the person's average daily flow varies more than 20 percent on a yearly basis, either party may open the contract for renegotiation of the minimum payment.

 

Article X. Sewer Rates and Charges

 

§30-77.  Purpose of Article 
                The mayor and council of the city hereby find and determine: This City has constructed and owns and operates a sewerage system and plant for the treatment, purification, and disposal in a sanitary manner of the liquid and solid wastes, sewage, and night soil of such community and it is necessary, in order to protect the health of the inhabitants of the city and to comply with the law of the state and the requirements of the department of health of the state that the sewerage system be operated and maintained; that in order to provide the revenues to operate and maintain the sewer system and disposal plant and to create a reserve fund for the purpose of future maintenance, it is necessary that the City establish just and equitable rates and charges to be paid to the City for the use of such disposal plant and sewerage system by each person whose premises are served thereby.

 

§30-78.  Consumer; Defined 
                The word "consumer" as used in this article shall include all users of the municipal sewerage system of the City, including all persons whose premises are served thereby and all owners and tenants of real estate and buildings connected with such sewerage system or served thereby and all users of such system who in any way use the same or discharge sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquid either directly or indirectly into the sewerage system of the City.

 

§30-79.  Consumer; Classification 
                Consumers shall be classified as residential or commercial. For the purposes of this article a residential consumer is one whose property is used exclusively for residential purposes and commercial consumers are all consumers other than residential consumers.

 

§30-80.  Rental Charge; Computation 
                For the use of the city sewer system, each consumer shall pay a rental charge which shall be computed and based on his contribution of sewage to such system; provided, that a minimum charge for sewer rental as set forth in §30-84 and §30-85 shall be made for each dwelling unit which is directly or indirectly connected to the City sanitary sewer system, unless for a complete billing period the City water supply to such unit has been disconnected by the City, or the private water supply disconnected to the satisfaction of the City. For the purposes of this Article, a dwelling unit shall mean one or more rooms and a single kitchen designed as a unit for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes, and shall include a manufactured home. If more than one dwelling unit is served from a single water meter or single private water source as in the case of apartments and mobile home courts, a percentage of the minimum rate shall be charged against each unit, depending on the number of dwelling units per water meter or private water source as follows:

2 to 5 dwelling units........................................................................... 65%
6 to 10 dwelling units......................................................................... 60%
11 to 20 dwelling units....................................................................... 55%
21 and over dwelling units................................................................ 50%

The above charges shall be computed upon the yearly average of the number of dwelling units occupied.

 

§30-81.  Rental; Residential and Commercial

                The charges to be paid by residential consumers for use of the sewerage system and disposal plant shall be based upon water consumption.  The monthly residential sewer charges for the twelve months following April 1st of each year will be based on the average water consumption for that property during the months of January, February and March.  Commercial customers shall pay according to the meter reading which precedes billing. 

Amended by Ordinance No. 9524, effective 03/17/2015

 

§30-82.  Rental Charge; Use of Water Meters 
                The sewer rental charge shall be applied separately to each individual water meter which measures water contributing to or discharging into the city sewerage system and shall be determined by the water meter reading for water furnished by the water works system of the city or by privately-owned water supply which may contribute to or discharge into the sewerage system. In the case of unmetered water supply, the quantity of water used and discharged into the sewerage system of the City shall be determined to the satisfaction of the council and at the expense of the owner of the unmetered water supply. If the quantity of unmetered water discharged into the sewerage system is estimated by the council to be in excess of one thousand cubic feet per month for any one month, the council may require that such water supply be metered at the expense of the owner or consumer.

                Should any meter get out of order or repair and fail to register properly, such consumer will be charged at the average monthly consumption as shown by the meter when in order for six months previous, or fraction thereof, if the same has not been used that long.

 

§30-83.  Volume Charges 
                The charges for sewer service shall be paid either quarterly or monthly in conformance with the billing for water, and each consumer shall be billed per 100 cubic feet in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§30-84.  Service Charges 
                The monthly service charge for sewage contributions to consumers and users shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, regardless of the volume of sewage contributed.

 

§30-85.  Industrial Waste Surcharge 
Extra Strength Surcharge

An industrial waste surcharge shall be assessed against any person discharging industrial wastes into the City's sanitary sewer system where the contributed wastewater strength exceeds normal strength wastewater and shall be billed in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

Customer Charge

The specific costs incurred by the City associated with monitoring and determining flow and strength.

Industrial Four Part Charge

The industrial service four-part charges will be applied to those industrial users who certify that their sewage contributions are less than normal strength wastewater, and such customers shall be billed in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

Customer Charge

The specific costs incurred by the City associated with monitoring and determining flow and strength and/or checking the users certification.

 

§30-86.  Minimum Charges 
                The minimum charge for sewage contributions shall be the sum of applicable service charge, volume charge and/or extra strength surcharge. For customers billed on the industrial four part charge, the minimum charge shall be the sum of the volume, BOD, SS, oil and grease, hydrogen sulfide, ammonia, and customer charge.

                The minimum charge for sewage contributions to consumers and users who are not required to meter their water supply shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§30-87.  Reserved

 

§30-88.  Collection 
                The sewer rental charges prescribed by this article shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same officers as water charges are collected by the City.

 

§30-89.  Delinquent Charges 
                Bills for sewer rental charges made by this Article shall be rendered as for water service of the City and all rental charges levied by this Article which are not paid at or before water service charges of the City are required to be paid shall be deemed to be delinquent and the water service of such consumer may be discontinued.

 

§30-90.  Charges To Be a Lien 
                All rental charges prescribed by this article shall be a lien upon the premises and real estate for which the sewer service is supplied and used and if not paid when due such charge shall be certified to the city treasurer and may be recovered by the City in an action at law and such delinquent charges may be certified to the county clerk and assessed against the real estate and premises served and be collected and returned in the same manner as other city taxes are certified, collected, and returned.

 

§30-91.  Disposition of Funds 
                The mayor and council hereby find and determine that the rental charges established by this article are just and equitable rates and charges to be paid to the City for the use of its disposal plant and sewerage system by each person whose premises are served thereby. All moneys collected for such rental charges shall be paid into the sewer and sewer collection funds and shall be used only for the purpose of maintenance and operation of the existing sewer system and disposal plant, and to create a reserve fund for the purpose of future maintenance, pursuant to Article 5, Chapter 18, Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska 1943.

 

§30-92.  Accounting System 
                Under Ordinance No. 4131, the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, has agreed to account for its revenues and expenditures in a specified manner. It is considered that the requirements for user charge accounting systems can be met by following the accounting procedures outlined in Ordinance No. 4131 and supplemental ordinance which have been issued subsequently for additional bonds.

 

§30-93.  Special Rates 
                Where, in the judgment of the council, special conditions surround the use of city water to the extent that the application of the service charges, rates, or rentals as specified by this Article would be inequitable and unfair to either the City or such consumers, the council shall establish a special rate applying to such consumers. Such special rates when adopted by ordinance by the city council shall apply to all consumers under like circumstances.

 

§30-94.  Water Discharged Into Storm Sewers 
                The provisions of this Article do not apply to water discharged into the storm sewer.

 

§30-95.  Charges for Septic Tank Sludge 
                Septic tank sludge may be deposited at the City's Wastewater Facility in a location designated by the superintendent of the said plant or his representative after payment of a fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule for ordinary septage, having strength up to 6,000 mg/l BOD, and 20,000 mg/l SS.

                Per 100 gallons or fraction thereof of tank capacity in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

                For septage having strength of more than 6,000 mg/L BOD, and 20,000 mb/L SS, the fee shall be charged according to the current Fee Schedule for charges of high septic sludge.

                Waste from a recreational vehicle may be deposited at the City's water pollution control plant in a location designated by the superintendent of said plant. Fees for such discharge of recreational waste shall be on a voluntary basis.

 

§30-96.  User Charge System Review 
                The City will review the user charge system at least every two years and revise user charge rates as necessary to insure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement, and that the system continues to provide for the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance, including replacement expenses among users and user classes.

 

§30-97.  Reserved

 

§30-98.  Toxic Pollutants 
                Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the City's treatment works, or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by interaction with other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement of the treatment works, shall pay for such increased cost.

 

Entire Chapter 30 Amended and Reorganized Pursuant to Ordinance No. 9641, effective 08-23-2017

CHAPTER 31

SIGNS

Article I. Signs - Generally

 

§31-1.  Definitions
                For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.

                Back-to-Back Sign. An off-premise sign consisting of two sign facings oriented in opposite directions with not more than two faces per sign facing.

                Cloth Sign. Any sign executed upon or composed of any flexible fabric.

                Development Sign. A ground sign whose purpose is to identify business located within a retail subdivision or commercial development.

                Directional Sign. A sign erected for the convenience of the public, such as for directing traffic movement, parking, or identifying restrooms, public telephones, walkways and other similar features or facilities, and bearing no advertising message.

                Double Faced Sign. An off-premise sign with two adjacent faces oriented in the same direction and not more than ten (10) feet apart at the nearest point between the two faces.

                Facing. That portion of an off-premise sign upon which advertising is affixed or painted and visible in one direction at one time.

                Flat Sign. Any sign so attached to a building or other structure that it projects beyond the building line, but extends parallel or substantially parallel thereto.

                Free Standing Yard Sign. Any sign 15 square feet or less that shall have as its supports, wood or steel columns, pipe, angle iron framing, or any other combination of these materials, other than ground signs as defined herein.

                Ground Sign. Any sign which is supported by uprights or braces placed upon or extending into the ground.

                Mobile Sign. Any sign structure designed and constructed to be moved by means of wheels or skids which proposes any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, or illustration used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public. This shall not include signs anchored or attached to vehicles or trailers parked and used primarily as a static advertising display, visible from the public right-of-way.

                Multi-faced Sign. An off-premise sign comprised of sections which rotate to display a series of advertisements, each advertisement being displayed for at least six (6) seconds continuously without movement; the duration of movement of sections between advertisements not exceeding two (2) seconds.

                Official Sign. A sign erected by a governmental agency or its designee, setting forth information pursuant to law.

                Off –Premise Outdoor Advertising Sign. A sign, including the supporting sign structure, which is visible from a street or highway and advertises goods or services not usually located on the premises and/or property upon which the sign is located; also called "billboard." The following shall not be considered an off-premise sign for the purposes of this Chapter: (1) directional or official signs authorized by law; (2) real estate signs; (3) on-premise signs.

                On-Premise Sign. A sign which advertises the primary goods or services or taking place upon the premises on which the sign is located.

                Projecting Sign. Any sign attached to a building or other structure and extending beyond the building line either perpendicularly or at any angle other than parallel thereto.

                Roof Sign. Any sign which is supported by uprights or braces placed upon or extending into the roof of any building or other structure.

                Sign. Any device composed of one or more letters, words, pictures, figures, characters, symbols or emblems, or any combination or grouping thereof which prefigures, typifies, or represents one or more ideas.

                Transparent Sign. Any sign illuminated from within and made of glass or similar material containing opaque lettering upon a translucent letter upon an opaque ground.

                V-Type Sign. Any off-premise sign structure which consists of multiple sign facings placed at angles of each other, oriented in different directions and not exceeding twenty (20) feet apart at the nearest point to each other.

                Wall Sign. Any sign which is painted or otherwise directly depicted upon a wall.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003
Amended by Ordinance No. 8978, effective 06-08-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011

Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013

 

§31-2.  Sign Permit; License; Requirements
                (1) It is unlawful for any person to erect, re-erect, move, remove, or materially alter any sign within the City's zoning jurisdiction without first obtaining a permit therefor as provided in this chapter.

                (2) Except as provided in subsection (3) below, it is unlawful for any person other than a licensed sign hanger to erect, re-erect, move, remove, or materially alter any sign within the City's zoning jurisdiction.

                (3) A property owner or tenant may erect, re-erect, move, remove, or materially alter signs upon his, her, or its own property when such signs do not exceed any of the following limitations:

(A) For flat, nonprojecting or ground mount signs:

(i) maximum of twelve (12) feet above the adjacent surface;

(ii) maximum of forty (40) square feet of surface area (per side);

(B) For projecting signs:

(i) maximum of twelve (12) feet above the adjacent surface;

(ii) maximum of two (2) feet projecting from building;

(iii) maximum of four (4) square feet of surface area (per side);

(C) For all signs:

(i) must comply with all other provisions of this chapter;

(ii) all electrical wiring must be installed by a licensed electrician and comply with all City Code provisions pertaining thereto.

 

§31-3.  Sign Hanger Contractor
  (1) No person shall engage in the business of sign hanging in the City of Grand Island without first obtaining a Certificate of Registration as a sign hanger contractor.

  (2) The fee for a sign hanger's license shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

  (3) Every registrant shall maintain in full force and effect insurance policies written by a company or companies authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska with the following coverages,  amounts, and provisions:

(a) Comprehensive General Liability insurance covering the operations of the registrant, including coverage for completed operations, with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage;

(b) A provision making the City of Grand Island an additional insured for any third party claims for bodily injury or property damage based upon occurrences in connection with the registrant's operations, including completed operations, within the City's zoning jurisdiction;

(c) The registrant shall furnish the City of Grand Island Building Department a certificate or certificates of insurance for the above insurance coverage.

(d)  Any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked should the registrant permit the insurance policy herein required to expire or lapse.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9265, effective 08-17-2010

 

§31-4.  Sign Hanger's License; Revocation

                Licenses issued pursuant to this article may be revoked or suspended by the city council upon recommendation of the City building department for the following reasons:

  (A) Failure to comply with this article or any rules issued by the City building department;

  (B) Abandonment of any contract or undertaking without good cause or fraudulent departure from plans or specifications;

  (C) Failure to obtain or cause to be obtained permits when same are required by this article.

 

§31-5.  Permit to Erect, Move, or Remove Sign
                (1) A permit shall be obtained from the building department for each sign to be erected, re-erected, moved, or removed in the City, prior to the work being performed;

                (2) Before issuing a permit for erecting any sign, a drawing shall be submitted to the chief building official showing height, width, elevations, and electrical details of such signs;

                (3) Upon the granting of a permit for sign erection or moving, the applicant shall pay a fee to the City in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule;

                (4) When any construction, alteration, or repair of a sign shall have been started before a permit has been issued, an investigation fee of double the amount provided in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule shall be charged.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013

 

§31-6.  Inspections
                It shall be the duty of the holder of a permit pursuant to this chapter to notify the chief building official when the sign for which such permit was issued will be ready for inspection.

 

§31-7.  Removal by City
                It shall be the duty of the chief building official to cause to be removed all signs erected in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, whether such signs are on private or public property.

 

§31-8.  Sign Maintenance
                It shall be the duty of the owner of any sign to keep the same in good repair. Any sign found to be structurally unsound, unsafe or in a state of disrepair shall be made safe by the owner of the sign within a reasonable time not to exceed ten (10) days as determined by the chief building official or his designated representative; and all signs shall be repaired accordingly or removed by the owner of the sign within thirty days after written notification from the chief building official or his designated representative. If the owner of the sign is not the owner of the building or property on which such sign is erected, such property owner shall also be notified in writing of the condition of such sign.

                It shall be the duty of the owner of any sign or the owner of the property to remove, within ninety (90) days, any sign not utilized for advertising or identification of an operating business at that location. This requirement shall apply to properties located within the area specified §13-13(2) of this code.

                In the event of the failure of the owner or person having control of any sign, or the owner of the property on which any sign is located in the City, to bring such sign into compliance with this section, or to remove or repair such sign within the time stated in such notice, the sign shall be declared a public nuisance and may be removed by the City at the expense of the owner or person having control of such sign, or the owner of the property upon which the sign is located. The cost of removing any sign shall be levied against the property upon which the sign was located, in the manner provided by law for assessment and levy of other special assessments.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013

 

§31-9.  Wind Pressure Specifications
                All signs installed in the City of Grand Island shall meet the design specifications and wind pressure requirements of the Building Code as adopted by the Grand Island City Code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013

 

§31-10.  Clearance; High Voltage Power Lines
                It shall be the responsibility of the sign installer to contact the City Utility to determine the required clearances from high voltage lines.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011

 

§31-11.  Projecting Across Windows, Doors, Etc.
                No sign of any description shall cover or project across any window, door, exit, or other opening in the walls of a building, or any part of any such window, door, exit, or opening.

 

§31-12.  Sign Elevation
                The lowest part of any sign, including any embellishment thereon, projecting over a sidewalk, drive, or parking lot shall maintain at least eight feet of clearance above such sidewalk or driving surface.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011

Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013

 

§31-13.  Signs In Public Right-of-Way
  (1) No sign shall project into the public right-of-way of any street, alley, or sidewalk, including the air space above such right-of-way, except as provided in this section.

  (2) Signs may project into the public right-of-way, including the air space right-of-way only within that business district of the City which is within the following described area:

Beginning at a point of beginning, being the intersection of the centerline of Clark Street and the centerline of the alley located one-half block North of Fourth Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of said alley to the West right-of-way line of Cherry Street, now vacated; thence southwesterly along said right-of-way line extended to the centerline of the alley located one-half block south of First Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of said alley to the centerline of Sycamore Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Sycamore Street to a point located on the easterly extension of the south lot line of Lot 3 of Westervelt Subdivision; thence westerly along said lot line and extension to the centerline of Pine Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Pine Street to the centerline of Koenig Street; thence westerly and southwesterly along the centerline of Koenig Street to the centerline of Cedar Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Cedar Street to the centerline of the alley one-half block south of First Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of said alley to the centerline of Clark Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Clark Street to the point of beginning.

  (3) Any sign which projects into the public right-of-way in said business district must:

        (A) Be a projecting sign attached to a building, building canopy or awning;

        (B) Extend not more than ten (10) feet from such building;

        (C) Not extend beyond a perpendicular line three (3) feet back of any street curb line or alley line.

        (D) Maintain at least 8’-0” clearance above the sidewalk surface.

  (4) All signs which extend into or over the public right-of-way are maintained solely at the sufferance of the City. The City reserves the right and power to require the removal of any such sign at its sole discretion.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011

 

§31-14.  Affixing Sign to Another Sign
                No sign shall be affixed to or suspended from any other sign.

 

§31-15.  Electric Signs
                Unless a person engaged in the business of hanging, maintaining, or removing signs is a bonded, licensed contracting electrician, such person shall not under any circumstances wire or connect any electric sign installed within the scope of this chapter.

 

§31-16.  Projecting Horizontal and Vertical Signs
                Signs permitted under the classification of projecting signs are limited to 30% of the building façade on which they are attached.

                Every projecting sign shall be hung and its weight entirely supported independent of the side guys or sway bracing, and no supports, side guys or sway braces shall be attached to any fire escape nor extend across or in any way interfere with free use of any fire escape or any exit from a building.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013

 

§31-17.  Unlawful Signs
                It shall be unlawful to display any sign which contains anything which is misleading, fraudulent, obscene, immoral, or objectionable.

                It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any sign upon any fire escape.

                It shall be unlawful to have a sign anchored, painted or attached to vehicles or trailers parked and used solely or primarily as a static advertising display, visible from the public right-of-way.

                It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, or corporation to erect, maintain, or continue any sign, when all or any portion of the supports therefor are located upon any portion of any sidewalk, street, alley, or public place, or within the limits thereof, except as may be required or provided for by laws of the State of Nebraska, without express consent by resolution of the city council of the City of Grand Island. The continued maintenance of any such sign shall also be subject to the limitations of §31-8 of the Grand Island City Code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013

 

§31-18.  Business Signs In Public Right-of-Way
                All existing signs placed in the public right-of-way, and any new signs placed in the right-of-way shall be subject to the following requirements:

  (A) The owner or operator of any business or applicant for a sign permit that occupies public right-of-way shall apply for and obtain a License Agreement pursuant to this code prior to erecting or placing said sign.

  (B) The owner or operator of any business or applicant for a sign permit that occupies public right-of-way shall hold the City harmless for any lawsuit, costs or expenses occasioned by any injury, damages or casualty happening to person or property, as a result of problems with the sign.

  (C) The City shall have unencumbered access to the space above the right-of-way, occupied by the sign.

  (D) The owner or operator of any business or applicant for a sign permit that occupies public right-of-way shall accept and agree that the sign is placed at the owner's sole risk and expense.

  (E) Any sign erected, maintained, or existing in violation of the Grand Island City Code may be seized, removed and disposed of by the Building Department Director or his/her designee pursuant to §31-19 of the Grand Island City Code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013

 

§31-19.  Unauthorized Signs on Public Property
                It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or keep on any public property, including sidewalk spaces, any moveable or temporary signs, including placards and pennants, or any sign not specifically authorized and approved. The City of Grand Island is hereby authorized to seize such unauthorized signs and dispose of the same without notice.

 

§31-19.1.  Public Property; Authorized Signs
                The city council may authorize the construction and placement of signs or other structures upon public property within the city which exceed the height, width, area, and setback requirements of this chapter, provided:

  (1) A public hearing shall be held before the city council to consider the proposed project;

  (2) Notice of said hearing shall be published one time at least ten days prior to the hearing;

  (3) The owners of all property located within 150 feet of the proposed project shall be mailed a copy of said notice of hearing at least ten days prior to the hearing;

  (4) the proposed sign or structure shall not unduly interfere with the full use and enjoyment of the public property or private property in close proximity thereto;

  (5) the design, size and placement of the proposed sign or structure shall be aesthetically appropriate and proportional to the use and size of the public land upon which it is to be placed;

  (6) the proposed sign or structure shall be determined by the city council to be in furtherance of a public purpose and its construction and placement to be in the best interests of the city and its inhabitants.

 

§31-20.  Signs in Residential Districts
                Except as otherwise provided in §31-20 and §31-34, no signs of any nature whatsoever shall be permitted in districts zoned AG, TA, LLR, R1, R2, R3, R4, RD, and RO under Chapter 36 of the Grand Island City Code. Nothing in this section shall prevent the use of identification signs not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in the districts mentioned above. The maximum allowable size of such identification signs may be increased by one (1) square foot for each one and one-half (1.5) feet of setback from any adjacent property line up to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet.

                In AG or TA zoning districts, tracts of land exceeding 10 acres, and in R-4 zoning districts on tract of land exceeding 5 acres, in which a conditional use permit has been issued for a permitted conditional use, the following restrictions shall apply:

  (1) The maximum square footage of all signage shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.

  (2) Ground signs shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet, shall be limited to twelve (12) feet in height, be set back from the front property line a minimum of ten (10) feet, be set back from the side property line a distance of one third of the total frontage or a minimum of ten (10) feet, and be separated from other ground signs a distance of one hundred (100) feet.

  (3) Flat or projecting wall signs shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet and shall comply with all other restrictions of the city code.

In RO zoning districts, and RD districts on tracts of land exceeding 10 acres, the following restrictions shall apply;

(1)  Ground signs shall be allowed with the area limited to two square feet of signage for every one foot of street frontage with no single sign face exceeding four hundred square feet.

(2)  The maximum height of any ground sign shall not exceed thirty feet in height measured from the nearest street top of curb elevation.

(3)  All ground signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the property line to the leading edge of the signage.

(4)  Wall signs or projecting signs shall be allowable at a maximum square footage not to exceed 15% of the building façade. A minimum of 8’ of clearance shall be maintained above any adjacent walking or driving surface.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013

Amended by Ordinance No. 9573, effective 03-15-2016

 

§31-21.  Signs on Poles, Trees, Etc.
                No person shall post, print, nail, or otherwise fasten any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind whatsoever, or cause the same to be done, on any curbing, or any portion or part of any sidewalk, or street, or upon any tree, electrolier, telegraph pole, telephone pole, electric pole, hydrant, bridge, pier, or upon any structure within the limits of any street in the City, except as may be otherwise permitted by the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the City.

                No person shall post, print, nail, or otherwise fasten any handbill, sign, poster, or advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done, upon any private wall, window, door, gate, fence, advertising board or signboard, or upon any other private structure or building unless he is the owner thereof, without the consent in writing of the owner of such wall, window, door, fence, gate, advertising board, signboard, or other private building or structure.

                Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the posting of legal notices by public officers in the performance of their official duty, in the manner and in the places prescribed by law.

 

§31-22.  Reserved

                                                                                                Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011

 

§31-23.  Cloth Signs
                It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any cloth sign over any street or other public thoroughfare within the City, except as provided by this section.

                For special advertising purposes, the chief building official may at his discretion issue a permit for the erection of temporary signs made of cloth, or of compressed fiber not more than one-quarter of an inch thick, to be attached to the face of a building, or to the face of a flat or projecting sign. Such sign shall be erected in a manner ordered and approved by the chief building official, but shall not be permitted to remain in place for a period exceeding thirty days.

                The mayor shall have the right to authorize the temporary hanging of display banner or other cloth decorations for special occasions such as religious, civic or festival occurrences, or for Christmas decorations, or in celebration of some event of religious, national, state or civic significance, or in honor of a visit from a person of note. It is especially provided, however, that advertising of a commercial nature shall not be made a part of such decorations. No such temporary signs, decorations, or displays shall be displayed for more than sixty days. The permission for such displays shall be issued without charge for any fee.

                Within the fire limits, all cloth signs or other signs made of flammable material shall be treated with a fire-retarding solution subject to the approval of the chief of the fire department before being erected.

 

§31-24.  Flat Signs
                No flat sign shall extend beyond any building line more than fifteen inches; provided, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit the erection of a flat sign on the outer edge of a marquee, provided the same is securely fastened and is not higher than the base of windows to the rear thereof.

                Flat signs shall not extend beyond the top or ends of the wall surface on which they are placed.

                Flat signs or signs enclosed in cases used for building directories or theater advertisements, not extending beyond the building line more than three inches, shall be permitted at any height. Flat signs denoting places of entrance and exit, and those used for public safety shall also be permitted at any height.  The area of flat signs shall not exceed thirty percent of the building facade upon which it is placed.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011

 

§31-25.  Ground Signs
(1) Dimension Limitation: All ground signs shall be subject to the following:

        (A) For each foot of height over thirty (30) feet, there shall be a corresponding one foot of setback from the property line;

        (B) Lighting reflectors attached to the top of a sign may project above the top and beyond the face of such sign, and shall be excluded from all measurement requirements established by this subsection.

(2) Height Limitation: Ground signs which exceed fifty (50) feet in height, measured from the ground level at the base of the sign to the top of the sign, shall be subject to the following:

        (A) No permit shall be issued by the chief building official until such issuance has been authorized by the mayor and city council.

        (B) The applicant for the permit shall submit the following to the chief building official for review and consideration by the mayor and city council:

  (i) A drawing showing the height, width, elevations, and electrical details of such sign;

  (ii) Clear and convincing evidence that if the sign does not exceed fifty (50) feet in height the owner will suffer undue hardship and that said hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the area;

  (iii) Clear and convincing evidence that the proposed sign will not be a substantial detriment to adjacent properties and the character of the surrounding area will not be changed by the erection of the proposed sign.

  (C) Ground signs exceeding fifty (50) feet in height shall be erected only on tracts of real estate adjacent to state and federal highways and occupied by the business premises advertised by the sign.

  (D) No permit shall be issued for any sign exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height, measured from the ground level at the base of the sign to the top of the sign.

  (E) In lieu of the permit fee set forth in this chapter, upon the granting of a permit for erection or moving of a sign exceeding fifty (50) feet in height, the applicant shall pay a fee of $250.00 to the City.

  (F) All other provisions of the Grand Island City Code pertaining to signs which are not inconsistent with this section shall apply to ground signs exceeding fifty (50) feet in height.

(3) Number Limitations: There may be only one ground sign allowed for each one hundred (100) lineal feet or fraction thereof of street frontage for any one lot or tract. Notwithstanding this limit, any lot that fronts on more than one street may have at least one sign on each street.  Streets vacated after January 1, 1990 may be included as frontage for number limitations.

(4) Location Limitations:

  (A) No signs may be placed in city right-of-way.

  (B) At street intersections, no signs may be placed within the triangle formed by the intersections of maintained roadway, whether paved or graveled, of two intersecting streets and the line extended joining points measured thirty feet on each property line from the point of said property lines intersection, unless:

(i) said signs are on posts with a width or diameter not greater than 18 inches; and

(ii) the bottom of said signs are not less than eight feet from the ground or the tops are no higher than twenty-four (24) inches from the ground.

(5) The formula for determining the allowable area for ground signs shall be as follows: Four square feet of sign for each one foot of frontage on the lot where the sign is to be placed. In any event, the maximum square footage of any ground sign shall not exceed 800 square feet per side, regardless of frontage feet.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011

Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013

 

§31-25.1.  Development Signs
Development signs shall be allowed under the following conditions:

                (A) Only allowed on subdivisions of twenty (20) acres or more that front on at least one side on a street classified as a major arterial or higher.

                (B) Limited to one per street frontage of the development.

                (C) Limited to thirty (30) feet in height or the height specified in the zoning classification, whichever is the most restrictive.

                (D) Limited to no more than two hundred (200) square feet in area. Double faced signs shall be calculated on the largest side only.

                (E) Development signs shall be separated a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all other signs, and shall be at least five (5) feet from all property lines.

                (F) A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the sign face shall identify the development with the remaining square footage advertising tenants within the development and within five hundred (500) feet of the sign.

                (G) Development signs as defined in this chapter shall not be classified as billboards or off-premise signs for the purpose of spacing of off-premise signage on other properties, provided they meet the provisions specified.

                (H) No signs defined as billboards shall be allowed within the subdivision if the provision of development signs is utilized.

Added by Ordinance No. 8978, effective 06-08-2005

 

§31-26.  Roof Signs
                No roof sign shall be placed in such a manner as to prevent the free passage from one part of the roof upon which such sign is erected to any other part thereof. Neither shall such sign be so placed as to interfere or block any openings in such roof.

                No part of a roof sign shall project beyond the wall lines of the building whereon it is placed.

                All roof signs shall be set back so that there shall be a space of at least four feet between the face of the sign and the face of any wall of the building whereon it is erected; provided, that ends of signs set diagonally may extend to, but not beyond wall lines.

                All roof signs shall be constructed so that there shall be a minimum clear space of not less than six feet between the roof level and the lowest part of the sign structure, and there shall be a minimum clearance of not less than five feet between the vertical supports and braces thereof.

                Structural elements of every roof sign erected shall be entirely of metal, including the uprights, supports and braces; provided, that subject to the approval of the chief building official, battens behind the metal facing, molding and decorative lattice work may be of wood construction, treated with a fire resistant compound.

                Any roof sign erected upon any frame building shall be supported only upon load bearing walls or columns of the building. Any person desiring to erect a roof sign shall submit to the chief building official a diagram or sketch showing the general character of the proposed sign and placement, and a written statement from a licensed architect or engineer certifying as to the safety of the proposed sign and placement.

                The maximum height of a roof sign shall be twenty feet above the roof line, the measurement shall be from the base of the roof to the top of the sign.

                One roof sign shall be allowed for each street frontage of the building upon which the sign is placed. The maximum area in square feet for roof signs shall be computed by allowing four square feet of sign space for each front foot of the lot on which the building is constructed; provided, that no roof sign shall exceed 800 square feet for one side only.

 

§31-27.  Swinging Signs and Rotating Signs
                Swinging signs of all types are prohibited and rotating or revolving signs shall not exceed eight revolutions per minute.

 

§31-28.  Transparent Signs
                Signs designated as transparent signs are hereby authorized. Regulations pertaining to roof signs and ground signs shall govern the construction, erection, and maintenance of transparent signs.

 

§31-29.  Wall Signs
                Any sign directly painted or otherwise directly depicted upon a wall is hereby authorized, provided, that the fee requirements of §31-5 of the Grand Island City Code are complied with. In addition, the area in square feet of any wall sign shall not exceed thirty percent of the building facade upon which it is painted or depicted.

 

§31-30.  Nonconforming Signs
                Any lawful sign existing on or before May 15, 1974, although such sign does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued as a nonconforming sign, except as provided herein, but if any such sign is changed, altered, modified, or its use discontinued, any further use of said sign must be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. In addition, all nonconforming signs existing on or before May 15, 1974, shall be made to conform with the provisions of this chapter within ten years of the effective date of this section or be removed at the owner's expense. All nonconforming signs are subject to the provisions of §31-5 which requires a permit to erect, re-erect, remove, or maintain signs within the City; and the provisions of §31-8 which requires all signs to be kept in good repair and a safe condition.

 

§31-31.  Free Standing Ground Signs Prohibited
                It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to be placed upon premises any free standing ground sign. For the purposes of this section, "free standing ground sign" shall mean any ground sign which is not permanently attached or fixed to the ground in excess of 15 square feet; provided, however, this section shall in no way prohibit the placement of mobile signs as defined by §31-32.

 

§31-32.  Mobile Signs
  (1) General. The placement of mobile signs shall be in accordance with all requirements of the Grand Island City Code.  Furthermore, no mobile sign shall be placed or used at any location except as allowed in this section, and only after obtaining a permit therefor from the City building department.

  (2) Permit, Types, Duration; Fee; Application

  (A) 45 Day Permit: A permit to allow one mobile sign per business to be located at a specific property location for no more than forty-five (45) days from the date of issuance, during any calendar year.  No sign authorized by a 45 Day Permit shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet of any other sign allowed by a 45 Day Permit.  Properties with less than one hundred (100) feet of street frontage shall be entitled to one 45 Day Permit per calendar year.  The fee for a 45 Day Permit shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

  (B) Special Event Permit: A permit to allow any number of mobile signs at any one property location for a period not to exceed four (4) days.  The fee for a Special Event Permit shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.  Special Event Permits shall only be issued in the spirit of the following examples of truly special events: a grand opening sale, a special holiday or seasonal sale, anniversary sale, going out of business sale.  There shall be a minimum of one day between special events.

  (C) Application Contents: The application shall describe in detail all positions where the sign will be placed on the location, the dimensions of the sign, and the type of permit being sought.

  (3) Design. Mobile signs may be constructed of any material meeting the requirements of this Code and shall be so designed that the structural frame will resist wind loads of twenty-five (25) pounds per square foot when anchored to the ground. The measured height of the face of a mobile sign shall not exceed six feet (6'). Mobile signs shall be so designed that the sign when placed upon the ground shall not rest upon any wheels. The wheels shall only be utilized in moving the mobile sign from site to site. Mobile signs shall be anchored to the ground or ground-surfacing material in a manner approved by the building official.

  (4) Electrical. Mobile signs utilizing electrical equipment in connection with illuminating the mobile sign shall have all such equipment installed in accordance with the Grand Island Electrical Code. All electrical connections to mobile signs shall be made with a type S or SO or STO flexible 12-3 cord and plugged into an approved 120 volt grounded electrical outlet protected with a FGCI receptacle or breaker with a capacity of not less than 15 amperes nor more than 20 amperes. The distance between the electrical outlet receptacle and the mobile sign shall not exceed 50 feet and the cord shall not be placed upon any ground or ground-surfacing that is specifically designed to accommodate pedestrian traffic or vehicular traffic of any sort.

  (5) Anchoring Requirements  All mobile signs must be weighted with ballast or anchored in the following manner:

        (A) Such weight or ballast must be a minimum of five pounds of weight for each square foot of sign face. Mobile signs shall be weighted in a manner approved by a building department official.

        (B) Anchored at each position used by a minimum of four anchors which meet the following specifications:

  (1) If anchored in concrete, the anchors shall extend to a depth of at least four inches (4") and shall be at least one half inch (1/2") diameter; or

  (2) If anchored in asphalt, the anchors shall extend to a depth of at least three feet (3') and shall be at least one half inch (1/2") diameter; or

  (3) If anchored in dirt, the anchors shall extend to a depth of at least three feet (3') and shall be either metal spikes with a diameter of at least one half inch (1/2") or wooden spikes with dimensions of at least two inches by two inches (2"x2").

  (4) The anchoring of any mobile sign must be approved by a building department official.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011

 

§31-33.  Free Standing Yard Signs
  (1) Free Standing Yard signs shall be free standing and shall not be in excess of fifteen (15) square feet in size.

  (2) Free Standing Yard signs shall be exempt from Section 31-5 Permits. 

  (3) Free Standing Yard signs shall not be allowed on any public property or right-of-way.

  (4) Free Standing Yard signs at street intersections shall not be placed within the triangle formed by the adjacent property lines of the two intersecting streets and the line joining points thirty (30) feet distant along property lines from their point of intersection.

  (5) It shall be unlawful to erect free standing yard signs at any time in violation of the Grand Island City Code.

  (6) The Chief Building Official, or his/her designee, shall be authorized to seize and remove all signs in violation of this section, and dispose of the same without notice.

  (7) The city clerk shall provide copies of this section of the Grand Island City Code to the Hall County Election Commissioner for distribution to all candidates for political office and persons using political free standing yard signs within zoning jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island, or other interested persons.

  (8)  Free Standing Yard signs utilized to advertise an event shall be removed no later than five (5) days after the event.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9316, effective 09-13-2011

 

 

§31-34.  Public Signs
                A sign which is owned and erected by or for the City of Grand Island, Hall County, or any public or private nonprofit school may be placed in any zoning district, provided:

  (A) The sign is for public identification purposes only and shall not advertise a product, service, or business activity;

  (B) The maximum size of such sign shall be 150 square feet.

  (C) Any public entity described above may be allowed the maximum signage on any of two street frontages provided the signs are separated by a distance of one hundred fifty (150.0) lineal feet measured adjacent to the street right-of-way.

  (D) Wall signs are allowable limited to one per building elevation and not to exceed three hundred (300.0) square feet per sign with a total of six hundred (600.0) square feet per tract of land.

Amended by Ord. No. 8834, eff. 8-27-2003

 

Article II.  Signs in AC-Arterial Commercial Zone

 

§31-35.  Authorized Signs In AC-Arterial Commercial Zone
                All signs placed in the AC-Arterial Commercial Zone shall be subject to the following requirements:

  (A) Signs Allowed. Ground signs, monument signs, roof signs, wall signs (flat or projecting), and freestanding ground signs. (Monument signs shall be those ground signs in which the base width is fifty percent (50%) or more of the width of the sign.)

  (B) Size.

        (1) Total ground signage allowed per tract of land shall be one square foot of sign for each one lineal foot of street frontage for the first one hundred fifty feet and .75 foot of signage for each lineal foot thereafter. The total ground signage on the property shall not exceed three hundred square feet. (The area of a double-faced sign is calculated on the largest face only).

                (2) No single ground sign shall exceed two hundred square feet.

                (3) For tracts of land with three hundred (300) lineal feet or more of street frontage the total allowable square footage of ground signage shall be one square foot of sign for each one foot of street frontage for the first one hundred and fifty (150) feet and one point one eight (1.18) square foot of signage for each lineal foot thereafter. No single sign shall exceed three hundred and fifty (350) square feet. This section applies within the AC Zone from Fonner Park Road to Stolley Park Road.

  (C) Location.

        (1) All signs shall be set back from the front property line a minimum of five feet, and a minimum of ten feet from all other property lines. Exception: the side property line adjacent to a public street shall have a minimum setback of five feet. Monument signs shall be set back from the front property line a minimum of twelve feet, and ten feet from all other property lines.

        (2) All ground and monument signs shall be set back from the side property line a distance equal to or greater than 25% of the lot frontage. Exception: the side lot line adjacent to a public street or City owned property and directional signs not exceeding four square feet with a maximum of forty inches (3'-4") in height.

        (3) Ground signs on the same tract of land shall be separated by a minimum of fifty lineal feet. The one exception shall be directional signs not exceeding four square feet in size.

  (D) Height.

        (1) The maximum height of ground signs shall be thirty feet.

        (2) Signs shall maintain twelve feet of clearance above all adjacent walking or driving surfaces.

        (3) Signs may project over a sidewalk or drive on private property, but shall not extend beyond such surface.

  (E) All other provisions of the city code shall apply; the most restrictive requirement shall be enforced.

  (F) Billboards.

        (1) The maximum size of any billboard shall be three hundred square feet. (The area of double-faced, or back-to-back signs will be calculated on the largest face only).

        (2) The maximum height of any billboard shall be thirty feet.

        (3) Billboards shall not be located in the required front yard and shall maintain a ten foot setback from all other property lines.

        (4) Billboards shall maintain a 1,000 foot separation between other billboards located along the same side of the Locust Street right-of-way and shall be a minimum of fifty feet from any ground sign.

        (5) Billboards shall not be calculated in the maximum allowable on-site signage.

        (6) There currently exist five signs defined as billboards in the AC-Arterial Commercial Zone from Stolley Park Road south to U.S. Highway 34.  Those signs shall be legal non-conforming signs and allowed to remain with the provisions as stated in Section 31-42.

        (7) No billboards shall be allowed within the AC-Arterial Commercial Zone within the area bounded by Stolley Park Road on the south and Fonner Park Road on the north.

Amended by Ord. No. 8787, eff. 12-18-2002

Amended by Ord. No. 9177, eff. 07-22-2008

Amended by Ord. No. 9259, eff. 05-10-2010

Amended by Ord. No. 9573, eff. 03-15-2016

 

§31-36.  Reserved
§31-37.  Reserved
§31-38.  Reserved
§31-39.  Reserved

 

 

Article III.  Off-Premise Outdoor Advertising Signs

 

§31-40.  Statement of Purpose
                This Article establishes the regulations for the continuing use of off-premise outdoor advertising in order to encourage an attractive environment for businesses, inform and direct the general public, protect and enhance the physical appearance of the community, ensure public safety along streets and highways, and provide businesses with a format for advertising the goods and services made available by the business community.

                Outdoor advertising is a traditional advertising medium involving the use of private property.

                Outdoor advertising should be regulated to provide for safe structures, to be properly located so as to meet uniform standards for construction and maintenance, and to be maintained to conform to a neat and pleasant community appearance.

                In support of the previous statements and in order to assure the compatibility of billboards with surrounding land usage, to protect the public interest in streets and highways, to promote and maintain the safety and general welfare of persons and their property in the vicinity of outdoor advertising structures, to allow orderly and effective display of outdoor advertising, it is deemed to be in the public interest to enact this ordinance.

                The regulations in this Article shall be known as the Outdoor Advertising Ordinance of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

Added by Ord. No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003

 

§31-41.  Permitted Zones
                Off-Premise signs shall be permitted as principal, accessory or conditional uses in the following zones:

                    1.  Business Zones:

                              B2 – General Business Zone

                              AC – Arterial Commercial Zone

                              B3 – Heavy Business Zone

                              TD – Travel Development Zone

                    2.  Manufacturing Zones:

                              M1 – Light Manufacturing Zone

                              M2 – Heavy Manufacturing Zone

                              M3 – Central City Manufacturing Zone

Note: Off-premise signs located within B2/AC zones shall comply with the most restrictive requirements of Section 31-35 or Article III of this Chapter.

Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003

 

§31-42.  Legal Nonconforming Signs
                Any off-premise sign lawfully erected and in existence on the effective date of this ordinance which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance may be maintained as a matter of right as a legal nonconforming sign. The sign may be maintained and repaired provided the degree of nonconformity is not increased. If for any reason the sign is damaged to the extent that the repairs are equal to or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the physical components of the sign it may not be repaired or replaced unless it will comply with all requirements of this Article.

Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003
Amended by Ordinance No. 8978, effective 06-08-2005

 

§31-43.  General Provisions
                (A)  No off-premise sign shall be constructed which resembles any official marker erected by a governmental entity, or which by reason of position, shape, or color would conflict with the proper functioning of any official traffic control device.

                (B)  Off-premise signs shall be constructed in accordance with local and state building and electrical codes. Stamped structural engineering plans shall accompany sign permit applications and shall be subject to wind speed requirements as set forth in the latest edition of the adopted Building Code.

                (C)  Off-premise signs shall be regularly maintained in good and safe structural condition.

                (D)  No off-premise sign shall be located on a property without the consent of the property's owner or legal representative.

                (E)  The general area in the vicinity of any freestanding sign on undeveloped property shall be kept free and clear of sign materials, debris, trash and refuse.

                (F)  Signs located on the property as the principal use require that landscaping regulations are provided as part of the permit to erect the sign.

                (G)  Sign applications must include a copy of a lease sufficient to provide a description of the tract of land and the location of the sign on the land.

Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003

 

§31-44.  Size of Signs
                (A)  The maximum sign area for any one facing of an off-premise sign shall not exceed three hundred seventy eight (378) square feet, excluding the base or apron, trim supports, and other structural elements. Temporary embellishments shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the maximum sign area allowed and limited to one hundred eighty (180) days within a calendar year.

                (B)  Signs may be back-to-back, double-faced, V-type, and multiple-faced with not more than two (2) faces to each facing and such structure shall be considered as one off-premise sign.

                (C)  The total of all faces shall not exceed 756 square feet with no single face greater than 378 square feet.

Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003

Amended by Ordinance No. 9461, effective 12-24-2013

 

§31-45.  Height of an Off-Premise Sign
                (A)  An off-premise sign shall maintain a minimum clearance of ten (10) feet measured from the ground level at the base of the sign to the bottom of the sign face.

                (B)  An off-premise sign shall have a maximum height not to exceed fifty (50) feet above grade level of the roadway to the top of the sign face, as measured from the centerline of the roadway to which the sign is oriented.

Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003

 

§31-46.  Spacing for Off-Premise Signs
                (A)  No off-premise sign may be established within an eight hundred (800) foot radius of any other off-premise sign along a state or federal highway. Signs along arterial and collector streets may be located no closer than a five hundred (500) foot radius from all other off premise signs.

                (B)  Spacing from Directional and Official signs, On-Premises signs, or any other sign which does not constitute an off-premise sign shall not be counted nor shall measurements be made from such signs for the purpose of determining compliance with these spacing requirements.

                (C)  The minimum distance between off-premise signs shall be measured along the nearest edge of the signs along either side of the highway, roadway, or street.

                (D)  All off-premise signs shall maintain a minimum of fifty (50) feet from on-premise signs located upon the same property.

Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003

 

§31-47.  Setback Requirements
                (A)  Front: A minimum front yard setback equal to that required in the zoning classification is required from the front lot line for any off-premise sign, but in no event shall the setback be less than ten (10) feet.

                (B)  Side: A minimum setback of ten (10) feet is required from side lot lines for any off-premise sign, regardless of zone.

                (C)  Rear: A minimum setback of ten (10) feet is required from the rear lot line for any off-premise sign, regardless of zone.

                (D)  In no case shall any portion of an off-premise sign overhang into or be placed upon the public right-of-way, or any easement unless allowed by the public entity.

                (E)  All off-premise signs in excess of thirty (30) feet in height shall provide an additional one (1) foot of setback for each foot in height over thirty (30) feet in addition to those setbacks required above. The setback distance shall be measured from the leading edge of the sign to the property line. No sign shall exceed fifty (50) feet in total height.

Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003

 

§31-48.  Lighting
Off-premise signs may be illuminated subject to the following restrictions:

                (A)  Signs which contain, include, or are illuminated by any flashing, intermittent, or moving light or lights are prohibited if such signs interfere with traffic safety. Reflective surfaces or devices on sign faces, and multiple-faced signs, with illumination, are permitted, provided such signs do not interfere with traffic safety and comply with subsections (C) and (D) of this section.

                (B)  Electronic variable message signs giving public information such as, but not limited to time, date, temperature, weather, or other similar information, and commercial electric variable-message signs which function in the same manner as multiple-faced signs are permitted, provided such signs do not interfere with traffic safety and do not resemble or simulate traffic control or safety devices or signs.

                (C)  Signs must be effectively shielded to prevent beams or rays from being directed toward any portion of the traveled ways, and must not be of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare or impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle.

                (D)  No sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the effectiveness of or obscures an official traffic sign, device or signal.

Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003

 

§31-49.  Sign Permits
                No off-premise sign shall be erected without submitting an application, securing a permit and paying the permit fees required by the City of Grand Island. Before any such permit is issued, an inspection shall determine that the off-premise sign complies with the provisions of this Article. When any construction, alteration, or repair of off-premise signs shall have begun before a permit therefore has been issued, an investigation fee in addition to the sign permit fee shall be collected. The permit fee and the investigation fee shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

Added by Ordinance No. 8866, effective 11-19-2003

 

 

CHAPTER 32

STREETS AND SIDEWALKS

 

Article I. Obstructions and Excavations

 §32-1.  Obstructions Generally; Impeding Traffic
               Except as otherwise provided by this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any of the streets, sidewalks, street right-of-way, or alleys in the City, or in any manner impede the passage of traffic thereon by sitting, standing, lying, walking, or running on the streets, sidewalks, street right-of-way, or alleys with the intent to obstruct or impede, or to allow to permit the same to be done by any building, vehicle, or other thing under such person's charge or control.

 

§32-2. Trees and Shrubs Projecting  into Street
               It is hereby declared unlawful for any property owner or any lessee or occupant of any property to permit the limbs, branches or foliage of any tree or shrub upon such property to project into or extend over any street, lane, or sidewalk in such manner that there shall be a clearance of less than fourteen feet between the surface of such street, lane, or less than eight feet between the sidewalk and such limbs, branches, or foliage.

               It is also declared unlawful for any property owner or any lessee or occupant of any property to plant, grow, keep or maintain, or cause to be planted, grown, kept, or maintained, any hedge, bush or shrubbery of any kind or nature, within the public right-of-way to be continuous of five feet (5’) or more and of a height over three feet (3’) above the roadway surface measured from the nearest top of the roadway surface or the centerline grade of the roadway, whichever is higher.

 

§32-3.  Obstructions; Clearance Above Alley
                It is hereby declared unlawful for any property owner or any lessee or occupant of any property to permit the limbs, branches or foliage of any tree or shrub upon such property to project into or extend over any alley in such manner that there shall be a clearance of less than fourteen feet between the surface of the alley and such limbs, branches or foliage.

 

§32-4.  Obstructions; Duty to Remove
               It shall be the duty of any property owner or any lessee or occupant of any property to remove all obstructions as defined in §32-2 and §32-3 of the Grand Island City Code originating from that part of street right-of-way lying between the curb and the adjacent property line of said property owner or lessee or occupant, or where no curb exists, that part of the street right-of-way between the lateral line of the right-of-way improved for vehicle use and the adjacent property line of said property owner or lessee or occupant.

 

§32-5.  Obstructions; Notice
               It shall be the duty of the public works director to notify in writing the owner, the agent of the owner, or the lessee, or the occupant of the property whereon is located any illegally maintained tree or shrub as defined herein to remove such tree or shrub or portion of such tree or shrub within ten days from the date of such notice. If at the expiration of the date set forth in such notice such illegally maintained portion of such tree or shrub has not been removed and no extension of time has been granted, the public works director shall report such refusal or neglect to the city attorney, who shall file charges against such owner, agent or the lessee or occupant of such premises for violation of this chapter.

 

§32-6.  Obstructions; Removal by City
               The public works director shall have the right to cut down and to remove any tree, tree limb or shrub which may be permitted to remain in violation of the provisions of this chapter after service of notice to remove the same. The public works director shall report to the mayor and city council the cost of removing such tree, tree limbs or shrubs, and the cost thereof shall, by ordinance, be assessed against the property on which such tree, tree limbs or shrubs was removed, and the amount thereof shall be a lien on such premises and shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the date of such levy until paid. The same shall be collected and enforced as in the case of special assessments.

 

§32-7.  Obstructions at Intersections
               It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to plant, grow, keep or maintain, or cause to be planted, grown, kept, or maintained, any hedge, bush or shrubbery of any kind or nature more than three feet in height above the roadway within the triangle formed by the adjacent side lines of two intersecting streets and the line joining points distant thirty feet on each side line from their point of intersection. For the purpose of this section, "side line" of street shall mean the property line.

 

§32-8.  Obstructions; Mailboxes
               It shall be unlawful for any person to place, keep, or maintain a mailbox on or over a sidewalk, or that overhangs the street paving, curb, or interferes with the use of the public right-of-way or presents a hazard to those using it.

 

§32-9.  Mailbox; Defined
               For the purposes of this chapter, mailbox shall mean an individual box used for the collection or delivery of mail to a dwelling unit or business, and shall include a number or group of mailboxes for the collection or delivery of mail to a number of dwelling units or businesses.

 

§32-10.  Guy Wires
               Every person owning or maintaining guy wires in such close proximity to city streets, alleys, and sidewalks as to endanger pedestrians or vehicles shall protect each of such guy wires by attaching thereto at the ground a board not less than six feet in length and three inches in width, or by enclosing such guy wires in a substantial and conspicuous wood or metal guard not less than six feet in length and three inches in diameter or width. Such board or guard shall be painted white or galvanized and shall be securely attached to such guy wires.

 

§32-11.  Injuring Streets
               Except as otherwise provided by this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to injure or obstruct any public street or alley by placing upon or across the same anything whatever that will injure the same or retard the public travel thereon, or by encroaching upon the same, by any fence, or by plowing or digging any ditch or opening thereon, or by taking any earth therefrom; provided, that this section shall not apply to the City in the making of such improvements and repairs as it deems necessary on its streets and alleys, or any work that may be done thereon by the authority of the City.

 

§32-12.  Excavations; Barricades
               No person shall leave any excavation made in any street or highway open at any time without retroreflectorized barricades at such excavations.  The name of the company responsible for the excavation shall be clearly visible on the barricades.

Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09

 

 

§32-13.  Excavations While Ground Is Frozen
               No person shall make any excavation in any street or highway in the City while the ground is frozen except under the direction of the city council or the public works director.

 

Article II. Paving Districts
 

§32-14.  Service Pipes In New Paving Districts
               All property owners within a newly created paving district who derive their water and sewer service from mains laid in the streets proposed to be paved within such paving district are hereby required to lay service pipes and sewers from the street to the curb line and connect same with the water and sewer main in such street before the surface of such street is paved and within the time provided by this article.

 

§32-15.  Utility Lines In New Paving Districts
               All public service and utility companies having mains within the streets in a newly created paving district are hereby required, after notice given as provided by this article, to lay service pipes from their mains in such street to the curb line for the use of all abutting property owners wishing to connect up with the same in the future before the surface of such street is paved.

 

§32-16.  Notice
               The city clerk is hereby instructed, after the organization of a paving district is completed, to publish a notice, in a legal newspaper published in the city, and directed to the property owners within such district, and to public service and utility companies having mains within such streets or wishing to lay mains in such streets for future use, advising such property owners and public service and utility companies of the provisions of this article.

 

§32-17.  When Work to be Done
               Service pipes and sewers shall be laid and connections made with the mains and sewers in any street within a newly created paving district within thirty days after the last publication of the notice provided by §32-16.

 

§32-18.  City to Perform Work; Assessments
               In the event any property owner within a newly created paving district shall fail or neglect, within the time provided by this article, to lay service pipes or connect with the water and sewer mains in any street before such street is paved, the City is hereby authorized and required, after due notice given as required by law, to lay such service pipes and connect the same with the water and sewer mains in such street, and the cost of such extension, connection, and improvement is hereby made assessable as a special tax against the property contained in such district and benefit thereby.

 

§32-19.  Disturbing Pavement
               It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the surface of any paved street or alley for the purpose of laying service pipes or sewers after failing to comply with §32-14 to §32-18.

 

§32-20.  Pavement or Sidewalk Cut; Defined
               A pavement or sidewalk cut for the purpose of §32-21 to §32-33 shall be defined as any cut or opening made in any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public ground and shall include all types of street and alley surfaces and the curb and gutter.

 

§32-21.  Applicability of Section 32-20 to Section 32-32
               Work on pavement or sidewalk cuts or openings made either as a result of obtaining a permit for the same or as a result of entering into a contract with the City for some other type of construction shall be subject to the provisions of §32-20 to §32-32, except that contracts with the City for the complete repaving or resurfacing of an existing paved street or alley shall be exempt from this provision.

 

§32-22.  Permit to Make Pavement Cut
               It shall be unlawful for any person to make any street, alley, sidewalk or other public ground cut or opening without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City public works department.

 

§32-23.  Permits; To Whom Issued
               The following parties shall be eligible to secure permits to cut or open streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public grounds:

        (1) Public Utility Corporations. Any public utility corporation having a franchise to operate in any street, alley, or other public grounds in the City.

        (2) Licensed Plumbers. Licensed plumbers bonded by the City.

        (3) City-owned Utility Departments. The water and light departments owned and operated by the City under the direction of the utility director.

        (4) Others Performing Services. Others performing services under contract for the City with approved surety bonds on file.

        (5) Persons Requesting Lowered Curbs. Any person requesting a lowered curb for a driveway entrance or parking area in back of a curb.

 

§32-24.  Permits; Application
               The application for a permit to make a pavement or sidewalk cut shall be made to the City Public Works Department and shall show the name of the party seeking the permit, the location of the duty or  opening to be made, the purpose for which the same is to be made and any other pertinent information the City may require. No permit or fee is required for the lowering (milling) of a curb for ADA compliant handicap sidewalk ramps.

Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09

 

§32-25.  Permit; Fee
               The party applying for a permit to make a pavement or sidewalk cut shall pay to the City at the time such permit is issued a fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, which amount shall be credited to the general fund of the City. No fee shall be charged for those performing services under contract for the City, but a permit shall be required. A single (blanket) permit may be issued with no fee to a contractor working in multiple locations throughout the City as directed by the City. If work is commenced prior to application for the permit, an investigation fee in addition to the permit fee in the same amount as the permit fee shall be assessed. Each permit shall expire six months from date of issuance.

Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09

 

§32-26.  Responsibility of Permittee

               (1) Public utility corporations operating in the City under a franchise, licensed plumbers, city owned utility departments, parties lowering curbs for a driveway entrance, parties performing services under contract for the City, and other permittees, shall at their own expense make such cuts or openings in streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public grounds according to specifications hereinafter provided. If the surface of any such cut or opening made in any street, alley, sidewalk, or public grounds should thereafter become defective within two years by reason of settling, faulty workmanship, or materials, the same shall upon notice from the public works director be immediately repaired and restored to the satisfaction of said director at no expense to the City. If such party fails to repair or replace such faulty work within a reasonable time, the City shall proceed to make such necessary repairs and restore the surface of such cut or opening, and the expense incurred by the City shall immediately be paid by the one to whom the permit to make such cut or opening was issued.

               (2) Public utility corporations operating in the City under a franchise, licensed plumbers, city owned utility departments, parties lowering curbs for a driveway entrance, parties performing services under contract for the City and other permittees, shall after receiving a permit to have a cut or opening made in any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public ground, if such cut or opening is to be made by the City, give at least forty-eight (48) hours notice before such pavement or sidewalk cut shall be made by the City for them, provided, that when such notice is given to the City on Friday or the day before any legal holiday, the time period shall extend to at least 1 p.m. of the second regular City workday. When desiring to have the replacement of any cut or opening made, the same time limit shall apply as when making application for a permit.  The removal of the material from the area cut, the excavation thereunder and the backfill to subgrade, shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be performed according to the provisions of the Grand Island City Code, as amended.

               (3) Parties performing services under contract for the City shall, after making application for a permit to make such cuts or openings in streets, alleys, sidewalk, and public grounds, proceed according to specifications as provided in their contracts.

               (4) All integral curbs to be removed for driveway entrances (if not milled by the City) shall be sawed and removed as per standard plans on file in the office of the city engineer. When the curb to be removed is part of the curb and gutter, the entire curb and gutter shall be removed to the nearest contraction joints beyond the width of the opening required.

Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09

 

§32-27.  Charges for Pavement Cuts
               The City will, after the person or corporation receives the permit, do pavement cuts at the charges

set out in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, except in the case of public utility corporations or city owned utility departments.

               The money collected for the above charges shall be credited to the General Fund.

               In lieu of the City performing any of the above services, a permittee may perform such work on City right-of-way abutting permittee's property only, or may employ an independent contractor, as approved by the public works director. Such permittee shall not commence work until providing City proof of insurance coverage with limits not less than hereinafter set out, namely:

(A) Worker's Compensation Insurance in compliance with the laws of the State of Nebraska, and Employees Liability Insurance.

(B) Public Liability and Property Damage Insurance covering with limits as follows:

(i) Where work is to be performed in Light Business (B1) Zone, General Business (B2) Zone, Heavy Business (B3) Zone, Light Manufacturing (M1) Zone, Heavy Manufacturing (M2) Zone, Commercial Development (CD) Zone, or Industrial Development (ID) Zone, with limits of not less than $25,000 for each person; $50,000 for

more than one person for each occurrence for bodily injury and death; and property damage limits of not less than $10,000; and

(ii) Where work is to be performed in Transitional Agriculture (TA) Zone, Suburban Residential (R1) Zone, Low Density Residential (R2) Zone, Medium Density Residential

(R3) Zone, High Density Residential (R4) Zone, Residential-Office (RO) Zone, or Residential Development (RD) Zone, with limits of not less than $5,000 each person; $10,000 for more than one person for each occurrence for bodily injury and death; and property damage limits of not less than $5,000; and, in any instance, in such additional amounts as specified and required by the public works director when authorizing the work.

(C) Automobile liability insurance with limits of $10,000 each person, and $20,000 each accident for bodily injury or death; and $5,000 each accident for property damage, or such additional amounts as specified by the public works director when authorizing the work.

Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09

 

§32-28.  Call-Out Charge
               In addition to the charges for pavement cuts, each person or corporation receiving a permit as required by §32-22 and requiring City personnel for performance of the work required thereunder, shall pay a fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule for concrete sawing and for concrete milling.

               The aforesaid fee shall be credited to the General Fund.

Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09

 

§32-29.  Removal of Sidewalk or Pavement
               All pavement and sidewalk openings for trenching purposes shall be removed in complete sections regardless of age. The minimum width of all openings shall be no wider at the bottom than at the top of such trench. Undercutting of openings is hereby prohibited.

               When bad expansion joints are sawed out for replacement, the sawcut shall be at least 36 inches on either side of the bad expansion joint. Each repair will be reviewed to ensure that a small area of old pavement is not left before the next expansion joint is encountered.

               When an underground main, pipe, conduit, cable, or other public utility, or any appurtenance thereto, is involved with any sidewalk, the public works director shall determine whether the entire sidewalk, a panel or panels, or a segment or segments less than a panel or panels, shall be removed.

               Any deviation of this section must first be approved by the director of public works.

 

§32-30.  Material and Workmanship Standards
               All material and workmanship on the following shall conform with specifications on file in the public works department:

        (1) All brick pavement that has been opened shall be replaced with a six-inch concrete base and a sand cushion, then replace the brick surface course and seal the joints with emulsified asphaltic compound.

        (2) All brick pavement with an asphaltic surface course that has been opened shall be replaced with six-inch concrete base and three inches of asphaltic concrete; provided, when there is not an asphaltic plant operating in or near the City, the opening may be replaced with nine inches of concrete upon receiving permission from the public works director.

        (3) Concrete pavement that has been opened shall be replaced with concrete of the same thickness as that removed, but in no case shall it be less than six inches in thickness.

        (4) Bituminous surfaced pavement with a concrete base that has been opened shall be replaced with a six-inch concrete base and surfaced with at least two inches of asphaltic concrete. When there is not an asphaltic plant operating in or near the City, the opening may be replaced with eight inches of concrete by receiving permission from the city engineer.

        (5) Bituminous surfaced pavement without a concrete base that has been opened shall be replaced with six inches of asphaltic concrete or six inches of concrete upon receiving permission from the public works director.

 

§32-31.  Temporary Traffic Control
               Part VI of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices MUTCD is the national standard for work zone traffic control.  The current version shall be followed.

               Any contractor utility company or any other person firm or corporation performing work within the right of way of any public street public way or alley in the City of Grand Island shall install and maintain Temporary Traffic Control TTC in accordance with the standards of the MUTCD.

Approval of permits to work within public right of way may be contingent upon evidence of capability to provide, install and maintain TTC devices in accordance with the MUTCD and these provisions.

The Director of Public Works or their representative shall have the authority to direct corrective actions for TTC not in compliance with the MUTCD and these provisions.  These actions include suspending operations and requiring removal of all equipment and materials from the right of way.

If the TTC is left in place longer than 4 hours and no personnel are on the site, the individual responsible for installing the TTC shall provide telephone numbers of personnel who will be available on 24 hours per day, seven days per week basis to the Director of Public Works.  These people shall be responsible for repair, correction, replacement and maintenance of the traffic control devices.  These people shall perform inspections of the TTC at the site twice during the day and once during the night every 24 hours until the work is completed and the right of way is cleared.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9205, effective 2/25/2009

Amended by Ordinance No. 9289, effective 2/23/2011

 

§32-32.  Backfilling
               All excavations, where a sidewalk, curb, gutter, or paved street has been cut or where new paving (concrete or asphalt) will be placed shall be backfilled using nonshrinkable backfill. The backfill shall be filled to the subgrade of the undisturbed sidewalk, curb, gutter, paving, or earth surface.

               The nonshrinkable backfill shall be a mixture of sand, gravel, Portland cement, and water which flows easily around the utility being covered and develops a 28 day compressive strength of from 30 to 200 psi. No nonshrinkable backfill mix designs shall be used without the approval of the Director of Public Works. Fly ash may be approved in the mix if test data are submitted to indicate the above characteristics are met.

               The Director may allow placement of excavated fill in six (6) inch lifts at 95% of maximum density where the opening is very large and the cost of nonshrinkable fill would be prohibitive. In those cases the permit holder will be required to hire an independent soil testing laboratory to test separately each six (6) inch lift for density and certify that each and every lift was compacted to 95% of maximum density.

               Graveled streets shall be backfilled with dampened excavated or similar material in successive horizontal layers or lifts not exceeding six (6) inches in thickness and mechanically compacted equal to one hundred percent (100%) of that of the adjacent undisturbed soil. In unimproved areas such as easements and alleys the trench or opening may be backfilled with sand which shall be flushed into place with water; provided, the top twelve inches (12") of backfill shall be made of the excavated top soil.

               All surplus excavated material shall be removed from the location by the person, firm, or corporation making an excavation in any street, alley, or public ground in the City. Any person, firm, or corporation having made an excavation in any street, alley or public ground shall maintain all trenches or ditches in a safe condition for the public until the excavated material has reached final settlement.

 

§32-33.  Public Works Director; Duties
               It shall be the duty of the public works director to make inspections of all pavement and sidewalk cuts and the openings made in streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public grounds, and the closing and restoration of the surface thereof and to enforce the provisions of this article.

 

§32-34.  Violations of Article
               Any person who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with, or violate any of the requirements or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and if such person shall be a licensed drain layer or plumber, such license may be declared forfeited.

 

 

Article III. Numbering Buildings
 

§32-35.  System Generally
               Except as otherwise provided by this section, First Street shall be the dividing line for the numbering of lots, houses, and buildings upon the north and south streets; that is to say, lots, houses, and buildings on the north and south streets between First Street and Second Street shall constitute the one hundred block, from Second Street to Third Street, the two hundred block, from Third Street to Fourth Street shall constitute the three hundred block, from Fourth Street to Fifth Street the four hundred block, etc., north; from First Street to Division Street shall constitute the one hundred block, from Division Street to Koenig Street, the two hundred block, from Koenig Street to Charles Street, the three hundred block, etc., south.

               Except as otherwise provided by this section, the numbers shall increase by two for each twenty-two feet. The even numbers shall be on the west side of the street and the odd numbers on the east side of the street, that is to say, the first twenty-two feet north of First Street on the east side of the street shall be number 101 and on the west side of the street, 102, and the second twenty-two feet north shall be number 103 on the east side and number 104 on the west side, etc.

               In that section of the city lying west of Broadwell Avenue and north of the right of way of the Union Pacific Railroad Company, the road now known as the Lincoln Highway shall constitute a dividing line. From the Lincoln Highway to George Street shall constitute the one hundred block north, and from George Street to North Front Street the two hundred block, and from North Front Street to Fourth Street the three hundred block, one number as aforesaid for each twenty-two feet on each side of the street.

               In that section of the city lying south of the road now known as the Lincoln Highway and north of the right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad Company, from the Lincoln Highway to Thorn Street shall constitute the one hundred block south, and from Thorn Street to the right-of-way the two hundred block south, numbered as aforesaid.

               In that section of the City lying south of East Division Street and east of the Belt Line, the following shall constitute the numbering: From East Division Street to Sutherland Street shall constitute the two hundred block, from Sutherland Street to Groff Street shall constitute the three hundred block south, from Groff Street to Ashton Avenue as projected in Joehnck's Subdivision, shall constitute the four hundred block south, numbered as aforesaid.

               On South Oak Street, South Vine Street, and South Plum Street, from East Division Street to East Koenig Street shall constitute the two hundred block south, and from East Koenig Street to Ashton Avenue the three hundred block south; on the three such streets between East Division Street and East Koenig Street there shall be one number for each forty-four feet instead of each twenty-two feet as in the rest of the City. In construing the terms of this section, Court Street shall constitute a part of Division Street.

               In that part of the City lying north of East Ninth Street and east of the right-of-way of the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad Company between Ninth Street and Tenth Street and east of the St. Paul Road, from Ninth Street north to the north line of Lots Five, Six, and Seven, Pleasant Hill Addition, shall constitute the nine hundred block. From such point to Loan Street, the one thousand block; from Loan Street to Edgar Street, the one thousand one hundred block; from Edgar Street to Stanley Street, the one thousand two hundred block, etc., north.

 

§32-36.  East-West Streets, West of Broadwell
               The numbers of houses on all streets running in easterly and westerly directions west of Broadwell Avenue shall commence with 1800, the first block west of Broadwell Avenue constituting the one thousand eight hundred block; the second block west of Broadwell Avenue constituting the one thousand nine hundred block, etc.

 

§32-37.  Numbers Assigned
               It shall be the duty of the public works director to prepare a plan for the numbering of principal buildings in accordance with the provisions of this article so that the owner of any principal building may, by applying therefor, receive a certificate of the correct number to be placed on such principal building.

 

§32-38.  Owner's Duty to Install
               It is hereby made the duty of the owner, agent, lessee, or occupant of any principal building in the City to place or cause to be installed and maintained on such building a proper house number as herein designated.

 

§32-39.  Size and Color
               For any installation or replacement of address numbers on or after October 1, 2008, the figures of each number shall be not less than four inches in height. Each figure shall be plain, legible, and of contrasting color with its background. The numbers shall be maintained in such condition at all times.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9182, effective 10-1-2008

 

§32-40.  Place for Number
               The house number shall be placed on the principal building in a conspicuous place as near as may be to the main entrance thereto so that it may be easily seen from the street extending in front of said building. The requirement for house numbers as specified in this article shall be the minimum requirement. The owner, agent, lessee, or occupant of any principal building may place such other correct house numbers on such building as deemed necessary so long as the minimum requirements of this article are met.

 

§32-41.  Enforcement
               It shall be the duty of the public works director to enforce the provisions of this chapter concerning the duty of the owners, agents, lessees, or occupants to number buildings, and any person refusing to number a building as herein required, or who shall fail to do so within a period of thirty days after being notified in writing by the public works director to do so, shall upon the conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

§32-42.  Definitions
            The following words when used in this article shall have the following meanings:

               Street - Every way or place open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular traffic.

               Principal Building - The main building on any lot, tract, or subdivision of either. This definition includes business, commercial, and industrial buildings as well as dwellings.

               Public Works Director - The public works director of the City of Grand Island or his or her delegated representative.

 

Article IV. Street Vendors and Solicitors
 

§32-43.  Definitions
               Food Vendor: shall mean any person, firm or corporation who engages in the sale of food or drink in which such food or drink is prepared, packaged, served and/or sold by such person, firm or corporation from a temporary or mobile facility, and is sold or offered for sale on the streets, alleys, easements, or other public or private property in the City of Grand Island. The sale or offer of sale of freshly grown whole produce shall be exempt from this definition.

               Solicitor: shall mean any person that travels from house to house taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, subscriptions or personal property of any nature whatsoever. An exception shall be granted to residents of Grand Island giving, selling or offering for sale goods, wares or merchandise who qualify as bona fide nonprofit organizations and operate exclusively for nonprofit, religious, charitable, educational or civic purposes or where persons selling or offering for sale goods, wares or merchandise, or soliciting orders for sale of the same do so in an event held exclusively for nonprofit, religious, charitable, educational or civic purposes.

               Street Vendor: shall mean any person, firm or corporation who engages in the sale of merchandise or commercially prepared, pre-packaged, non-potentially hazardous food or drink on the streets, alleys, easements, or other public property in the City of Grand Island.

Added by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004

 

§32-44.  Food Vendor Permit; General Rules
               (A) All food vendors shall make application, pay a permit fee and obtain a permit from the Central District Health Department prior to the sale of food or drinks on any street, alley, easement, or other public or private property in the City of Grand Island.

               (B) The amount of the permit fee shall be established and approved by the Health Board.

Added by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004

 

§32-45.  Solicitors; General Rules
               (A) All solicitors shall make application to the Grand Island Police Department prior to the commencement of any house-to-house sale of goods, wares or merchandise, subscriptions or personal property of any nature whatsoever.

               (B) Each person shall show proof of identity with a photo identification card, and shall pay a nonrefundable application fee to the Grand Island Police Department in accordance with the Grand Island Fee Schedule at the time of making such application.

               (C) Processing of such application shall be completed within three working days (Monday-Friday), and shall include a background check of the person submitting such application. Applicants having a felony conviction will be denied a Solicitor's Permit.

               (D) Solicitor's Permits shall remain in effect for 30 consecutive days from the date of issuance.

               (E) Solicitors may conduct business, door-to-door, only between 8:00 a.m. and sunset. This regulation does not apply where the solicitor is on the property by the express, prior invitation of the person residing on the premises.

Added by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004

 

§32-46.  Street Vendors; General Rules
               (A) All street vendors shall make application to the Grand Island Police Department, pay a permit fee and obtain a permit prior to using the streets, alleys, easements or other public property in the City of Grand Island to sell merchandise or commercially prepared, pre-packaged food or drinks.

               (B) The owner of each company making application for a street vendor permit shall show proof of identity with a photo identification card, and shall pay a nonrefundable application fee to the Grand Island Police Department in accordance with the Grand Island Fee Schedule at the time of making such application.

               (C) Processing of such application shall be completed within three working days (Monday-Friday), and shall include a background check of the owner of the company submitting such application. Applicants having a felony conviction will be denied a Street Vendor Permit.

               (D) Street Vendor Permits shall be in effect for 30, 90 or 365 consecutive days from the date of issuance as requested by the vendor and upon payment of the applicable permit fee.

               (E) Street vendors may conduct business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.

               (F) A person shall vend only when the vendor's truck is lawfully parked or stopped.

               (G) A person shall vend only from the side of the vendor's truck away from moving traffic and at the curb or edge of the roadway.

Added by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004

 

§32-47.  Rules Applicable to All.

The following rules shall apply to all persons conducting business in accordance with this Article:

               (A) A valid permit shall, at all times, be in the possession of the person authorized to operate such business, and shall be subject to inspection upon request.

               (B) Except as provided in §32-48, every person authorized by the Grand Island Police Department or the Central District Health Department to engage in any business allowed by this Article may use any of the streets in the City except those streets which have been designated as highways or arterial streets.

Added by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004

 

§32-48.  Downtown Business District Streets.
               It shall be unlawful for any person authorized to do business under this Article to conduct such business on any street listed in §13-17 Congested Parking Area of this code.

 

§32-49.  Use of Sirens, Loudspeakers, Bells, Etc.
               It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in any business pursuant to this article while traveling about the City by motor vehicle or other conveyance, to use sirens or loudspeakers for the purpose of advertising such business.

Amended by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004

 

§32-50.  When Concessions Granted to Others
               (A) No person shall engage in sales of food or drink at any City park or recreational facility without first obtaining written permission from the Parks and Recreation Director. The Parks and Recreation Director shall have authority to limit the number of street vendors or food vendors doing business at any City park or recreation facility and the manner and time that such sales are conducted.

               (B) It shall be unlawful for any person authorized to do business under this article to carry on such business at any City park or recreation facility, baseball or football game, or any athletic contest where an exclusive concession to carry on a similar business has been granted by the Parks and Recreation Director.

               (C) Any person that has been refused permission to engage in sales of food or drink at any City park or recreational facility by the Parks and Recreation Director may request a hearing before the Mayor and City Council on the issue of whether the refusal was arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable.

Amended by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004

 

§32-51.  Violations
               It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to enforce the provisions of this Article against any person found to be violating the same. Any violation of the provisions of this Article may result in the immediate seizure of such permit by the Grand Island Police Department, and may result in prosecution.

Added by Ord. No. 8904, effective 5-26-2004

 

 

Article V. Sidewalks, Curbs and Driveways
 

§32-52.  Prerequisites Generally
               Any person who intends or desires to alter, break, construct, reconstruct, or remove any curb, gutter, public sidewalk, or hardsurfaced driveway, or any combination of them within the area of any street right-of-way lying within the limits of the City, or within its zoning jurisdiction, shall notify the public works director of such intent or desire and obtain a permit therefor. No construction or reconstruction work in connection therewith shall be started until the public works director has furnished specifications for such work. A permit fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule shall be charged for each permit, and each permit shall expire six months from date of issuance. The City Council may, by resolution, waive the permit fee.

Amended by Ord. No. 8808, eff. 5/7/2003

Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09

 

§32-53.  Duties of Public Works Director
               The public works director shall furnish specifications for all approved projects described by §32-52, and shall cause the work to be inspected at proper times to see that such work is done in accordance with such specifications. No additional fee shall be collected for the inspection service, nor for the original engineering service.

Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09

 

§32-54.  Material; Location; Curb Length
               All curbs and gutters, public sidewalks and hard-surfaced driveways constructed or reconstructed within the area of any street right-of-way shall be of Portland cement concrete construction (driveways may also be constructed of hot-mix asphalt), unless the city council, upon proper showing that the public will be adequately protected, shall permit other material to be used in a particular location.

               Curbs and gutters shall be located so as to provide the proper width for future street paving; shall be constructed to the grade established by ordinance; and shall not be constructed in length of less than the full distance between street intersections at any one time.

Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09

 

§32-55.  Sidewalks
               Sidewalks built within one foot or less of property lines shall be known as "conventional" sidewalks. Conventional sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide. Only conventional sidewalks may be constructed on arterial, collector, and other protected streets, except as hereinafter provided.

               Sidewalks constructed immediately adjacent to any curb and gutter shall be known as "curb" sidewalks. Curb sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide. No curb sidewalk may be constructed unless curb and gutter is constructed immediately prior to or is in place at the time of the sidewalk construction.

               No curb sidewalks may be constructed unless there is constructed a continuous curb sidewalk between successive streets or between a street and an alley. The intent of this section is to provide for uniform sidewalk construction between successive streets or streets and alleys. In some instances, intersections or alleys are not in existence in newly platted areas, or blocks in earlier platted areas are excessive in length, in which case curb sidewalk may be constructed only if it will be continuous for approximately one block and there remains a continuous distance of the same length for construction of conventional sidewalk. For the purpose of this section, one block is defined as 300 feet, more or less. The purpose of this requirement is to provide for continuous sidewalk, either curb or conventional, for a reasonable distance without change. No conventional sidewalk may be replaced with curb sidewalk without special permission from the Public Works Director.

               Where buildings, improved parking lots, or other improvements extend to the property line, the sidewalk must be at least five feet in width and extend to the property line.

               In areas classified as rural routes by the U.S. Postal Service, properties will be allowed curb sidewalk only if the following conditions exist:

(1) If curb exists or is being constructed immediately prior to installation of the sidewalk; and

(2) If all property owners installing curb sidewalk agree to neighborhood box units which are approved and installed by the U.S. Postal Service; and

(3) If the section of sidewalk will be consistent between successive streets or from a street to an alley.

Amended by Ord. No. 9227, effective 07/29/09

 

 

§32-56.  Specifications
               The public works director shall determine and provide specifications for the surfaced driveways as nearly uniform as possible throughout the City, and, in determining such specifications, shall consider the mixture of materials, forming, thickness, handling, finishing, expansion joints, foundations, compaction, and any other items or phases for the highest durability of the completed structure, and for safety, convenience, and general utility. Special consideration shall be given to design for vehicle crossings and driveways.

 

§32-57.  Costs at and Within Intersections
               The owners of corner lots at the intersections of streets shall be responsible for the cost of construction of the extensions of public sidewalks to the adjacent curb lines, and, in case of curb sidewalk construction, shall be responsible for the cost of all such sidewalks laid within the street intersection area.

 

§32-58.  Sidewalks; Assessments; Bonds
               (1)  Petition Method of Sidewalk Construction. Upon the petition of any freeholder who desires to build such a permanent sidewalk, the council may by ordinance order the same to be built, and that the cost of the same until paid shall be a perpetual lien upon the real estate along which the freeholder desires such sidewalk to be constructed, and the City may assess and levy the costs of same against such real estate in the manner provided by law. The total cost of the building of the permanent sidewalk shall be levied at one time upon the property along which such permanent sidewalk is to be built, and become delinquent as herein provided: One-seventh of the total cost shall become delinquent in ten days after such levy; one-seventh in one year; one-seventh in two years; one-seventh in three years; one-seventh in four years; one-seventh in five years; one-seventh in six years. Each of such installments, except the first, shall draw interest at the rate of not exceeding seven percent per annum from the time of the levy aforesaid until the same shall become delinquent; and after the same shall become delinquent interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month shall be paid thereon as in the case of other special taxes. The council shall pay for the building of such permanent sidewalk out of the general fund.

               (2)  Sidewalks; Failure to Improve.

                        (A) Whenever it shall be determined by a three-fourths vote of the city council that  public sidewalks are not in place contiguous to the street side boundary lines of any lot, tract, or parcel of land within the city, or that any sidewalks then in place are of insufficient width for usual and convenient use by the public, or that any sidewalks are not laid upon property grade and line, or are of defective construction, or are in a state of disrepair, or are obstructed so as to make such sidewalks unsafe, dangerous or hazardous for public use, then the Public Works Department shall send notice to the property owner giving 15 days to obtain a permit and an additional 15 days to construct or repair the sidewalk as required. Notice will be sent by regular United States mail to the owner’s last known address.

                        (B) In case the owner or owners of any lot, lots or lands abutting on any street or avenue, or part thereof, shall fail to construct or repair any sidewalk in front of his, her or their lot, lots or lands within the time and in the manner as directed and required by the mayor and council, after having received due notice to do so, they shall be liable for all damages or injury occasioned by reason of the defective or dangerous condition of any sidewalk; and the mayor and council shall have power to cause such sidewalk to be constructed or repaired and assess the cost thereof against such property in the manner provide by law for the levying and collection of special assessments.

                        (C) In addition to the foregoing, the Council by a three-fourths vote of all members may, by ordinance, create a sidewalk district pursuant to §19-2417, R.R.S. Neb., and cause such sidewalk to be constructed, reconstructed, or repaired as the case may be and shall contract thereof. The council shall levy assessments on the lots and parcels of land abutting on or adjacent to the sidewalk improvements especially benefited thereby in such district in proportion to the benefits, to pay the cost of such improvement. All assessments shall be a lien on the property on which levied from the date of the levy until paid. The assessment of the special tax, for the sidewalk improvement, shall be levied at one time and shall become delinquent as follows: One-seventh of the total assessment shall become delinquent in ten days after such levy; one-seventh in one year; one-seventh in two years; one-seventh in three years; one-seventh in four years; one-seventh in five years; and one-seventh in six years. Each of such installments, except the first, shall draw interest at the rate of not exceeding seven percent per annum from the time of the levy until the same shall become delinquent; and after the same shall become delinquent, interest at the rate of fourteen percent per annum shall be paid thereon as in the case of other special taxes. All such assessments shall be made and collected in accordance with the procedure established for paving assessments. The power to establish a sidewalk district shall be cumulative to the general authority of the City to regulate sidewalks.

               (3) Bonds, Warrants, Payments. For the purpose of paying the cost of sidewalk improvements in any sidewalk district, the council may, by ordinance, cause to be issued bonds of the City, to be called Sidewalk Bonds of District No. , payable in not exceeding six years from date, and to bear interest annually or semi-annually at not exceeding six percent per annum, with interest coupons attached. Such bonds shall be general obligations of the City with principal and interest payable from a fund made up of the special assessments collected and supplemented by transfers from the general fund to make up any deficiency in the collection of the special assessments. For the purpose of making partial payments as the work progresses, warrants may be issued by the council, upon certificate of the engineer in charge showing the amount of the work completed, in a sum not exceeding eighty percent of the cost thereof, which warrants shall be redeemed and paid upon the sale of the bonds issued and sold as aforesaid.

               (4) Waiver of Sidewalk Requirements. This section shall be of no force or effect with respect to any property subject to a waiver of sidewalk requirements granted by the city council as provided by this Code.

Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09

 

§32-59.  Civil Liability and Cleaning Assessments
                It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant of lots or lands to keep the adjacent sidewalks clean and free from obstructions and accumulations of snow, ice, mud, and slush. If such owner or occupant shall fail in this duty after notice, the City may by contract or through its own employees, clean such sidewalks and free them from obstructions and accumulations of snow, ice, mud, and slush. The cost of such service shall constitute an assessment and tax upon the real estate adjacent to the sidewalks involved and shall remain a lien on the real estate which may be foreclosed by the City in the manner provided by law for other liens or assessments, with the priority of other taxes.

               Any person who is injured by the failure or neglect of the owner and occupant of real estate to comply with this provision may have a cause of action for damages against such owner and occupant.

 

 

Article VI. Wells Beneath Sidewalks
 

§32-60.  Construction; Conditions
               Authority is hereby granted to persons conducting a business within the City to construct privately owned wells on that portion of the street of the City which is beneath the public sidewalk; provided, that the same has been approved by the City; and provided, further, that the same is constructed in a manner approved by the City.

 

§32-61.  Application and Permit
               Before any well is installed pursuant to this article, the party desiring to construct the same shall first make an application to the public works director, which application shall show the location and size of such well and the purpose for which the same is to be used. If the construction of such well is approved by the City a permit to install the same shall be granted.

 

§32-62.  Cost of Supervision and Inspection
               The party desiring to construct a well pursuant to this article shall pay to the City an amount in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule for the cost of supervision and inspection, which sum shall be deposited to the credit of the public works department.

 

§32-63.  Bond
               Any person constructing or repairing any privately-owned well on city-owned property shall furnish a corporate surety bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars to be approved by the city council, which bond shall contain the condition that the applicant shall defend, save, keep harmless, and indemnify the City from all liability, claims, damages, judgments, costs, and expenses of every nature and description caused by or growing out of the making of any excavation, hole, or trench in any street, highway, alley, or thoroughfare, including the pavement, sidewalk, and sidewalk space in the City, the opening or removal of any pavement or any sidewalk surface, the placing of any obstruction, barricade, material, equipment, or apparatus of any nature in the street, highway, alley or thoroughfare, including the sidewalk and sidewalk space, the failure to properly protect any excavation, hole, or trench in any street, highway, alley, or thoroughfare, including the sidewalk or sidewalk space, the installation of any stop box in any street, highway, alley, or thoroughfare, including the sidewalk and sidewalk space, and any and all negligence on the part of such person or his agents, servants or employees, in the use and occupancy of any street, highway, alley, or thoroughfare, including the sidewalk and sidewalk space, in any manner or nature whatsoever while engaged in the construction or repair of such wells; provided, that any person who shall have undertaken to indemnify the City as a licensed plumber shall not be required to furnish any additional indemnity bond.

 

§32-64.  Wells In Traveled Portion of Street
               No well shall be constructed pursuant to this article in any portion of the alley or in any portion of the street used for vehicular travel.

 

§32-65.  Disposing of Discharge from Well
               It shall be unlawful to empty the discharge from any well constructed pursuant to the provisions of this article into the sanitary sewer system of the City or upon any street, avenue, or alley of the City, or upon any lot, tract, parcel of land, or any part thereof which will tend to create a nuisance or interfere with the use or enjoyment by any person of such land or adjacent land. The discharge from such well shall be conveyed in pipes or conduits placed beneath the public sidewalk or in the alleys or public streets which shall be connected with and served by storm sewers. The construction of such pipe lines or conduits beneath such public sidewalk or in any street or alley shall be constructed and laid in such places and in a manner to be approved by the public works director and all excavations or openings made for such pipe lines and conduits shall be promptly covered, closed and backfilled as directed by the public works director, and whenever it shall become necessary to break any sidewalk, paving, or curb and gutter, or any building wall, to provide passageway for such conduit or pipe, the same shall be replaced by the party constructing such well in the manner and when ordered so to do by the public works director.

 

§32-66.  Interconnection with City Water
               It shall be unlawful for any party constructing any well pursuant to this article to cause any interconnection with the city water supply system.

 

§32-67.  Occupation Tax

               Any person constructing a well pursuant to this article shall pay annually to the City an occupation tax for the use of the area beneath the public sidewalk in an amount and at a time as provided by the City Council.

 

§32-68.  Registration of Existing Wells
               The owner or operator of any privately-owned well now in existence and being used for air conditioning or commercial purposes shall register the same with the City public works department in order that the same may be periodically inspected so that the City may ascertain whether or not such well has been wrongfully connected with the water system of the City. There shall be no fee required for the registration of existing wells.

 

 

Article VII. Occupancy of Public Right-of-Way
 

§32-69.  General
               (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, as defined in §1-2 of this code, to use, occupy or obstruct any portion of any street, alley, sidewalk, easement or other public right-of-way or real estate owned by or under the control of the City of Grand Island without first applying for, securing and executing a License Agreement and paying the processing fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, which fee shall not be refundable. The procedure for application and review of a license agreement shall be as follows:

  (A) An applicant or their agent shall file an application and a processing fee shall be paid in the Public Works Department on forms to be provided by the City.

  (B) The Public Works Department shall review the information provided on the application and shall distribute copies of said application to such departments and agencies within the City as may have an interest in or be affected by the proposed use set out in the application for review, comment and/or recommendations.

  (C) The application for license agreement shall be approved, unless a department or agency of the City finds that the proposed use violates a federal, state or local statute, regulation, ordinance, code, rule, regulation or policy or impedes, impairs, diminishes the use of the public land by the City, the public or other person which has a lawful right to use and/or occupy said lands.

               (2)  The Public Works Director or his/her designee, upon receipt of comments and/or recommendations from the aforementioned departments and agencies, may approve, or disapprove, in whole or in part an application for license agreement. The director or his/her designee may specify such conditions and terms to be included in the requested license agreement as are necessary and prudent to protect the interests of the City, public, or any person which has a lawful right to use and/or occupy said lands. The director shall inform the applicant or their agent in writing of any decision disapproving in whole or in part the application for license agreement, said decision to be sent to the address shown on the application.

               (3)  In the event an application submitted under (1) above is disapproved in whole or in part, the applicant, within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by the Public Works Director or his/her designee, may request that the application be placed on the agenda at a regular meeting of the Mayor and City Council for review and final decision. A request for review shall be made in writing and filed in the Public Works Department, along with the appeal fee set out in the Grand Island Fee Schedule.

               (4)  This section shall not apply to;

(A)  personal property which is not affixed or attached to the real estate except movable buildings or structures; and

               (B)  underground lawn irrigation systems encroaching into the public Right-of-Way except when license agreements are required to obtain Federal or State Transportation Funds for an improvement project.  

               (5)  Underground vault space under public sidewalk on buildings constructed prior to 1972 in the Downtown Improvement Parking District, as defined in Section 13-1 of the Grand Island City Code, are maintained solely at the sufferance of the City. The City reserves the authority to require structural upgrades or removal if in the interest of public safety.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9372, effective 04/03/2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9391, effective 08/14/2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9683, effective 05/01/2018

 

§32-70.  Occupancy at Pleasure of City
               Any occupancy of the public right-of-way granted under this article shall be at the pleasure of the City and shall be limited to the uses or occupancies set forth in the license agreement created pursuant to this article.

 

§32-71.  Indemnification Required
All license agreements created pursuant to this article shall provide:

        (1) That such use or occupancy is at the licensee's sole risk;

        (2) The licensee shall waive any claim for damages against the City, its officers, employees, agents, and contractors for any damage or injury that may result to the Licensee's property within the area occupied pursuant to said license agreement;

        (3) The licensee shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from and against any and all loss or damage, and any and all claims, demands, suits, liabilities, and payments in contract or tort, penal or otherwise, resulting from or in connection with the use or occupancy of the public right-of-way pursuant to said license agreement;

        (4) That such use or occupancy is at the pleasure of the City and may be revoked at any time;

        (5) Such other conditions that the City deems necessary to protect the interests of the City and the general public's use of the public right-of-way.

 

§32-72.  Railroad Company Platforms
               The provisions of this article shall not apply to any platforms that have been erected, or may hereafter be erected, in the streets, alleys or sidewalks conveyed to the City by the Union Pacific Railroad Company in which deed of conveyance such company has reserved for itself and its assigns the right to erect such platforms in such streets.

 

§32-72.1.  Use of Public Right-of-Way
               (1) It shall be unlawful for any person, as defined in this Code to use and obstruct for building, construction, demolition or razing purposes any street, alley, or sidewalk, or part thereof, without first securing a permit from the director of public works, pay the fee therefor, and giving bond/proof of insurance, provided:

        (A) No permit shall authorize occupancy of any street or sidewalk space, part thereof, other than immediately in front of, or any alley space immediately behind the lot or lots upon which any building or structure is in process of demolition, razing, erection, or other construction is to be done, and in relation to which such permit is issued, unless consented to in writing by the abutting property owner or owners.

        (B) During progress of any such operations a sidewalk not less than four feet in width shall be at all times kept open, and protected for the purpose of passage in front of each lot or lots and within the space permitted for occupancy.

        (C) Such sidewalk shall be protected by a tight board fence at least four feet in height, and when deemed necessary and required in the permit by the director of public works, by a tight board fence of such additional height and an adequate tight board roof.

        (D) Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the maintenance of necessary driveways and gates for the delivery or removal of material across such sidewalks to or from the building, construction, demolition or razing site, provided, a watchman is stationed at the sidewalk to warn and protect the public.

     (2)     No permit, as provided above, shall be required for any roll off box owned and provided by a collector licensed pursuant to Chapter 17, Article II of the City Code. All other provisions of Chapter 32, Article VII, relating to use of public right-of-way shall apply to any roll off box which is used upon and obstructs any street, alley or sidewalk or part thereof.

 

§32-72.2.  Material Stored in Street
               It shall be unlawful to store building materials or occupy a street, or temporary sidewalk, in front of any one building, in excess of one-third of the width of the same, or to erect any enclosure or store or place any material within eight feet of any street or railway tracks.

 

§32-72.3.  Earth or Rubbish Storage
               It shall be unlawful to store either upon sidewalks or roadways or streets or alleys, earth or a material other than sand used in the construction of the building, taken from excavations, and rubbish taken from buildings, or to fail and neglect to remove the same therefrom from day to day as rapidly as produced, or when dry rubbish apt to produce dust is being handled, to fail and neglect to keep the same wetted down so as to prevent its blowing about by the wind.

 

§32-72.4.  Derrick on Street or Sidewalk
               It shall be unlawful to use any derrick, or place the same upon any sidewalk or street unless approved by the director of public works.

 

§32-72.5.  Abutting Owners; Consent and Waiver
               If the written consent and a waiver of claims for damages against the City or the owners of property abutting upon the side of any proposed building or construction is first obtained and filed with the director of public works, the permission to occupy a street, alley, and sidewalk space may be extended beyond limitations of such building in front of the property for which the consent of the owner or lessee thereof has been secured upon the same terms and conditions as those fixed for the occupancy of sidewalk, street, and alley abutting upon a building site.

 

§32-72.6.  When Occupancy Terminates
               Streets, alleys, and sidewalks may be occupied only in connection with the actual erection, repair, alteration, or removal of buildings, and permission for such occupancy shall terminate with the completion of such operation. It shall be unlawful to occupy any sidewalk or street after the completion of such operation for which a permit has been issued by the director of public works. It shall also be unlawful to occupy a sidewalk or street, under authority of such permit, for the storage of materials not intended for immediate use for operations for which such permit has been issued.

 

§32-72.7.  Barricades
               (1) Retroreflectorized barricades shall be maintained at each end of every pile of material in every street or alley, and at each end of every excavation.

               (2) Any roll off box using and obstructing a street, alley or sidewalk or part thereof must be equipped with reflective material not less than two (2) square feet in area on both the front and back ends.

Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09

 

§32-72.8.  Permit - Issuance, Fee, and Insurance
        (1) Permits for obstructions of streets, sidewalks, and alleys shall be issued by the director of public works. The fee for a permit shall be in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, and shall be paid when the permit is obtained. If work is commenced prior to application for the permit, an investigation fee in addition to the permit fee in the same amount as the permit fee shall be assessed. Each permit shall expire six months from date of issuance.

        (2) No permit shall be issued until the applicant therefore shall have executed and delivered to the director of public works, proof of insurance to be approved by the city attorney and filed with the city clerk, as follows:

        (a) Worker's Compensation Insurance in compliance with the laws of the State of Nebraska, and Employees Liability Insurance.

        (b) Public Liability and Property Damage Insurance covering with limits as follows:

   (i) Where work is to be performed in Light Business (B1) Zone, General Business (B2) Zone, Heavy Business (B3) Zone, Light Manufacturing (M1) Zone, Heavy Manufacturing (M2) Zone, Commercial Development (CD) Zone, or Industrial Development (ID) Zone, with limits of not less than $25,000 for each person; $50,000 for more than one person for each occurrence for bodily injury and death; and property damage limits of not less than $10,000; and

   (ii) Where work is to be performed in Transitional Agriculture (TA) Zone, Suburban Residential (R1) Zone, Low Density Residential (R2) Zone, Medium Density Residential (R3) Zone, High Density Residential (R4) Zone, Residential-Office (RO) Zone, or Residential Development (RD) Zone, with limits of not less than $5,000 each person; $10,000 for more than one person for each occurrence for bodily injury and death; and property damage limits of not less than $5,000; and, in any instance, in such additional amounts as specified and required by the public works director when authorizing the work.

        (c) Automobile liability insurance with limits of $10,000 each person, and $20,000 each accident for bodily injury or death; and $5,000 each accident for property damage, or such additional amounts as specified by the public works director when authorizing the work.

 

§32-72.9.  Penalty for Violation
               Any person violating the provisions of §§32-72.1, 32-72.2, 32-72.3, 32-72.4, 32-72.5, 32-72.6, 32-76.7, 32-72.8, and 32-72.9 of this Code shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

 

Article VIII. Snow Removal
 

§32-73.  Snow and Ice Removal from Sidewalks
               It shall be unlawful for the occupant or owner of any lot, tract, or parcel of real estate within the City to fail to clear or have cleared the sidewalks contiguous thereto of all snow and ice within twenty-four hours after the cessation of any storm or snow fall; provided, that if such lot, tract, or parcel of real estate is located within the Central Business District of the City of Grand Island, then it shall be unlawful for the occupant owner of such lot, tract, or parcel of real estate to fail to clear the sidewalks contiguous thereto of all snow and ice within six hours after the cessation of any storm or snow fall, or by 12:00 Noon should the cessation of any storm or snow fall occur during night-time hours.

               It shall be unlawful for the occupant or owner of any lot, tract, or parcel of real estate within the City to fail to clear or have cleared the sidewalks contiguous thereto of all ice accumulated from natural or artificial drainage of water within twenty-four hours after the commencement of accumulation; provided, that if such lot, tract, or parcel of real estate is located within the Central Business District of the City of Grand Island, then it shall be unlawful for the occupant or owner of such lot, tract, or parcel of real estate to fail to clear the sidewalks contiguous of all ice accumulated from natural or artificial drainage of water within six hours after the commencement of accumulation, or by 12:00 noon should the accumulation of ice occur during night-time hours.

               The violation of this section shall give rise to a cause of action for damages in favor of any person who is injured by the failure or neglect of the owner or occupant of the real estate to comply with the provisions of this section.

 

§32-74.  Shoveling, plowing or blowing  now onto the  street or city property
               It is hereby declared unlawful for any property owner or any lessee or occupant of any property or contractor to shovel, plow or blow any snow from sidewalks, driveways or private property onto any city street or other city property.  The only exception is in the Central Business District where snow from sidewalks only may be placed in the street in such a manner as to cause the least interference to traffic upon such street.

Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09

Amended by Ord. No. 9227, effective 07/29/09

 

§32-74.1.  Objects in the Right-of-Way

               The City will assume no responsibility for damage to underground lawn sprinkling systems or landscaping installed in the City owned right-of-way.

Amended by Ord. No. 9205, effective 02/25/09

 

§32-74.2.  Mailboxes

               (1)  Where mailboxes are placed adjacent to the street it shall be the policy of the City that snow shall be plowed as close as practicable to the curb to allow for passage of traffic and mail delivery.  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to keep piled snow away from mailboxes so mail can be delivered.  The City will not assume responsibility for clearing mailboxes for mail delivery. 

Amended by Ord. No. 9227, effective 07/29/09

 

§32-75.  Removal from Sidewalks by City
               If any sidewalk contiguous to any lot, tract or parcel of real estate within the City is not cleared of snow and ice within the time specified in §32-73, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause such sidewalk to be cleared forthwith, and to immediately report the cost and expense thereof, and the legal description and the name of the record owner of the property to the city council. Thereupon the city council shall, by resolution, direct the city clerk to file with the county clerk a certified copy of such report and resolution, directing that the cost and expense shown in such report be placed upon the assessment rolls and tax books of the county to constitute a lien against such property and be collected in the manner provided by law.

 

§32-76.  Removal from Private Property
               It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed any snow or ice from privately-owned property within the City and place or cause to be placed such snow or ice upon any street or alley within the City.

 

§32-77.  Closing Streets
               Whenever it shall appear necessary to close any street to facilitate snow removal, the public works director is hereby authorized to close any such street in the City; provided, that the closing of such streets shall be clearly indicated by proper signs, signals, lights or barricades.

 

§32-78.  Curb Sidewalk Areas; Private Driveways
               It is hereby specifically provided that in areas where curb sidewalks exist, if and when it becomes necessary to plow snow from the street on to such curb sidewalks, it shall immediately become the abutting property owner's responsibility to have such snow removed as provided by law. It is also hereby provided that when snow from the streets is plowed into private driveways, it shall not be the responsibility of the City to remove such snow therefrom.

 

§32-79.  Sidewalk Cleaning Equipment; License
               No person shall operate for commercial purposes, on any sidewalk space within the City, any motor powered snow removal or sidewalk cleaning equipment without first obtaining a license from the city treasurer.

               The provisions of §32-79 through §32-84 shall not apply to two-wheeled, motor powered snow removal equipment.

               The term "sidewalk space" as defined in §22-1 of the Grand Island City Code shall apply to this article.

 

§32-80.  License; Application
               Applications for licenses issued hereunder shall be made upon forms prepared and made available by the public works director.

 

§32-81.  License; Conditions for Issuance
               The city treasurer shall issue a license hereunder only after receiving a certificate of approval from the public works director that:

(1) Such equipment does not exceed seventy-five horsepower;

(2) The equipment is in a safe condition;

(3) The bond and insurance policy, as required by this chapter, has been approved;

(4) The gross load weight of such equipment shall not exceed seven thousand five hundred pounds;

(5) The axle weight of such equipment with two wheels mounted on said axle shall not exceed four thousand five hundred pounds, and further, that the weight for an axle with a single wheel shall not exceed two thousand five hundred pounds;

(6) The distributed load through the equipment's wheels to the sidewalk surface shall not exceed one hundred fifty pounds per square inch, and further, the distributed load through said wheels shall not exceed two thousand pounds per square foot to the subgrade of the sidewalk.

 

§32-82.  License; Fee; Term; Transferability
               A license shall be issued to a successful applicant hereunder after payment to the city treasurer of an annual license fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule. All licenses shall expire on September 30 following date of issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked; and no license shall be assignable or transferable either as to permittee or equipment.

 

§32-83.  Bond; Liability Insurance
               Every applicant for a license hereunder shall accompany the application with a bond approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by a bonding company or surety company authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska, in the sum of ten thousand dollars, conditioned that the licensee shall save and keep the city free and harmless from any and all loss or damages arising from or out of the use of said license, and upon the payment by the licensee of any and all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses for injuries to persons or damages to property arising out of the operation or maintenance of such motor powered snow removal or sidewalk cleaning equipment. The foregoing condition shall include payment to the city as necessary to restore the sidewalk to such condition as will meet with the approval of the public works director if by operation of the equipment there is damage to said sidewalk. A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska, conforming with the requirements of this section, may be submitted in lieu of a bond or insurance policy if submitted in lieu of a bond or insurance policy if submitted in lieu thereof.

               In addition to the bond, every applicant for such license shall also file with the application required, a public liability insurance policy which such applicant has taken out and agrees to maintain in full force and effect at all times covered by such license, at its expense, which insurance shall include the City of Grand Island as a named insured with personal injury coverage in a sum of at least one hundred thousand dollars for the injury or death of any one person, three hundred thousand dollars for the injury or death of any number of persons in any one accident, and with a coverage in a sum of at least fifty thousand dollars for property damage in any one accident. The policy of insurance shall further provide that it cannot be canceled until ten days' written notice of such cancellation shall have been filed with the city clerk.

 

§32-84.  License; Suspension; Revocation
               The public works director shall have the authority to revoke or suspend a license issued hereunder upon finding that such licensee is conducting business in a reckless or careless manner, or if the licensee is shown to be no longer qualified, or fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

 

Article IX. Controlled Access Streets
 

§32-85.  Fonner Park Road
               That part of Fonner Park Road between the west line of Sycamore Street and the east line of Pleasant View Drive is declared to be a controlled access road, and no real estate lying north of and abutting thereon, except street intersections, shall be permitted access, ingress, or egress to that part of Fonner Park Road.

 
CHAPTER 33

SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS

Article I. In General

 

§33-1.  Definitions
               Applicant shall mean the titleholder of record, his agent, or a person holding a notarized letter authorizing the person to represent the legal owner of the property, or an appropriate purchase agreement.

               Alley shall mean a minor public service street or public thoroughfare 20 feet or less in width, through a block of lots primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street and to provide access to utility services located therein. Buildings facing an alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this code related to frontage on a dedicated street.

               Block shall mean a parcel of land platted into lots and bounded by public streets or by waterways, right-of-ways, unplatted land, City-County boundaries, or adjoining property lines.

               Bond shall mean any form of security including a cash deposit, security bond, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the City Council which meets the intent of such security required by this chapter.

               Boundary Adjustment shall mean the transfer of property by deed to a respective owner or owners of contiguous property for the purpose of adjusting a boundary line and not for the purpose of creating an additional lot or parcel.

               Building Line shall mean a line parallel, or nearly parallel, to the street line at a specified distance from the street line which marks the minimum setback distance a building may be erected. In the case of a cul-de-sac, the building line shall be measured around the curvature of the street line and shall be located at the required front yard setback where the lot width shall meet the minimum lot width required in the zoning district.

               Chief Building Official(s) shall mean the individual(s) appointed and/or employed by the City to enforce the prescribed and adopted building codes for the City.

               City shall mean the City of Grand Island, Nebraska. Also, City Council or governing body.

               City Council shall mean the governing body for the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

               City Engineer shall mean the City Engineer of the City of Grand Island utilized for the recommendation, advice, and implementation of engineering work as requested by the City or such other engineer as the City may assign in the particular matter.

               Clerk shall mean the City Clerk of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

               Comprehensive Development Plan shall mean the master plan for the improvement and development of Grand Island, Nebraska, as adopted by the Hall County Regional Planning Commission and the City in accordance with the laws of the State of Nebraska and the ordinances of Grand Island.

               County Control Point shall mean any point identified as such within the Grand Island/Hall County Geographic Information System (GIS) by the GIS Committee. County control points may include but are not limited to township corners, section corners, quarter section corners, subdivision corners, and block corners.

               Cul-de-Sac shall mean a short public way that has only one outlet for vehicular traffic and terminates in a vehicular turn-around.

               Dead End Street shall mean a public way that has only one outlet for vehicular traffic and does not terminate in a vehicular turn-around.

               Dedication shall mean the intentional appropriation of land by the owner to some public use.

               Developer see "Subdivider".

               Easement shall mean a right to use a parcel of land, granted to the general public, utility, corporation or person(s) for a specific purpose or purposes.

               Flood Plain shall mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see also definition of "flooding" in §36-128).

               Floodway shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

               Frontage Road shall mean minor streets parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways, which reduce the number of access points to the arterial street or highway for the purpose of increased traffic safety.

               Grading Plan shall mean a drawing of a proposed subdivision with plans and specifications for grading which is intended to represent the layout which will be approved for construction by the Planning Commission and the City Council.

               Hall County Regional Planning Commission shall mean the Hall County Regional Planning Commission of Grand Island, Nebraska.

               Improvements shall mean street grading, street surfacing and paving, curbs and gutters, street lights, street signs, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, water meters, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm drainage facilities, culverts, bridges, public utilities, or other such installation as designated by the City Council or its specific approving authority.

               Landscaped shall mean landscaping improvements which include but are not limited to screen plantings, lawn area, pools, trees, shrubs, fences, and walls. Crushed rock, gravel, bark chips, etc., shall not substitute for lawn area. Landscaping shall be provided within two years of issuance of occupancy permit for the principal structure on each lot, and thereafter be properly maintained.

               Lot shall mean a parcel, tract or area of land created in conformance with this chapter that may be separately owned, used, developed or built upon.

               Lot Consolidation shall mean a method for approval of lot boundary adjustments which reduces the number of lots to not greater than two.

               Lot, Corner shall mean a lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets at an angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. If the angle is greater than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, the lot shall be considered an "interior lot".

               Lot, Depth of shall mean the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. Corner lots shall provide at least one dimension equal to the required lot depth prescribed in the affected zoning district.

               Lot, Double Frontage shall mean a lot having a frontage of two non-intersecting streets.

               Lot, Flag shall mean a lot with frontage and access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor. The measurement of the actual lot frontage shall be made along the widest portion of the lot along the line parallel to the street.

               Lot, Frontage shall mean that portion of a lot abutting a street. For purposes of determining yard requirements of corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot abutting a street shall be considered frontage.

               Lot, Interior shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.

               Lot Line shall mean the boundary line of a lot.

               Lot Minimum Area shall mean the minimum square footage of land area within the boundaries of the platted lot lines, as applicable to designated zoning districts.

               Lot, Nonconforming shall mean a lot having less area or dimension than that required in the district in which it is located and which was lawfully created prior to the zoning thereof whereby the larger area or dimension requirements were established, or any lot, other than one shown on a plat recorded in the office of the Hall County Register of Deeds, which does not abut a public road or public road right-of-way and which was lawfully created.

               Lot, Platted shall mean a lot which is part of a subdivision of the plat of which, or the appropriate permit for which, has been legally approved by the City and recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Hall County.

               Lot of Record shall mean a lot held in separate ownership as shown on the records of the Hall County Register of deeds at the time of the passage of a regulation or regulation establishing the zoning district in which the lot is located.

               Lot Split shall mean a subdivision involving the division of one or more lots with the end result not be greater than the two lots.

               Lot, Through shall mean a lot having frontage on two (2) dedicated streets, not including a corner lot.

               Lot, Width of shall mean the average horizontal distance between the side lot line, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.

               Master Plan see "Comprehensive Development Plan".

               Monument shall mean an identification marker established by certified land survey and set by a registered land surveyor at each section corner, angle point, block corner, street centerline, or other point.

               Outlot shall mean a lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is intended as open space or other use, for which no building permit shall be issued for any private structure. Typically uses are limited within the subdivision agreement and/or plat.

               Owner shall mean an individual, firm, association, syndicate, or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain such proceedings.

               Pedestrian Way shall mean a tract of land dedicated to public use, which cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjoining streets or properties.

               Person shall mean an individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, City, County, special district or any other group or combination acting as an entity, except that it shall not include Grand Island, Nebraska.

               Planned Unit Development shall mean a development designed to provide for an unusual or different arrangement of residential, business, or industrial uses in accordance with an approved development plan.

               Plat shall mean a map showing the location, boundaries, and legal description of individual properties, including street rights-of-way, public utility easements, etc.

               Plat, Administrative shall provide for lot combinations and boundary adjustments which result in reconfigured lots with new lot boundaries.

               Plat, Final shall mean the final plan of the plat, subdivision or dedication of land prepared for filing or recording in conformance with this chapter. Substantial conformance to an approved preliminary plat, prepared by a registered professional engineer or a registered land surveyor in accordance with this chapter is required.

               Plat, Preliminary shall mean the preliminary plan of the plat, subdivision or dedication prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

               Plat, Revised Preliminary shall mean a revised plat or map of a previously approved preliminary plat, including supporting data, indicating a proposed subdivision development, prepared in accordance with this chapter.

               Preliminary Study shall mean a drawing of a proposed subdivision to be approved by the Planning Commission and City Council before proceeding with a final plat.

               Property Line Adjustment shall mean the relocation of a single common property line between two abutting lots, parcels or other units of land where an additional lot, parcel or unit of land is not created and the existing lot, parcel or unit of land reduced in size by the adjustment must comply with the applicable zoning requirements. A property line adjustment does not alter the location of utility services and hook-ups. Property line adjustments are accomplished through an administrative plat.

               Sidewalk or Walkway shall mean that portion of a dedicated right-of-way or easement improved and intended for pedestrian use only.

               Replat shall mean the act of platting the lots, parcels and easements in a recorded subdivision to achieve a reconfiguration of an existing subdivision or to increase or decrease the number of lots in the subdivision.

               Street shall include public streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways, roads, lanes, alleys, viaducts, subways, tunnels, bridges, public easements and right-of-way. Where explicitly authorized by the City Council, private streets may be authorized with the subdivision agreement.

               Street, Arterial shall mean a street of considerable continuity connecting various sections of the City, designated as an arterial street on the official street plan of the City.

               Street, Collector shall mean a street or highway that is intended to carry traffic from minor streets to major streets. Collector streets are usually the principal entrance streets to residential developments and the streets for circulation within the development as designated in the Comprehensive Development Plan.

               Street, Frontage Access shall mean a street parallel and adjacent to a major street, major inter-regional highway, or major collection road and primarily for service to the abutting properties, and being separated from the major street by a dividing strip.

               Street, Local shall mean a street which is used primarily for access to the abutting properties.

               Street, Major shall mean a street or highway used primarily for fast or high volume traffic, including expressways, freeways, boulevards, and arterial streets as designated in the Comprehensive Development Plan.

               Street, Minor shall mean a street intended primarily to provide pedestrian and vehicular access to the abutting properties.

               Subdivider shall mean any person, group, corporation, partnership, or other entity, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision.

               Subdivision shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, provided that the smallest lot created by the division is less than ten (10) aces in size.

               Subdivision, Administrative shall mean the re-subdivision of existing subdivided lots and blocks, involving the adjustment of existing lot boundaries or the consolidation of lots, in a manner consistent with zoning regulations concerning minimum area and dimensions of lots; but not creating additional lots nor necessitating the dedication of additional public right-of-way or easements.

               Subdivision Agreement shall mean an agreement between the City of Grand Island and a subdivider whereby the subdivider agrees to construct any required public street, drainage, and other improvements, for a subdivision and to provide security for completion of the subdivision improvements and in situations involving public financing, the relative cost be borne by the subdivider and by the public entity. Conditions involving lot frontage, use, annexation, landscaping, sidewalks, flood plain, utilities and similar concerns specific to the development of the property may also be addressed.

               Water Course, Drainage Way, Channel or Stream shall mean a current of water usually flowing in a definite channel, having a bed and side or banks, and discharging itself into some other stream or body of water.

               Zoning District shall mean an area delineated on a zoning map for which uniform use regulations are specified.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8921, effective 07-28-2004
Amended by Ordinance No. 9031, effective 03-01-2006

 

§33-2.  Application of this Chapter
               Any plat hereafter made, or any subdivision, or any part thereof lying within the corporate limits of the City of Grand Island or in the unincorporated territory within an area extending for two miles beyond the city limits of the City of Grand Island, shall be prepared, presented for approval and recorded as herein prescribed. Any plat of land contiguous to the corporate limits of the City shall be treated as an addition to the City as provided in Section 19-916, R.R.S. 1943. The regulations contained herein shall apply to the subdivider of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more parts for the purpose of sale, transfer of ownership, including the resubdivision or replatting of land or lots. The regulations contained herein shall also apply to all persons or entities engaging in any aspect of real estate development, whether immediate or future. This provision shall not be construed to limit the acceptance of deeds, right-of-way, or other land by the city council when such acceptance is in the public interest and not for the purpose of circumventing these regulations.

               In order to clarify, ratify, and include within this code the policy of the City of Grand Island, the minimum improvements required pursuant to this chapter shall be installed in all subdivisions in which development commenced after January 1, 1997, irrespective of when the subdivision was created and the plat or dedication legally filed of record.

 

§33-3.  Exemption
               The subdivision of land into parcels which are more than ten acres in size and not involving the dedication of any street, easement, or other public use shall be exempt from the requirements of these regulations.

               For proposed developments that provide for the dedication of any street, easement or other public use and contains lots that are all more than ten acres in size, the provisions of these regulations shall apply except Article V. Minimum Improvements. The improvements for this type of subdivision shall be determined by agreement. The Public Works Director, Utilities Director, and Planning Director shall provide recommendations to the Planning Commission and City Council for minimum improvements to be included in the Subdivision Agreement.

 

§33-4.  Division of Platted Lots
               For subdivisions or resubdivisions having one or more of the following characteristics, the public works director and the director of planning shall have the power to waive any or all portions of the preliminary study requirements and procedure:

        (1) Where the subdivision involves the creation of not more than two new building lots and does not involve the dedication of a full width street or is not part of a larger tract intended for future development;

        (2) Where the subdivision involves the creation of not more than one new building lot which exceeds 20,000 square feet in size and has access to a public road;

        (3) Where the subdivision involves the replatting of existing lots and results in the creation of additional building lots, or involves an administrative subdivision.

 

§33-5.  Approval Necessary
               No plat, subdivision, or administrative subdivision shall be recorded in the Register of Deeds Office, Hall County, Nebraska, until all provisions and approvals set forth in these regulations have been met.

 

§33-6.  Building and Utility Permits; Prohibition
               No officer, employee, or agent of the City of Grand Island shall issue any building permit, make any water or sewer connection, or issue any permit for any water or sewer connection for any building or buildings constructed or proposed to be constructed on land subdivided contrary to the provisions of these regulations. No officer, agent, or employee of the City of Grand Island shall perform or caused to be performed any construction or maintenance upon any street or public way purported to be dedicated as a public street or public way by virtue of being shown on a plat, unless such plat shall have been approved as provided by these regulations. The above prohibitions shall not apply to any plat or dedication legally filed of record prior to April 22, 1968.

 

 

Article II. Procedure, Plans and Data
 

§33-7.  Preliminary Study and Data
               (1)  The subdivider shall prepare and file with the Planning Commission twenty-five (25) copies of the proposed preliminary study and required data at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the next regular Planning Commission meeting at which approval of the preliminary study is requested for standard preliminary plat requests. Twenty-five (25) copies of preliminary study or plat approval requests for planned developments including: Commercial Development Zone, Residential Development Zone, Travel Development Zone, Gateway Corridor (Overlay) District, and Mobile Home Residential Zone; shall be submitted at least forty (40) days prior to the next regular Planning Commission meeting at which approval of the preliminary study is requested.

               (2)  The director of Planning shall, at least ten (10) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting, transmit a copy of the proposed preliminary study to the Board of Education of the school district or districts involved, the public works director, director of utilities operations, and any other department or agency that may be affected by the plat and as the commission may designate. Such department or agency except said Board of Education shall have five days to review the referred preliminary study and report back to the director of Planning any requirements or recommendation pertinent to approval of the study. The director of Planning shall examine the preliminary study as to compliance with laws and ordinances of the approved master plan, other official plans and good planning principles; analyze the recommendations submitted by other departments and agencies; coordinate these recommendations and submit his recommendations to the Planning Commission at the next regular meeting.

               (3)  The Planning Commission shall consider all evidence presented by the subdivider, the director of Planning, and others, and shall approve or disapprove the preliminary study, and shall transmit its recommendation along with all supporting papers to the City Council. A copy of the recommendation shall be sent to the subdivider, and one copy shall be retained in the permanent files of the Planning Commission.

               (4)  The city council shall consider and act upon the Planning Commission's recommendation, and shall approve or disapprove the preliminary study. In the event of disapproval, the council shall notify the Planning Commission and state specific reasons for disapproval, a copy of which shall be transmitted to the subdivider. Approval by the council shall be effective for a period of twelve months, after which if a final plat has not been submitted to the Planning Commission for approval, reapproval of the preliminary study by the Planning Commission and council shall be required.

               (5)  The preliminary study shall be made from an accurate survey made by a licensed land surveyor in the State of Nebraska. The acceptable scale shall be between 10 and 100 feet to the inch. Scales of more than 100 fet per inch may be permitted by the Director of Planning for very large projects. All preliminary studies shall provide the following information:

(a) Proposed name and acreage of the subdivision.

(b) Name and address of owner, subdivider, and engineer or land surveyor.

(c) A legal description sufficient to define the location and boundaries of the subdivision and evidence of ownership of the property proposed to be subdivided.

(d) A map indicating plans for the development of the entire area if the proposed plat is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent development. Preliminary engineering plans for all improvements for the entire holding shall be a part of the requirement. Positive drainage from easements shall be included in the drainage plan.

(e) Location, width, and name (if any) of all highways, streets, easements, right-of-way or railroad, whether public or private, parks, or other open spaces within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision. Tentative grades and direction of flow in streets and easements shall be shown.

(f) Location, grade, and size of existing and proposed storm drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, water mains, electric, CATV, telephone, and gas mains within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.

(g) Contours at intervals of six inches.

(h) If any portion of the land within the boundary of the proposed subdivision is subject to flood or storm water overflow, that fact and location shall clearly be shown. Areas covered by water and trees shall also be shown.

(i) Layout, approximate dimensions, proposed use, number of each lot, and number of each block shall be indicated.

(j) Location and outline to scale of each existing building or structure.

(k) Date, north point, and scale shall be shown.

(l) All areas not a part of the proposed plat due to other ownership shall be clearly shown and marked "Not a Part."

(m) If the lots within the proposed subdivision are to be served by individual water supply and sanitary sewage systems, then the general location of such facilities on each lot shall be shown.

Amended by Ord. No. 8921, effective 7-28-2004

Amended by Ord. No. 9081, effective 10-25-2006

 

 

§33-8.  Final Plat
               (1) The subdivider shall prepare and file with the Planning Commission twenty-five (25) copies of the proposed final plat at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the next regular Planning Commission meeting at which approval of the final plat is requested for standard final plats. Twenty-five (25) copies of final plat approval requests for planned developments including: Commercial Development Zone, Residential Development Zone, Travel Development Zone, Gateway Corridor (Overlay) District, and Mobile Home Residential Zone; shall be submitted at least forty (40) days prior to the next regular Planning Commission meeting at which approval of the final plat is requested.

               (2) At the time of filing of the final plat with the Planning Commission the subdivider shall pay to the city treasurer a filing fee, as provided by a fee schedule approved by the City Council, which shall not be refundable unless such final plat is withdrawn by the subdivider prior to consideration by the Planning Commission.

               (3) The director of Planning shall, at least ten (10) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting, transmit a copy of the proposed final plat to the Board of Education of the school district or districts involved, the public works director, the director of utilities operations, and any other department or agency that may be affected by the plat and as the Commission may designate. Such department or agency except said Board of Education shall have five days to review the referred final plat and report back to the director of Planning any requirements or recommendations pertinent to approval of the final plat. The director of Planning shall examine the final plat as to compliance with laws and ordinances of the master plan; other official plans and good planning principles and compliance with the approved preliminary study if submitted; analyze the recommendations submitted by other departments and agencies; coordinate these recommendations and submit his recommendation to the Planning Commission at the next regular meeting.

               (4) The Planning Commission shall review the recommendation of the director of Planning and either approve or disapprove the final plat. If the Planning Commission finds that the final plat has been prepared in compliance with these regulations and in substantial conformance with the approval preliminary study, such plat shall be approved. In the event of disapproval, specific points of variance with aforesaid requirements shall be a part of the Planning Commission's recommendation. The Planning Commission shall transmit its recommendation, along with a copy of the final plat, to the city council. A copy of the recommendation shall be sent to the subdivider, and one copy shall be retained in the permanent files of the Planning Commission.

               (5) The city council shall consider and act upon the Planning Commission's recommendation and shall approve or disapprove the final plat. If it finds that the final plat has been prepared in compliance with these regulations and in substantial conformance with the approved preliminary study, such plat shall be approved. In the event of disapproval, specific points of variance with aforesaid requirements shall be a part of the official record. Upon approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall, within twelve months, furnish the following departments the data as shown or such approval shall become null and void:

(a) Register of Deeds

(i) Approved final plat

(ii) Protective covenants, restrictions and conditions, if any.

(iii) Approved drainage plan.

(b) City Clerk

(i) Print of approved plat.

(ii) Approved subdivision agreement.

(iii) Print of approved drainage plan.

(c) Public Works Director

(i) Reproducible of approved final plat.

(ii) Reproducible of approved drainage plan.

(iii) Copy of approved erosion control plan unless the subdivision contains less than five acres in size.

               (6) The final plat shall be in permanent black lettering and lines on high grade linen or mylar which is reproducible with dimensions of 18 inches by 24 inches. The acceptable scale shall be between 10 and 100 feet to the inch. In the event that the entire plat cannot be one sheet, it shall be submitted in two or more sheets of the same dimensions along with an index sheet showing the entire development at a smaller scale. All final plats shall portray the following information.

(a) Name of subdivision, north arrow, scale, date, and names of subdivider, owner, and land surveyor.

(b) Legal description of the property, including location of boundary lines in relation to section, township, range, county, and state. The perimeter of the subdivision shall be clearly and distinctly indicated.

(c) The lines of all streets and alleys and other lands to be dedicated with their widths and names.

(d) All lot lines and dimensions and numbering of lots and blocks according to a uniform system.

(e) Location, use, and width of all easements for public use, drainage, services, and utilities.

(f) All dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, both linear and angular, interior angles, length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, with all other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground.

(g) The perimeter and blocks of the plat shall have a closure to an allowable unadjusted error of 1 to 7500. Latitudes and departure computations shall be submitted.

(h) The location and description of all permanent monuments in the subdivision.

(i) The description, location, and elevation of all benchmarks.

(j) Names in dotted lettering of adjacent plats with the location and widths of adjoining streets shown by dashed lines.

(k) Certificate, seal, and signature of land surveyor.

(l) Notarized certificate and signature of all parties having title interest in the land being subdivided consenting to dedication and recording of the final plat as submitted.

(m) Certificates to be signed by the chairman of the Planning Commission, mayor, and city clerk.

(n) All areas not a part of the plat due to other ownerships shall be clearly shown as "Not a Part."

(o) Electronic subdivision requirements as provided in Addendum "A" of this chapter. The plat shall meet the drawing standards as identified in Addendum “B” of this chapter. Certificates shall be written in a format consistent with those shown on Addendum “B” of this chapter.

(p) References to a minimum of three established points, such as section corners, section quarter corners, block or subdivision corners, at least one of which shall be a County Control Point.

(q) A closure sheet shall be included with all submitted final plats. Said closure sheet shall include northing and easting coordinates for each point on the Subdivision Boundary and bearing and distance between points.

(r) The following supplementary engineering data and plans shall be submitted following approval of the final plate:

(i) Paving design, including alignment, grades, and a typical cross-section.

(ii) Public sidewalks design and location.

(iii) Location of telephone, electric, and CATV facilities, if underground.

(iv) Location, grade, and size of existing and proposed storm drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, water mains, and gas mains within the proposed subdivision.

(v) Location and outline to scale of each existing building or structure which is not to be removed in the final development.

(vi) Final approved drainage plan including the location, grade, and direction of flow of easements, and showing the proposed general locations of individual water supply and sanitary sewer systems on each lot, if applicable.

(vii) An approved erosion control plan to prevent wind and water erosion during any activity that will remove natural surface cover from within the subdivision boundary. This plan shall not be required for any subdivision containing less than one acre in size.

(viii) Final approved drainage plans shall be required with the submission of all final plats.  A drainage plan may be submitted with the paving and storm water plans, but the paving plan will not be signed off until the drainage plan is approved by the Director of Public Works and proof of its filing at the Register of Deeds office is submitted to the Director of Public Works.

Amended by Ord. No. 8921, effective 7-28-2004

Amended by Ord. No. 9081, effective 10-25-2006

 

 

§33-8.1.  Final Plat-Administrative Subdivision
               (1) The subdivider shall prepare and file with the Director of the Planning Commission, three (3) copies of the proposed administrative subdivision final plat.

               (2) At the time of filing of the administrative subdivision final plat with the Planning Director, the subdivider shall pay to the city treasurer, a nominal filing fee as provided by a fee schedule approved by the Regional Planning Commission and City Council.  Such fee shall not be refundable, unless the administrative subdivision final plat is withdrawn by the subdivider prior to consideration by the Planning Director.

               (3) The administrative subdivision final plat shall be prepared in accordance with final plat requirements specified and set forth in Section 33-8(6), excepting subsections (m) and (o).  A place of certification to be signed by the Planning Director shall also be provided.

               (4) The Planning Director shall examine the administrative subdivision final plat as to its compliance with the Zoning ordinance, Subdivision ordinance and Building Code of the City.  If the Planning Director finds that the administrative subdivision final plat has been prepared and submitted in compliance with the aforementioned ordinances, the Planning Director shall approve such plat.  If the Planning Director finds that the proposed plat does not qualify for approval as an administrative subdivision final plat, the Planning Director shall return the proposed plat to the subdivider, without an approval.

               (5) Upon approval of the administrative subdivision final plat, the subdivider shall, within twelve (12) months, furnish the following departments the data as shown below or such approval shall become null and void:

(a) Register of Deeds

(i) Approved administrative subdivision final plat

(ii) Protective covenants, restrictions and conditions, if any.

 (b) City Clerk

(i) Print of approved administrative subdivision final plat.

 (c) Public Works Director

(i) Reproducible of administrative subdivision final plat.

Amended by Ord. No. 9081, effective 10-25-2006

 

 

Article III. Subdivision Agreement
 

§33-9.  Procedure
               No approved final plat shall be released by the planning director until a subdivision agreement shall have been entered into between the subdivider and the City. Approval of an administrative subdivision shall not be contingent upon the requirement of a subdivision agreement between the subdivider and the City. The city attorney shall prepare such agreement with assistance of the director of Planning, the public works director, and the director of utilities operations. The agreement shall provide for the needs of the subdivision, including but not limited to pavement, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, sidewalks, grading, waste treatment, and open space requirements. Security may be required to assure performance under the agreement.

Amended by Ord. No. 8921, effective 7-28-2004

 

§33-10.  Engineering Data
               The subdivision agreement shall require that all final engineering plans and specifications for public improvements bear the signature and seal of a registered professional engineer and shall be furnished by the subdivider to the Department of Public Works for approval prior to contracting for construction of any improvements.

 

 

Article IV. Minimum Design Standards
 

§33-11.  General
               Land within the proposed subdivision which the Planning Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdividing due to flooding or bad drainage or other topographic features likely to be harmful to the safety, welfare, or general health of the future residents of the proposed subdivision shall not be subdivided until the objectionable features have been eliminated or until adequate safeguards against such hazards are provided.

 

§33-12.  Streets and Alleys
               (1)  The arrangement of streets shall conform as nearly as possible to the street plan of the General Development Plan with provisions for the extension of arterial and collector streets. Streets in the subdivision, normally shall connect with streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions, and provisions may be required for future connections to adjoining unsubdivided tracts.

               (2)  Local streets should be so planned as to discourage through traffic. Cul-de-sacs should normally not be longer than five hundred feet and shall terminate with right-of-way turn-around having a diameter of not less than one hundred feet, and an outside curb diameter of not less than eighty feet for residential areas. Cul-de-sacs within industrial or commercial areas shall have a right-of-way diameter of not less than 120 feet and an outside curb diameter of not less than 100 feet.

               (3)  Collector and Arterial streets should be planned with minimal local street and driveway accesses. Residential subdivisions should be designed with street patterns that provide driveway access from local streets.

               (4)  Whenever a proposed subdivision is adjacent to or contains a portion of an existing or proposed federal or state highway, provision in such subdivision shall be made for one of the following methods of development:

        (a) If the highway is either a non-access or controlled access thoroughfare, one of the following two methods of development shall be required:

(i) A frontage street adjacent and parallel to such thoroughfare shall be provided; or

(ii) Lots shall back or side to such thoroughfare and have access to another street. Lots in commercial or industrial zoning districts shall have a landscaped area averaging thirty feet in width, or other approved landscaping, adjacent to such thoroughfare, and outside storage of unassembled or unfinished materials or products and inoperable equipment or motor vehicles shall be suitably screened by a sight-obscuring fence, foliage, or other screening material. Lots in residential zoning districts shall have a sight-obscuring fence, foliage, or other screening material adjacent to such thoroughfare. The sight-obscuring fence shall not be metal strips or slats in a chain link fence.

        (b) If the highway is not a non-access or controlled access thoroughfare, one of the following methods of development shall be required:

(i) Either method required for a non-access or controlled access thoroughfare may be applied; or

(ii) Lots may have frontage directly on such thoroughfare, provided, that the minimum setback for any new building in any zoning district shall be thirty feet, and shall be landscaped except for approved driveways.

               (5)  Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, or where it is found to be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when adjoining property is subdivided.

               (6)  Under normal conditions streets shall be laid out as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, except where topography or other conditions justify variations. More than four approaches to any intersection shall be prohibited. Street jogs at intersections with centerline offsets of less than 75 feet should be avoided.

               (7)  Alleys may be provided in commercial and industrial districts. Alleys shall be avoided in residential districts except to extend existing alleys to a street.

               (8)  The right-of-way widths, improvements, and grades for streets and alleys included in any subdivision shall not be less than the minimum right-of-way and outside curb dimensions or less than the minimum grade for each classification as shown on the Street Width Matrix attached.

 

Medians

Location: Medians may be located within streets to be dedicated to the public.

Lane width: A minimum unobstructed lane width of twenty (20.0) feet (improved 21' back of curb to back of curb) is required between the median curb and the street curb.

Landscaping: Medians within the public right-of-way may be landscaped, maintenance of landscaped medians shall be the responsibility of a property owners association created at or before filing the final plat. The city will maintain concrete medians or bricked medians within the public right-of-way.

 

All streets shall be designed and graded to the full right-of-way widths stated.

 

               (9)  Drives, streets, or roadways within condominium, townhouse, or planned unit developments shall have a minimum right-of-way, improvement, and grade as determined by agreement between the subdivider, public works director, director of Planning, and approved by the city council.

               (10)  The horizontal alignment on all streets except in unusual cases shall be as follows:

 

Radii of Horizontal Curves (Center Line)

Arterial Streets............................................. 700' minimum

Collector Streets.......................................... 300' minimum

Local Streets................................................ 100' minimum

 

Street Width Matrix

Zone

Paving Width

26'

30'

32'

37'

40'

41'

65'

AG-1

Primary Agricultural Zone

Subject to Design Review

AG-2

Secondary Agricultural Zone

AG-SC

Special Agricultural / Conservation Zone

AG-SE

Special Agricultural / Events Zone

AG-SI

Special Agricultural / Industrial Zone

SRC

Special Recreation / Conservation Zone

TA

Transitional Agricultural Zone

LLR

Large Lot Residential Zone

SP

-

P

P

-

-

-

R-1

Suburban Residential Zone

-

-

P

SP

-

SP*

-

R-2

Low Density Residential Zone

-

-

P

SP

-

SP*

-

R-3

Medium Density Residential Zone

-

-

P

P

-

P*

-

R-3SL

Small Lot Residential Zone

P

-

P

P

-

P*

-

R-4

High Density Residential Zone

P

-

P

P

-

P

-

RO

Residential Office Zone

P

-

-

SP

-

SP*

-

B-1

Light Business Zone

-

-

-

-

-

SP

SP*

B-2

General Business Zone

-

-

-

-

-

SP

SP*

AC

Arterial Commercial Overlay Zone

-

-

-

-

-

SP

SP*

B-3

Heavy Business Zone

-

-

-

-

-

SP

SP*

ME

Industrial Estates Zone

-

SP

-

-

SP*

-

-

M-1

Light Manufacturing Zone

-

SP

-

-

SP*

-

-

M-2

Heavy Manufacturing Zone

-

SP

-

-

SP*

-

-

M-3

Mixed Use Manufacturing Zone

-

SP

-

-

SP*

-

-

CD

Commercial Development Zone

Subject to Design Review

TD

Travel Development Zone

RD

Residential Development Zone

A

Airport Zone

GCO

Gateway Corridor Overlay District

M and MD

Manufactured Home Overlay Zone

SP

Follow standard cross section plan.

P

Designed Residential

*

Wider street width required by subdivision committee on streets acting as collectors/arterials

-

Street width not allowed in this zoning class.

Note:  There may be exceptions in certain situations.

Designed Residential Development

Driveway widths restricted on average lot width.

Lot Width

Max Driveway Width

100’+ - 71’

36' wide

70'-51'

24' wide

50’-min         12’ wide

12' wide

Widths don’t include flare per standard driveway detail

Flare must occur on lot on which driveway is serving

Driveway location must be planned and approved by subdivision committee.  This would include staggered locations to allow for 20’ of clear zone for fire and emergency vehicles while moving down the street.

Off street parking per dwelling must be considered with design.

 

 

Amended by Ordinance No. 9480, effective 04-15-2014

Amended by Ordinance No. 9688, effective 06-12-2018

 

 

§33-13.  Blocks
               (1)  Block Length: Intersecting streets determining block lengths shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing streets and customary subdivision practice in the immediate area. Blocks shorter than 450 feet and longer than 1200 feet in residential districts should be avoided.

               (2)  Block Width. The width of a block shall be sufficient to allow for two tiers of lots with utility easement, if required. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width as may be best suited for the contemplated use of the property taking into consideration the probable arrangement of parking and truck loading and maneuvering upon the property.

               (3)  Very Large Lots and Blocks. When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal lots or parcels, such lots or parcels should be so arranged as to permit the logical location and opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivision with provision for adequate utility connections for such resubdivision. Easements for the future openings and extension of such streets may, at the direction of the Planning Commission, be made a requirement of the plat.

 

§33-14.  Lots
               (1)  Minimum Dimensions: The minimum width of lots shall be as required by the Zoning Chapter of the Grand Island City Code. Side lot lines should be at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines. Lots having a depth of less than 100 feet should be avoided. Lot sizes shall meet or exceed the requirement of the Zoning Chapter and should as near as practical meet or exceed the typical lot size for building sites in the immediate vicinity. Each lot shall be a buildable site after taking into account all yard spaces required by the Zoning Chapter. Excessive lot depth in relation to width should be avoided.

               (2)  Corner Lots Wider: Corner lots in residential areas shall be of sufficient size to comply with the requirements of the Zoning Chapter.

               (3)  Double Frontage: Lots with street frontage at both front and rear shall be avoided except when backing on a controlled access thoroughfare.

               (4)  Street Frontage: Each lot shall have frontage (minimum width of twenty (20) feet) on a street that will allow for practical, physical vehicular ingress/egress, and allow for the proper provision of present or future municipal services to the lot.

               (5)  Reversed Frontages and Key Lots: Reversed frontages at cross street intersections should be avoided except where it will match existing development. Key lots, being those inside lots fronting on side streets, should be avoided except where they are matching existing development and other lots are excessively deep. Key lots shall be prohibited where they disrupt utility or drainage easements. Reverse frontage and normal corner lots when adjacent to a key lot shall have additional width to allow front yard setbacks on both streets.

               (6)  Septic Tanks: In subdivisions within city jurisdiction outside of corporate limits where buildings are to be served by septic tanks, the size of lots shall be sufficiently large to accommodate adequate drainage fields. Standards set forth by the appropriate County and State or other agencies shall be met.

               (7)  Flag Lots: Flag lots, being those lots landlocked from public right-of-way except for a narrow tract of land of less width than minimum frontage as required by the Zoning Chapter should be discouraged except where development cannot reasonably be accomplished without their use. When such lots are platted, it shall be a requirement of the developer, builder, and owner to direct and maintain storm water drainage from the flag lot to the public right-of-way without directing the flow to adjoining property, i.e., drainage shall be by means of that strip of land connecting the area of the structure to the public right-of-way unless other drainage facilities are approved by the public works director.

Amended by Ord. No. 8921, effective 7-28-2004

 

§33-15.  Easements
               (1)  Utility Easements: Unless otherwise required by the director of Planning, the director of utilities operations, or the public works director, utilities easements shall be 20 feet wide, falling half on adjoining lots along rear lot lines, and where necessary the same shall apply to side lot lines. The full width of an easement may fall on one lot. They shall be planned for easy and continuous access for maintenance, shall be continuous through the block and shall connect as nearly in line as possible with adjoining easements. To facilitate the use of easements, rear lot lines in curvilinear platting shall form straight lines for as long a distance as feasible. Direction changes shall fall so that a side lot line will intersect the point of change so as to allow the guywire easements to be located on lot lines.

               (2)  Drainage Easements: Drainage easements for storm sewers or open channels shall be required where storm drainage cannot be practically carried under streets or in the right-of-way. Open channel drainage easements shall be required where there is evidence that the natural drainage for a large area traverses the subdivision. Drainage easements shall be sufficient in width so that motorized equipment may be used in their maintenance.

 

§33-16.  Pedestrian Ways
               Pedestrian ways may be required so as to allow cross access for pedestrians in very long blocks. In general, blocks of 800 feet or more in length may have a requirement for a pedestrian way near the center of the block and shall have a minimum width of six feet. Pedestrian ways shall have a sidewalk width of four feet and have a minimum 42 inch high chain link fence on both sides.

 

§33-17.  Reserve Strips of Land
               Reserve strips of land controlling access to or egress from their property, or from any other street or alley, shall not be permitted within any subdivided area.

 

§33-18.  School, Park, or Open Space Sites
               The Planning Commission may require the subdivider to reserve for purchase-option certain parcels of land for public use. The public agency shall have from the time of submission of the preliminary study to the submission of the final plat to exercise the purchase-option under this provision. The exact location of the reserved area shall be subject to approval of the Planning Commission.

 

 

Article V. Minimum Improvements
 

§33-19.  Minimum Improvements
               Inasmuch as the primary purpose of subdividing land is to create building sites, and inasmuch as vehicular access and certain utilities are essential to urban development, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to install in accordance with plans, specifications, and data approved by the public works director, certain required improvements as follows:

               (1)  Staking: The following described monuments shall be installed before the public works director shall approve the plat, or in lieu thereof, a performance bond in an amount equal to the cost of doing such work shall be furnished to the City of Grand Island before the public works director shall certify to the council that the required improvements have been satisfactorily arranged.

(a) The external boundaries, corners of blocks and lots, all points of curvature, and points of tangency, shall be monumented by an iron rod or pipe not less than 1/2 inch outside diameter and extending at least 24 inches below grade.

               (2)  Grading of Lots: When any building site is filled to a depth in excess of five feet, said fill shall be laid down in six-inch layers, and each layer shall be given six passes with a sheepsfoot roller with optimum moisture present for compaction to equal the bearing strength of the natural ground, indicated by Proctor test or other test which may be approved by the public works director.

               (3)  Storm Drainage shall be conveyed to an approved storm drainage system if available and adequate to accept the runoff from the fully developed subdivision. Available shall mean a system approved by the public works director to serve the proposed subdivision. If an approved system is available but not of adequate capacity, then provisions must be made for on-site detention to reduce the peak flow out of the subdivision to that which the approved system can accommodate. The detention cell shall be sized to accommodate a ten-year design storm as per criteria acceptable to the public works director. In computing cell capacity only the capacity above the elevation at which approved positive drainage exists will be considered. Detention cells without approved positive drainage will not be accepted. Determination of the approved form of positive drainage shall be made by the public works director. Gravity drainage shall be used if possible. Provisions shall be made for surface water traversing the subdivision. The subdivision agreement shall prohibit filling in of ditches or other drainage facilities and specify ownership and maintenance responsibility of detention cells and other drainage features not dedicated to the public.

               (4)  Sanitary Sewer shall be provided to connect all lots in the subdivision in accordance with standard specifications of the City of Grand Island to an approved public system if available and adequate to accept the flow from the fully developed subdivision. Available shall mean an existing approved system or a system approved for construction by the City. The city council may extend consideration of the preliminary study for up to 120 days to consider a sanitary sewer extension approval. In no case shall the minimum diameter for residential developments be less than eight inches, and for commercial and industrial developments the minimum shall be ten inches. If an approved system is not available, then individual systems may be permissible on an initial basis, however, the subdividers shall be required to install the complete system to serve the subdivision even though it may not be connected with the approved system.

               The requirement to install the complete but unconnected system shall not apply to existing right-of-ways, with existing improvements, when determined by the Planning Director along with recommendations from the Public Works Department and the Utility Department that public service mains will not be installed to serve the subdivision in the near future.

               The requirement to install the complete but unconnected system shall not apply for a subdivision having four (4) lots or less unless the subdivision is part of a larger development being finalized in phases, except when:

(a) The construction of the public system which will serve the subdivision is provided for in the current approved Capital Improvement Program for the City of Grand Island, or;

(b) The Council officially amends said program to include a public system which will serve the subdivision, and;

(c) The City can provide the subdivider sufficient information for the design and construction of his system.

In the event that individual systems are to be used, then the Subdivision Agreement shall state that the lot owners waive the right to protest creation of a sanitary sewer district abutting the subdivision or to serve the subdivision, shall keep all easements free of any obstructions, including fences, trees and bushes, sheds, etc.; shall indemnify the City of any removal/replacement/repair costs for obstructions in easements for the construction of such district, and shall connect to such district within two (2) years of the district construction completion.

               (5)  Water Supply shall be provided to connect all lots in the subdivision in accordance with standard specifications for the City of Grand Island to an approved public system if available and adequate to serve the needs of the fully developed subdivision. Available shall mean an existing approved system or a system approved for construction by the City. The city council may extend approval of the preliminary study for up to 120 days to consider a water main extension approval. Fire hydrants shall be installed in a pattern approved by the director of utility operations and the fire chief. If an approved system is not available, then individual systems may be permissible on an initial basis, however, the subdivider shall be required to install the complete system to serve the subdivision even though it may not be connected with the approved system.

               The requirement to install the complete but unconnected system shall not apply to existing right-of-ways, with existing improvements, when determined by the Planning Director along with a recommendation from the Public Works Department and the Utility Department that public service mains will not be installed to serve the subdivision in the near future.

               The requirement to install the complete but unconnected system shall not apply for a subdivision having four (4) lots or less unless the subdivision is part of a larger development being finalized in phases, except when:

(a) The construction of the public system which will serve the subdivision is provided for in the current approved Capital Improvement Program for the City of Grand Island, or;

(b) The Council officially amends said program to include a public system which will serve the subdivision, and;

(c) The City can provide the subdivider sufficient information for the design and construction of his system.

               In the event that individual systems are to be used, then the Subdivision Agreement shall state that the lot owners waive the right to protest creation of a water district abutting the subdivision or to serve the subdivision, shall keep all easements free of any obstructions, including fences, trees and bushes, sheds, etc.; shall indemnify the City of any removal/replacement/ repair costs for obstructions in easements for the construction of such district, and shall connect to such district within two (2) years of the district construction completion.

               (6)  Grading shall be completed to official grade on all streets for the full width of the right-of-way and fills shall be compacted sufficiently to assure adequate support for permanent paving, as set forth by standard specifications of the City of Grand Island.

               (7)  Street Surfacing: Paving, including curbs and gutters, shall be completed on all streets in accordance with the standard specifications of the City of Grand Island and in conformity with any official street plans which may be adopted by the city council of Grand Island. Standard installations for sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and water may be required to be installed before paving, subject to the recommendation of the public works director, even though such facilities cannot be connected with the City system at the time of approval of the plat.

               (8)  Public sidewalks four feet wide shall be constructed in accordance with sidewalk standards along each side of all public street right-of-way to serve all lots in the plat. This requirement may be waived until the Council directs such installation for a subdivision having four lots or less unless:

(a) the subdivision has curb and gutter; or,

(b) such installation would result in continuity with an existing sidewalk on at least one side of the new subdivision; or,

(c) the subdivision is part of a larger development being finalized in phases.

               (9)  Inspections of improvements under construction shall be performed under the supervision of a professional registered engineer and upon completion, shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Department of Public Works prior to acceptance by the City of Grand Island. The subdivider may enter into an agreement with the City whereby the developer of the subdivision shall pay for inspection personnel which may be furnished by the City under supervision of the public works director, on all improvements constructed by such developer of such subdivision as provided for in this chapter.  An “as-built” set of plans and specifications including required test results bearing the seal and signature of a registered professional engineer shall be filed with the Director of Public Works by the subdivider prior to acceptance of these improvements by the City.

 

§33-20.  Installation of Improvements
               Developers may select either method or combination of methods listed below to comply with the minimum improvements requirements:

        (1)  They may install the required improvements before council approval of the final plat.

        (2)  They may submit a petition or petitions requesting the City to construct street surfacing, sanitary sewer, and water mains in the proposed subdivision by the district method. In that event, the City will prepare plans and specifications for all such improvement districts and shall assess the cost of such improvements to the adjacent property, as provided by law. The size of any street improvement district, sanitary sewer district, or water main district, shall be determined by the city council. Construction of any such district shall be subject to the City's ability to finance any of the improvements. When any length of a full-width street is being dedicated as a part of the subdivision, the subdivider shall install water and sewer lines, without using the improvement district method, prior to the creation of any street improvement district.

        (3)  They may enter into a Subdivision Agreement for the installation of the required improvements.

        Sidewalks shall be constructed when the adjacent lot is built upon and shall be regulated and required with the building permit for such lots, unless a waiver to construct when directed by the city council is provided in the Subdivision Agreement.

 
 
Article VI. Miscellaneous
 

§33-21.  Modification of Requirements
               Upon hearing, the city council may modify or waive specific provisions of this chapter in its application to specific tracts of land, provided, it finds that:

        (1)  The strict application of a particular provision would produce undue hardship.

        (2)  Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the proposed subdivision, or in the case of modifications or waivers affecting an entire proposed subdivision the hardship is not shared generally with other similar subdivisions.

        (3)  The authorization of the modification or waiver will not be a substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the proposed subdivision will not be adversely changed.

        (4)  The granting of such modification or waiver is based upon demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of convenience, profit, or caprice.

        (5)  The granting of such modification will not unduly compromise the intent of this chapter.

 

§33-22. Subdivision Naming

               Submitted plats shall not have a number to start the subdivision name. example – 4 Times 4. Sub. (not allowed); Four Times Four (allowed). Subdivision names that start with initials with periods are not accepted. Example: R.J.M. Subdivision (not allowed); RJM Subdivision (allowed).

Added by Ord. No. 9081, effective 10-25-2006

 

 

§33-23. Original Mylar Subdivision Plat

               The original Mylar of subdivision plats submitted to the Regional Planning Commission for review, shall be signed by all title holders involved with the plat, prior to the time of the regular meeting date, and the Mylar present at the meetings for the chairman to sign.

               Mylar plats not presented at the meeting, will be signed by the chairman at the next regular regional planning commission meeting. subdivision shall not be forwarded to the City Council until all such signatures are in place.

               Mylar plats will not be released by the City until such time as all subdivision agreements have been signed and connection fees or other fees related to the development have been paid by the developer.

Added by Ord. No. 9081, effective 10-25-2006

 

§33-24.  Penalty
               Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

 Amended by Ord. No. 9081, effective 10-25-2006

 


ADDENDUM “B”

DRAWING STANDARDS AND SAMPLE PLATS

 

Drawing standards refer to drawings presented in model space. Line type and line width on paper space drawings shall match model space drawings as presented.

 

Examples:

 

1.  Subdivision Boundary – The outer boundary line of the subdivision.

Layer Name:  Subdivision Boundary.

The boundary shall be drawn equal to an Auto CAD line weight of 1.00mm and shall be a solid line.

 

2.  New Easements – Easements dedicated with this plat.

Layer Name:  New Easements.

Easements shall be drawn equal to an Auto CAD line weight of 0.30mm and shall be a dashed line.

 

3.  Existing Easements – Easements dedicated prior to this plat.

Layer Name:  Existing Easements.

Existing easements shall be drawn equal to an Auto CAD line weight 0.18mm and shall be a dashed line.

 

4.  Lot Line – New lot lines.

Layer Name:  New lot lines.

New lot lines shall be drawn in AutoCAD line weight of 0.30mm and shall be a solid line.

 

5.  Measurements – Distance, angles, bearings.

Layer Name: Measurements or Dimension

Measurements shall be shown with distance, angle, and bearings on all lot lines where allowable. In a case of large subdivision plats, distance, angle and bearings shall be shown along the centerline on existing and new easement.

 

Text fonts, size and placement shall be readable, legible and clear.

 

6.  Adjacent Properties

Surrounding property lines, subdivision, undeveloped ground, right of way, easements, section lines or quarter section lines shall be drawn in AutoCAD line weight of 0.18mm and shall be dashed or dash dot. Subdivisions adjacent shall also show subdivision names, lot numbers, block numbers.

 

Note:  Subdivision plats plotted on Mylar shall have no gray tone lines.

 

7.  All plats and revised plats submitted shall include a schedule of revisions showing the time and date of the original drawing and subsequent revisions.

 

8.  Hall County Register of Deeds.

A   space shall be reserved on the subdivision plat for the register of deeds stamp; a space shall be 6”x3”.

 

All notary stamps must be clear, complete and readable when reproduced.

 

All signatures must be clear, complete and readable when reproduced.

 

All dates and signatures must agree with the dates and signatures in the acknowledgements. (the acknowledgement must state the exact name that was signed.)

 

A paper copy of the subdivision plat shall be presented to the Register of Deeds offices for review at the time copies are presented to the Regional Planning department for review.

 

Names and titles in acknowledgements must be identical to the signatures and titles of the parties who sign. (acknowledgments must include the marital status of individuals and/or position or title for persons signing on behalf of partnerships, corporations or limited liability corporations).

Added by Ord. No. 9081, effective 10-25-2006

 
CHAPTER 34

TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION

 

Article I. Telecommunications

§34-1.  Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to:

        (A) Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and services;

        (B) Promote competition in telecommunications;

        (C) Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers and services;

        (D) Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the City for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;

        (E) Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held by the City;

        (F) Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or services within the City comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City.

 

§34-2.  Definitions
Terms used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings:

        Affiliate shall mean a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person.

        City shall mean the City of Grand Island, its elected and appointed officers, employees, and duly appointed and authorized agents.

        City Property shall mean all real property owned or controlled by the City whether in fee ownership or other interest.

        Code shall mean the Grand Island City Code, as amended.

        Overhead Facilities shall mean utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

        Person shall mean corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies, other entities and individuals.

        Public Ways includes the surface of an space above and below any real property in the City which the City owns or in which it holds an interest as a trustee for the public including, but not limited to, all public streets, highways, roads, alleys, easements, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways, or any other public place, area or property under the ownership or control of the City, and any rights-of-way established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes.

        Rights-of-Way shall mean all real property and public ways, which the City owns or in which the City has an ownership interest.

        State shall mean the State of Nebraska.

        Surplus Space shall mean that portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and regulations of the Nebraska Public Service Commission to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.

        Telecommunications Carrier includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages telecommunications facilities used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications service.

        Telecommunications Facilities shall mean the plant, equipment and property within the City used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications service.

        Telecommunications Provider includes every person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities.

        Telecommunications Service shall mean the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium, unless excluded or exempted by local, state or federal law.

        Underground Facilities shall mean utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for overhead facilities.

        Usable Space shall mean the total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Nebraska Public Service Commission.

        Utility Facilities shall mean the plant equipment and property including, but not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within public ways and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services.

 

§34-3.  Penalties
                Any person found violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Upon conviction any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as provided by §1-7 of this Code. A separate and distinct violation shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues.

 

§34-4.  Other Remedies and Regulations
                Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any other remedies at law or in equity that the City may have for enforcement of this chapter. The City Administrator is authorized to establish regulations and procedures for the implementation of this chapter.

 

§34-5.  Registration, Fees and Duration
                (A) To the extent permitted by law, any telecommunications carrier or provider who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in public ways and/or to provide telecommunications service, including but not limited to local exchange service, to persons or areas within the City shall register with the City pursuant to this Chapter and pay all fees provided herein.

                (B)  A registration shall remain in effect for a period of five (5) years from the date on which the City Administrator certifies that the information required pursuant to §34-6 has been submitted to the Administrator. A registration may be renewed by either submitting information in duplicate to the City Administrator as set forth in §34-6 or submitting affidavits in duplicate attesting that the information submitted for the initial registration remains unchanged except to the extent modified by attachments to said affidavits. Upon filing a registration renewal the registrant shall pay all fees as provided herein.

 

§34-6.  Registration Required

                All telecommunications carriers or providers required to register pursuant to §34-5, shall register with the City by submitting information in duplicate to the City Administrator which shall include the following:

        (A) The identity and legal status of the registrant including any affiliates.

        (B) The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.

        (C) A general description of registrant’s existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the City.

        (D) Information sufficient for the City to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any municipal tax or fee.

        (E) Copies of the registrant’s certificate of convenience and necessity issued by the Nebraska Public Service Commission.

        (F) A copy of relevant portions of the registrant’s certificate of convenience and necessity application may be filed in lieu of item (C) above.

        (G) Such other information as the City may require for purposes of this Chapter.

 

§34-7.  Registration Purpose, Exception
                (A)  The purpose of registration is to:

  (1) Provide the City with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide telecommunications services within the City, or that own or operate telecommunication facilities within the City;

  (2) Assist the City in enforcement of this Chapter;

  (3) Assist the City in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes or charges that are lawfully permissible and may be due the City; and

  (4) Assist the City in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal laws.

                (B)  A person which provides telecommunications services solely to itself, its affiliates or members between points in the same building, or between closely located buildings under common ownership or control is excepted from the registration requirement pursuant to this Chapter, provided that such company or person does not use or occupy any public ways of the City.

 

§34-8.  Registration; Construction Permits

                All registrants shall obtain permits and pay all fees required by the code prior to commencement of construction.

 

§34-9.  Registration; Compensation to City
                In the absence of state, federal or other law to the contrary, each registrant hereunder is subject to the City’s right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair, reasonable and non discriminatory compensation to be paid for use of public ways or property and such municipal taxes as are authorized by state and federal law.

 

§34-10.  Conditions of Registration; Interference with the Public Ways
                No registrant may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public ways by the City. All such facilities shall be moved by and at the expense of the registrant, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the City.

 

§34-11.  Maintenance of Facilities
                Each registrant shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state and local laws, codes, rules and regulations.

 

§34-12.  Relocation or Removal of Facilities
                (A) Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the City, a registrant shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public ways whenever the City Administrator shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:

        (1) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation by the City or other governmental entity of any public improvement in or upon the public ways.

        (2) The operations of the City or other governmental entity in or upon the public ways.

        (3) The vacation of a public street or the release of a utility easement.

                (B) Provided the City has complied with the One Call Notification System Act the City shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public ways as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling or work of any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the City unless directly or proximately caused by the willful, intentional or malicious acts of the City.

 

§34-13.  Removal of Unauthorized Facilities
                Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the City, any registrant or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances within the public ways shall at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public ways. If such registrant or responsible person fails to remove such facilities or appurtenances, the City may cause the removal and charge the registrant or responsible person for the costs incurred. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:

        (A) Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways.

        (B) If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit.

        (C) If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the City.

        (D) Any such other circumstances deemed reasonably necessary by the City Administrator in order to protect public health, safety and welfare.

 

§34-14.  Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities
                The City retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located within the pubic ways as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. The City shall use its best efforts to notify the grantee through its Emergency Management Department and the One Call Notification System Act prior to cutting or moving the grantee’s telecommunication facilities.

 

§34-15.  Restoration of Rights-of-Way
The Registrant shall comply with the following:

        (A) When a registrant, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public ways, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property including trees, landscaping and grounds to the same condition which existed before the work was undertaken.

        (B) If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required hereunder, the registrant shall temporarily restore the affected ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the registrant’s sole expense and the registrant shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration.

        (C) A registrant or other person acting on its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such public ways.

 

§34-16.  Construction; Applications
                Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities in public ways shall be submitted upon forms provided by the Public Works Department. The applicant shall pay all permit and plan review fees and shall include any additional information as requested by the Public Works Department. The application shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:     

        (A) That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.

        (B) The location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing utility poles.

        (C) The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public way.

        (D) The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations, if known, which are within the public way along the underground route proposed by the applicant.

        (E) A landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction.

 

§34-17.  Construction; Location of Facilities
                All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions unless hardship or a valid reason to locate elsewhere can be demonstrated to the City Administrator:

        (A) A registrant with written authorization to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles, and then only if surplus space is available. If either of the foregoing do not exist, registrant, with prior written approval of the Utilities Director may construct additional poles.

        (B) Whenever all existing telephone, electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within public ways, a registrant with written authorization to occupy the same public ways must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.

        (C) Whenever all new or existing telephone, electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within public ways, a registrant that currently occupies the same public ways shall concurrently relocate its facilities underground at its expense.

 

§34-18.  Construction; Conduit Occupancy
                In furtherance of the public purpose of reduction of public way excavation, it is the goal of the City to encourage both the shared occupancy of underground conduit as well as the construction, whenever possible, of excess conduit capacity for occupancy of future public way occupants.

 

§34-19.  Fees; Registration, Application and Public Way Occupancy
                The following fees, which shall be listed on the City's User Fee Schedule, shall be paid in connection with the administration of this Chapter:

        (A) Registration Fee to be paid at the time of filing registration information.

        (B) Occupation tax for local exchange service to be paid quarterly.

        (C) Pole Rental to be paid annually for installing and operating telecommunications facilities on or in conjunction with City utility facilities, including particularly utility poles.

 

§34-20.  Severability
                If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this Chapter, or its application to any person is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.

 

§34-21. through §34-74.  Reserved

 

 

Article II. Wireless Communication Facilities

§34-75.  Purpose

The provisions of this Article shall be known as the Wireless Communication Facilities regulations. It is the purpose of these provisions to delineate restrictions, development standards and siting criteria, and establish removal procedures in order to protect the City from the uncontrolled siting of wireless communication facilities in locations that have significant adverse effects and cause irreparable harm. It is further the purpose of these provisions:

(A) To protect the community’s visual quality and safety while facilitating the reasonable and balanced provision of wireless communication services. More specifically, it is the City’s goal to minimize the visual impact of wireless communication facilities on the community, particularly in and near residential zoning districts and historic districts and landmarks;

(B) To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare, preserve the aesthetic character of the Grand Island community, and to reasonably regulate the development and operation of wireless communication facilities within the City to the extent permitted under state and federal law;

(C) To minimize the impact of wireless communication facilities by establishing standards for siting design;

(D) To preserve the opportunity for continued and growing service from the wireless industry;

(E) To accommodate the growing consumer need and demand for wireless communication services;

(F) To establish clear guidelines and standards and an orderly process for review intended to facilitate the deployment of wireless transmission equipment, to provide advanced communication services to the City, its residents, businesses and the community at large;

(G) To ensure City zoning regulations are applied consistently with federal and state telecommunications laws, rules, regulations and controlling court decisions;

(H) To provide regulations which are specifically not intended to, and shall not be interpreted or applied to, (1) prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of wireless services, (2) unreasonably discriminate among functionally equivalent service providers, or

 

(3) regulate wireless communication facilities and wireless transmission equipment on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such emissions comply with the standards established by the Federal Communications Commission; and

(I) To incorporate the legislative findings and declarations in Nebraska Revised Statute 86-1202.

§34-76.  Definitions

All terms in this Article which are not specifically defined herein shall be construed in accordance with the Communications Act of 1934, the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the Orders, Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.  As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:

Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in providing wireless services.

        Antenna array means a single or group of antenna elements, not including small wireless facility antennas, and associated mounting hardware, transmission lines, remote radio units, or other appurtenances which share a common attachment device such as a mounting frame or mounting support structure for the sole purpose of transmitting or receiving wireless communication signals.

        Antenna support structure means any building or structure other than a tower which can be used for the location of wireless communication facilities.

Applicable codes means uniform building, fire, safety, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to such codes so long as such amendments are not in conflict with the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act and to the extent such codes have been adopted by the authority and are generally applicable in the jurisdiction.

Applicant means any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.

Application means a written request submitted by an applicant to an authority (1) for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure or (2) for a permit for approval for the installation, modification, or replacement of a utility pole to support the installation of a small wireless facility.

Authority means the State of Nebraska or any agency, county, city, village, or other political subdivision thereof, except as otherwise excluded herein. Authority does not include public power suppliers, state courts having jurisdiction over an authority, or an entity that does not have zoning or permit-granting authority.

Authority pole means a utility pole owned, managed, or operated by or on behalf of an authority.

Collocate or collocation means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace small wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. Collocate or collocation does not include the installation of a new utility pole or new wireless support structure in the right-of-way.

Communications facility means the set of equipment and network components including wires, cables, and associated facilities used by a cable operator as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as such section existed on January 1, 2019, a telecommunications carrier as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as such section existed on January 1, 2019, a provider of information service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as such section existed on January 1, 2019, or a wireless services provider, to provide communications services, including cable service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(8), as such section existed on January 1, 2019, an information service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as such section existed on January 1, 2019, wireless services, or other one-way or two-way communications service.

Communications network means a network used to provide communications service.

Communications service means a cable service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522, as such section existed on January 1, 2019, an information service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153, as such section existed on January 1, 2019, a telecommunications service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153, as such section existed on January 1, 2019, or a wireless service.

Communications service provider means a cable operator as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522, a provider of information service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153, or a telecommunications carrier as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153, as such sections existed on January 1, 2019. Communications service provider includes a wireless provider.

Decorative pole means an authority pole that is specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes.

        Distributed Antenna System or DAS means a network consisting of transceiver equipment at a central hub site to support multiple antenna locations throughout the desired coverage area.

        Electric distribution pole means a pole and wires that carry approximately 14,000 volts. 

        Electric transmission pole means a pole and wires that carry 69,000 volts or more. 

        FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.

        FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.

Fee means a one-time, nonrecurring charge.

Historic district means any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure, or object included in, or eligible for inclusion in, the National Register of Historic Places, in accordance with Stipulation VI.D.1.a (i)-(v) of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement for Review of Effects on Historic Properties for Certain Undertakings Approved by the Federal Communications Commission codified at 47 C.F.R. part 1, Appendix C, as such regulation existed on January 1, 2019, or designated pursuant to state historic preservation law if such designation exists at the time of application.

Law means federal, state, or local law, statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, resolution or ordinance.

        Macro cell means an antenna or antennas mounted on or in a tower, ground-based mast, rooftops or structures, at a height that provides coverage to the surrounding area, excluding small wireless facilities and distributed antenna systems.

Microwireless facility means a small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than twenty-four inches in length, fifteen inches in width, and twelve inches in height and with any exterior antenna no longer than eleven inches.

Permit means a written authorization required by an authority to perform an action, initiate, continue, or complete installation of a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or attached to an existing wireless support structure, or to install, modify, or replace a utility pole to support installation of a small wireless facility.

Person means an individual, a corporation, a limited liability company, a partnership, an association, a trust, or any other entity or organization, including an authority.

Public power supplier means a public power district or any other governmental entity providing electric service. Public power supplier includes a municipal electric utility or a rural public power supplier.

Rate means a recurring charge.

Right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, sidewalk, alley, dedicated utility easement, or similar property, but not including a freeway as defined in section 39-1302, the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways, or a private easement.

Rural public power supplier means a public power district, a public power and irrigation district, an electric cooperative, or an electric membership association, that does not provide electric service to any city of the metropolitan class, city of the primary class, or city of the first class.

        Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets each of the following conditions: (1) The facilities (a) are mounted on structures fifty feet or less in height including the antennas or (b) are mounted on structures no more than ten percent taller than other adjacent structures; (2) each antenna associated with the deployment is no more than three cubic feet in volume; (3) all other equipment associated with the structure, whether ground-mounted or pole-mounted, is no more than twenty-eight cubic feet in volume; (4) the facilities do not require antenna structure registration under 47 C.F.R. part 17, as such regulation existed on January 1, 2019; (5) the facilities are not located on tribal lands, as defined in 36 C.F.R. 800.16(x), as such regulation existed on January 1, 2019; and (6) the facilities do not result in human exposure to radio frequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in 47 C.F.R. 1.1307(b), as such regulation existed on January 1, 2019.

Street light means, for purposes of this Article, poles used or to be used for the City’s lighting in the right-of-way and City parks, and street lights in other areas as may be approved by the City.  The term street lights includes non-standard street lights; however, the term does not include traffic signal poles, electric transmission and distribution poles, or light poles for sports fields or arenas, stadium lighting or other lighting of any kind, and does not pertain to poles or other structures owned by others regardless of whether maintained by the City for lighting or any other purpose.

Technically feasible means that by virtue of engineering or spectrum usage, the proposed placement for a small wireless facility, or its design or site location, can be implemented without a reduction in the functionality of the small wireless facility.

Traffic signal means a set of automatically operated colored lights, typically red, amber, and green, for controlling traffic at road intersections and crosswalks.  Traffic control signals are devices placed along, beside, or above a roadway to guide, warn, and regulate the flow of traffic, which includes motor vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles, pedestrians and other road users.

Transmission equipment means equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, microwave dishes, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supplies. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

Utility pole means a pole located in the right-of-way that is used for wireline communications, lighting, the vertical portion of support structures for traffic control signals or devices or a similar function, or for the collocation of small wireless facilities and located in the right-of-way. Utility pole does not include (1) wireless support structures, (2) any transmission infrastructure owned or operated by a public power supplier or rural public power supplier, and (3) any distribution or communications infrastructure owned or operated by a rural public power supplier. Notwithstanding the mandatory inclusion of this definition by the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, for purposes of this Article, the City strongly discourages the placement of small wireless facilities on the vertical portion of support structures for traffic control signals for public welfare and safety reasons.

        Utility support structure means utility poles or utility towers supporting electrical, telephone, cable or other similar facilities.

        Wireless Communication Facilities or WCF means equipment for the transmission or reception of radio frequency (RF) signals or other wireless communications or other signals for commercial communications purposes, typically consisting of a group of antennas, a tower or base station, transmission cables and other transmission equipment, backup power supplies, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, electric meters, coaxial cables, fiber optic cables, wires, telecommunications demarcation boxes and related materials and equipment and an equipment enclosure or cabinets including small wireless facilities.

Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including (a) equipment associated with wireless communications and (b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular power supply, and small back-up battery, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities.  Wireless facility does not include (a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within the equipment which is collocated, (b) coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to, or directly associated with, a particular antenna, or (c) a wireline backhaul facility.

Wireless infrastructure provider means any person, including a person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State of Nebraska, when acting to build or install wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless support structures, but that is not a wireless services provider.

Wireless provider means a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider when acting as a coapplicant for a wireless services provider.

Wireless services means any services using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether mobile or at a fixed location, provided to the public using wireless facilities.

Wireless services provider means a person who provides wireless services.

Wireless support structure means a structure such as a guyed or self-supporting tower, billboard, building, or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities other than a structure designed solely for the collocation of small wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.

Wireline backhaul facility means an above-ground or underground facility used to transport communications services from a wireless facility to a communications network.

 

§34-77.  Applicability

(A) Public Power Supplier Poles:  A public power supplier shall not be required to allow the collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles owned, operated, or managed by a public power supplier except pursuant to a negotiated pole attachment agreement containing reasonable and nondiscriminatory terms and conditions, including, but not limited to, applicable rates, and the permit, operational, and safety requirements of the public power supplier. The City is a public power supplier.

(B) Annual Rate for Collocation on Public Power Supplier Poles: The annual pole attachment rate for the collocation of a small wireless facility supported by or installed on a utility pole owned, operated, or managed by a public power supplier shall be fair, reasonable, nondiscriminatory, cost-based, and set by the board of such public power supplier in accordance with section 70-655.

 (C) All new antennas, DAS and small wireless facilities in all zoning districts shall be subject to these regulations.

(D) A Tower Development Permit and Conditional Use Permit are required if a pole is to be located outside of the right-of-way.

(E) New antenna arrays meeting the requirements of §34-81 are permitted outright.

(F) DAS and small wireless facilities are permitted uses pursuant to §34-77(L).

(G) Antennas attached to distribution poles and street light poles in the public right-of-way shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above the highest point of the pole structure and may be installed: 1) when permitted by the pole owner’s franchise; or 2) by amendment to the pole owner’s franchise or right-of way use easement and consent of the City upon payment of reasonable compensation for use of the right-of-way.

(H) Preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this Article unless modified as described by this Article.

(I) The following are exempt from this Article:

  (1) FCC licensed amateur (ham) radio facilities;

  (2) Satellite earth stations, dishes and/or antennas used for private television reception not exceeding one (1) meter in diameter;

  (3) A WCF installed upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the federal, state or local government, or a written determination of public necessity by the City; except that such facility must comply with all federal and state requirements.  The WCF shall be exempt from the provisions of this Article for up to one month after the duration of the state of emergency;

  (4) A temporary, commercial WCF installed for providing coverage of a special event such as news coverage or sporting event, subject to administrative approval by the City. The WCF shall be exempt from the provisions of this Article for up to two weeks before and one week after the duration of the special event;

  (5) Other temporary, commercial WCFs installed for a period of up to ninety (90) days, subject to the City’s discretion; provided that such temporary WCF will comply with applicable setbacks and height requirements;

  (6) Antennas attached to existing structures (such as commercial buildings, houses or apartments) for Internet purposes and uses, solely for occupants of the building, for which the antennas are attached as long as the height limitations of the zoning district are not exceeded and the antenna design is satisfactory to the City; and

  (7) Routine maintenance and repair of antennas and replacement of antennas so long as the replacement antennas are of similar design, size, type, height, weight and color. Applicable building permits may be required for antenna replacement.

(J) Pole-Mounted Equipment:  All pole-mounted transmission equipment shall be mounted as close as technically possible to the pole so as to reduce the overall visual profile to the maximum extent feasible subject to applicable safety codes.  

(K) License or Agreement:  For all WCFs to be located within the right-of-way, prior to submitting for a permit, the applicant must have a valid municipal agreement, license, franchise or exemption otherwise granted by applicable law.  Prior to the installation or construction of a WCF within the right-of-way or a utility easement, the registrant or provider must notify all utilities located within such right-of-way regarding the use of the right-of-way or easement.

(L) Subject to the other requirements of this Article, Distributed Antenna Systems and small cells in the right-of-way are subject to approval via permits and administrative review by the City Administrator for use outside of the right-of-way and the Public Works Department for use inside of the right-of-way unless their installation requires the construction of a new pole exceeding the maximum height limitation of the underlying zoning district.  A permit is required for replacement utility support structures.

(M) Use of Street Lights:  For public safety and welfare considerations, the City strongly discourages wireless providers from placing small wireless facilities on any poles (street light, traffic signal or otherwise) located at an intersection having traffic control signals.  Instead, the City encourages wireless providers to place small wireless facilities on street lights elsewhere in the right-of-way.  The City also encourages wireless providers to place small wireless facilities on structures or buildings outside of the right-of-way rather than placing new poles in the right-of-way.

(N) For public safety and welfare reasons, the City will not allow the placement of small wireless facilities on electric transmission poles.  However, small wireless facilities may be placed on distribution poles subject to the other requirements of this Article.

 

§34-78.  Access to Right-of-Way 
(A)  General Terms:

  (1) The term of an Agreement shall be for up to ten (10) years unless extended by mutual written agreement of the parties.

  (2) The Agreement authorizes the provider’s non-exclusive use of the right-of-way for the sole purpose of installing, maintaining and operating wireless communication facilities, including any pole built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting the wireless communication facilities to provide the services expressly authorized in the Agreement, subject to applicable laws, this Article and the terms and conditions of the Agreement.  The Agreement authorizes use only of the right-of-way in which the City has an actual interest.  It is not a warranty of title or interest in any right-of-way, and it does not confer on the provider any interest in any particular location or to a superior or preferred location within the right-of-way.  All use of City poles or other structures in the right-of-way shall require payment of fees for such use.

  (3) The provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, keep and maintain its wireless communication facilities and poles in the right-of-way in a safe condition, and in good order and repair.

  (4) In the event of an emergency regarding the provider’s small wireless facilities, or related poles, the provider shall immediately notify the City of the nature of the emergency and planned response to the emergency.

(B)  Permit Required:  No person may construct, install or maintain in the right-of-way any wireless communication facilities or pole without first receiving a permit from the Public Works Department.

(C)  Application Requirements:  The application shall be submitted by the provider or its duly authorized representative to the City Engineer. Applications shall contain the following:

  (1) The applicant’s name, address, telephone number, and email address, including emergency contact information for the applicant.

  (2) The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and email addresses of all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant or provider with respect to the filing of the application.

  (3) A description of the proposed work and wireless communication facility sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this Article.

  (4) If applicable, a copy of the authorization from the owner of the pole, tower or support structure on or in which the wireless communication facility will be placed or attached.

  (5) Detailed construction drawings and photo simulations regarding the proposed wireless communication facility.

  (6) To the extent the proposed wireless communication facility involves collocation on a pole, tower or support structure, a structural report prepared by a Nebraska licensed professional engineer evidencing that the pole, tower or support structure will support the collocation (or that the pole, tower or support structure will be modified to meet structural requirements) in accordance with applicable codes.

  (7) For any new above-ground wireless communication facilities, accurate visual depictions or representations, if not included in the construction drawings or photo simulations.

  (8) Any other submission requirements per published City policies or regulations.

(D) Pole Attachment or Other Agreement:  Prior to installing in the right-of-way any wireless communication facility, or any pole built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting a wireless communication facility, a person shall enter into a Pole Attachment or other agreement (“Agreement”) with the City expressly authorizing use of the right-of-way for the wireless communication facility or pole proposed to be installed.  The Agreement shall provide for the attachment to City-owned poles or structures in the right-of-way in addition to poles or structures owned by unrelated third parties, provided that the applicant secures the written consent of the third party for such attachment.

 

§34-79.  Preferred Pole Locations

(A) All poles for supporting small wireless facilities in the right-of-way are permitted only after applying the following siting priorities, ordered from most-preferred (1) to least-preferred (6):

  (1) existing street lights;

  (2) relocated street lights;

  (3) replacement of street lights (with a pole of dual functionality) at the same location that can structurally support the Small Wireless Facilities;

  (4) new poles in the right-of-way specifically for Small Wireless Facilities;

  (5) electric distribution poles if they can meet the pole attachment agreement requirements;

  (6) traffic control signals but they must show why none of the other choices will work and ensure that the provider’s equipment will not interfere with the functionality of the traffic signals.

(B) The applicant for a pole shall address preferences 4-6 in an alternative sites analysis prepared pursuant to §34-80 below.

 

§34-80.  Alternative Sites Analysis

                (A) For a pole other than 1-3 in §34-79, the applicant must address the City’s preferred locations with a detailed explanation justifying why a site of higher priority was not selected.  The City’s location preferences must be addressed in a clear and complete written alternative sites analysis that shows at least three (3) higher ranked, alternative sites considered that are in the geographic range of the service coverage or capacity objectives of the applicant, together with a factually detailed and meaningful comparative analysis between each alternative candidate and the proposed site that explains the substantive reasons why the applicant rejected the alternative candidate.

                (B) A complete alternative sites analysis provided under this subsection may include less than three (3) alternative sites so long as the applicant provides a factually detailed written rationale for why it could not identify at least three (3) potentially available, higher ranked, alternative sites.

                (C) For purposes of disqualifying potential collocations or alternative sites for the failure to meet the applicant’s service coverage or capacity objectives the applicant will provide (a) a description of its objective, whether it be to address a deficiency in coverage or capacity; (b) detailed  maps or other exhibits with clear and concise Radio Frequency (“RF”) data to illustrate that the objective is not met using the alternative (whether it be collocation or a more preferred location); and (c) a description of why the alternative (collocation or a more preferred location) does not meet the objective.

 

§34-81.  Antenna Arrays

Antenna arrays are permitted in any zoning district as long as they are located upon an existing structure, excluding single family and duplex properties, that provides sufficient elevation for the array’s operation without the necessity of constructing a tower or other apparatus to extend the antenna array more than ten feet (10’) above the structure.  Installation on City property requires the execution of necessary agreements. 

 

§34-82.  Accessory Uses, Equipment, Design, and Standards

(A) Accessory Uses.

  (1) Accessory uses shall be limited to such structures and equipment that are necessary for transmission or reception functions, and shall not include broadcast studios, offices, vehicles or equipment storage, or other uses not essential to the transmission or reception functions.

  (2) All accessory buildings shall be constructed of building materials equal to or better than those of the primary building on the site and shall be subject to applicable permits.

(B) Accessory Equipment.  All accessory equipment located at the base of a WCF shall be located or placed (at the applicant’s choice) in an existing building, underground, or in an equipment shelter or cabinet that is (1) designed to blend in with existing surroundings, using architecturally compatible construction and colors; and (2) be located so as to be unobtrusive as possible consistent with the proper functioning of the WCF.

(C) Site Design Flexibility.  Individual WCF sites vary in the location of adjacent buildings, existing trees, topography and other local variables. By mandating certain design standards, there may result a project that could have been less intrusive if the location of the various elements of the project could have been placed in more appropriate locations within a given site. Therefore, the WCF and supporting equipment may be installed so as to best camouflage, disguise them, or conceal them, to make the WCF more closely compatible with and blend into the setting or host structure, upon approval by the City.

(D) General Standards  

                  (1)  Landscaping and Screening:  Equipment shelters and cabinets and other on the ground ancillary equipment shall be screened with landscaping (except for those in the right-of-way) as required for the district in which they are located or with another design acceptable to the City. Alternatively, where technically feasible, the applicant shall incorporate the cabinet and other equipment into the base of a new pole (for example, for a small wireless facility) provided there is adequate space in the right-of-way and that ADA sidewalk accessibility requirements can be met.  All provisions of the ADA (including, but not limited to, clear space requirements) shall be met by the applicant.

  (2)  New Poles:  To the extent technically feasible, new poles must be designed to match the existing light fixtures and other poles, and they shall serve a dual purpose (for example, a new light fixture, flag pole or banner clips).

        (E) Radio Frequency (RF) Emissions Compliance Report.  A written report will be prepared, signed and sealed by a Nebraska-licensed professional engineer which assesses whether the proposed WCF demonstrates compliance with the RF emissions limits established by the FCC.  In no event shall any small wireless facilities, either individually or collectively with those of others, exceed the maximum permissible RF emission standards of the FCC.  In the event the FCC’s maximum permissible RF standards are exceeded, the wireless provider shall immediately cease and desist the use of its equipment and facilities. 

 

§34-83.  Independent Technical and Legal Review

                Although the City intends for City staff to review applications to the extent feasible, the City may retain the services of an independent technical expert and attorney of its choice to provide evaluations of permit applications for WCFs.  The consultant shall have verifiable experience in the field of wireless communication facilities.  The consultant’s review may include, but is not limited to (a) the accuracy and completeness of the items submitted with the application; (b) the applicability of analysis and techniques and methodologies proposed by the applicant; (c) the validity of conclusions reached by the applicant; and (d) whether the proposed WCF complies with the applicable approval criteria set forth in this Article.  The applicant shall pay the reasonable cost for any independent consultant fees through a deposit, estimated by the City, within ten (10) days of the City’s request.  When the City requests such payment, the application shall be deemed incomplete for purposes of application processing timelines until the deposit is received.  In the event that such costs and fees do not exceed the deposit amount, the City shall refund any unused portion within thirty (30) days after the final permit is released or, if no final permit is released, within thirty (30) days after the City receives a written request from the applicant.  If the costs and fees exceed the deposit amount, then the applicant shall pay the difference to the City before the permit is issued.  The consultant shall provide an itemized description of the services and related fees and charges.

 

§34-84.  Indemnification

Each permit issued for a WCF located on City property shall be deemed to have as a condition of the permit a requirement that the applicant, registrant and wireless provider defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers, agents, employees, volunteers, and contractors from any and all liability, damages, or charges (including attorneys’ fees and expenses) arising out of claims, suits, demands, actions or causes of action as a result of the permit process, a granted permit, construction, erection, location, performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of the WCF.

 

§34-85.  FCC Shot Clock Requirements

(A) Eligible Facilities Request.  This Section implements Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a), as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No. 14-153 and Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018 which requires a state or local government to approve any Eligible Facilities Request for a modification of an existing tower or base station that does not result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of such tower or base station.  Eligible Facilities Requests shall be governed by the provisions of Federal law including, but not limited to, application review, the sixty (60) day shot clock, tolling and deemed granted remedy.

(B) Collocation for other than Small Wireless Facilities.  This Section implements, in part, 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No. 14-153 and Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018 regarding collocation applications for other than small wireless facilities including, but not limited to, application review, the ninety (90) day shot clock and tolling.

(C) New Macro Cell Tower. This Section implements, in part, 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No. 14-153 and Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018 regarding new macro cell tower applications including, but not limited to, application review, the one hundred fifty (150) day shot clock and tolling.

(D) Small Wireless Facilities - Collocation on Existing Structures.  This Section implements the shot clock procedures that are contained in the Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018, regarding the collocation of small wireless facilities on existing structures, including but not limited to application review, the sixty (60) day shot clock, resetting the sixty (60) day shot clock once the City timely sends a notice of an incomplete application and tolling.

(E) Small Wireless Facilities - New Structure.  This Section implements the shot clock procedures that are contained in the Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018, regarding the construction of small wireless facilities on a new structure, including but not limited to application review, the ninety (90) day shot clock, resetting the ninety (90) day shot clock once the City timely sends a notice of an incomplete application and tolling.

 

§34-86.  Multiple Sites in One Application

        An applicant may propose no more than ten (10) sites in a consolidated application.  The denial of a site in a consolidated application shall not affect the approval of any remaining sites.

 

§34-87.  Severability and Conflicts

                (A) If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this Article, or its application to any person is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.

(B) These Wireless Communication Facilities regulations are in addition to other regulations in the City Code.  In case of a conflict between regulations, the more restrictive shall control.




 

Article III. Reserved
 


§34-88.  Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-89.  Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-90.  Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-91.  Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-92.  Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-93.  Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-94.  Reserved 

§34-95.  Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-96.  Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-97.  Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-98.  Deleted by Ordinance No. 8962, effective 3-9-2005
§34-99.  Reserved
§34-100.  Reserved
§34-101.  Reserved
§34-102.  Reserved
§34-103.  Reserved
§34-104.  Reserved

 

 

Article IV. Public Transportation System
 

§34-105.  Public Transportation System

 

The city council of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, hereby appropriates for itself the authority to do any one or more of the following in order to provide for the general welfare of the citizens of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska:

Acquire by the exercise of the power of eminent domain, or otherwise, lease, purchase, construct, own, maintain, and operate, or contract for the operation of a public passenger transportation system, excluding taxicabs and railroad systems, and to exercise any other powers authorized by law.

        The exercise of the power herein granted shall be accomplished by further action of this council in such manner and method as it deems appropriate.

 
CHAPTER 35

WATER

 

Article I. In General

§35-1.  Utilities Director; Authority
                The authority and powers vested in the Utilities Director by this Chapter shall, in all cases, be subject to review by the Mayor and City Council.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-2.  Reports to be Submitted
                It shall be the duty of the Utilities Director to report to the City Council monthly a particular account of the affairs of the water operations for the preceding month, together with all suggestions and recommendations as deemed proper. The Director shall also make and submit a statement at the beginning of each fiscal year for the whole of the preceding year.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-3.  Application for Water Service
                Every person desiring a supply of water from the City water system shall make application therefore to the Utilities Director upon forms furnished for such purpose.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-4.  Water Service; Order Required
                Water will not be supplied into any location except upon the order of the Utilities Director, and plumbers are prohibited from turning the water into any service pipe except on the order of the Utilities Director; provided, that this rule shall not be construed to prevent licensed plumbers from admitting water to test pipes, but for that purpose only. The Utilities Director shall not order water to be supplied into any location, whether new or existing construction, until the water system to be served has been inspected and approved by the Grand Island Building Department.

                When water has been turned off from any consumer, the consumer shall not turn it on or permit it to be turned on without the written consent of the Utilities Director.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-5.  Service Pipes; Specifications; Laying
                Either copper or ductile iron pipe may be used at the option of the consumer. Copper service pipe shall be at least one-eighth inch larger in diameter than the tap through which it is supplied. All piping shall sustain a pressure of not less than two hundred pounds per square inch (200 psi).

                All service pipes shall be laid under the surface of the ground with no less than five feet of earth cover, and in all cases shall be so protected as to prevent rupture by freezing.

                In all cases, water service pipes, two inch or smaller in diameter, shall be of copper pipe between the water main and water meter. All service pipe laid between the water main and the curb stop at the property line shall be built of continuous construction without joints, unions, or splices; however two inch pipe may be installed with soldered joints. All piping shall meet the following specifications:

Specifications for Copper Pipe:

Copper pipe shall be Type K, cold drawn to size and of the proper bending temper and shall be made from phosphorized copper completely deoxidized and have a purity of at least ninety-nine and nine-tenths percent copper.

Copper pipe shall have the following dimensions:


 

Nominal

Size in

Inches

Wall

Thickness

In Inches

Pounds/

Lineal

Foot

Outside

Diameter

In Inches

3/4

.065

.641

.875

1

.065

.839

1.125

1 ¼

.065

1.04

1.375

1 ½

.072

1.36

1.625

2

.083

2.06

2.125

 

                In all cases, service pipes larger than two inches in diameter which are laid between the water main in the street and the valve at the property line shall be of pressure class 350 ductile iron, either mechanical joint or slip joint pipe. This shall be built and laid to withstand a pressure of 200 psi and shall conform to the standard specifications as recommended by the American Water Works Association for ductile iron pipe.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-6.  Service Pipes; Tapping
                No person shall be permitted to make or have made any taps or connection with any water service pipe between the water meter and the water mains.

 

§35-7.  Service Pipes; Cost and Installation
                The City shall furnish and install two inch and smaller water service pipe from the water main in the street to within six inches of the property line, at the expense of the consumer, and such service pipe shall include the corporation stop, pipe, curb stop, and stop box, and such installation shall include all labor of excavating and laying the same. The cost of the same shall be paid in advance to the Utilities Department before any work is done. In the event any expense is incurred by the City which exceeds the amount so paid, such additional expense shall be paid by the person responsible therefor before water is supplied to such consumer.  All costs for furnishing and installing service piping larger than two inches shall be by the consumer.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-8.  Excavations In Paved Streets
                Whenever it shall be necessary to cut into, excavate in, or remove any portion of the paving in any street in the City to serve any lot with water, or to repair or relay any service pipe connecting any water main with any lot, the consent of the Utilities Director shall be first secured and the paving shall be restored to its former condition. The expense of cutting into, removing, and restoring the pavement shall be paid in advance by the owner of the lot to the Utilities Department. The work of removing and restoring any street pavement for any such purpose shall be by or under the supervision, control, and direction of the Public Works Director and in accordance with the provisions of this Code and any other specifications of the City regulating paving.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-9.  Refilling Excavations
                After service pipes are laid, in refilling the opening, the earth shall be laid in layers of not more than nine inches in depth and each layer thoroughly tamped and settled with water. Density tests shall be conducted for each vertical lift of compacted material placed conducted by an independent testing laboratory to certify compaction of at least 95% of maximum density within the public right-of-way and submitted to the City before acceptance of the project.  The streets, sidewalks, and pavements shall be restored to as good condition as before the excavation, and all dirt, stones or rubbish shall be removed immediately after completing the work. Should an excavation in any street, alley, or highway be left open or unfinished for the space of twenty-four hours, or should such work be improperly done or should any rubbish not be removed, the Utilities Director shall have the right to finish or correct the work, and the expense incurred shall be charged to and paid by the person responsible for such work, and shall be paid before water is supplied

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-10.  Curb Stops; Stop Boxes
                Unless otherwise permitted, curb stops shall be placed in the service pipe within six inches of the property line and protected by a valve box reaching from the top of the curb stop to the surface of the ground, of suitable size to admit a valve key for turning on and off the stop, and with a cast iron cover, having the letter "W" marked thereon, visible and even with the pavement, sidewalk or top of the ground. The valve box shall be kept closed and in good repair by the water consumer. In case a consumer refuses to keep the valve box in good condition, the Utilities Department shall put the same in good order, at the expense of the owner of the premises.

 

§35-11.  Tapping Mains or Distributing Pipes
                No person except by direction of the Utilities Director will be permitted, under any circumstances, to tap the water mains or distributing pipes, or install corporation stops or appurtenances thereon. All pipes shall, in all cases, be tapped at the two o'clock position or at level, and not in any case nearer than fifteen inches of either end of the pipe, nor nearer than two feet to any other tap.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

 

§35-12.  Repairs and Maintenance
                All persons taking city water shall keep the service pipes, curb stops, meters, valves, valve boxes, and other apparatus in good working order and repair, and protect the same from frost at their own risk and expense. Leaking service pipes, curb stops, corporation stops, valves, and other water service appurtenances shall be repaired in a timely manner by the consumer at the consumer's expense. Equipment not in good working order shall be replaced or repaired by the consumer at the consumer's expense. The Utilities Department shall have the right to operate the curb stops and/or valves at any time deemed necessary by the Utilities Director. The City shall not be responsible for any damage to or damage caused by failure of the customer's service pipe, corporation stops, curb stops, valves, or any other appurtenances of the water service, unless caused by gross negligence or intentional acts by the City or its employees or agents.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-13.  Exposure of Water Pipes to Frost
                No person shall dig up or uncover so as to expose to the frost, any water pipe of the city, except under the direction of the Utilities Director.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-14.  Public Fire Hydrants
                All hydrants erected in the City for the purpose of extinguishing fire are hereby declared to be public hydrants. It shall be unlawful for anyone but authorized persons to obstruct a public hydrant, open any of such hydrants, attempt to draw water from the same, or in any manner interfere with the same. For purposes of this section, authorized persons shall mean members of the Fire Department, and then only for the use and purpose of the Fire Department, or persons specially authorized by the City or the Utilities Director, and then only in the exercise of the authority delegated by the City or Utilities Director.  Maintenance of hydrants not located in public right-of-way or easements shall be the responsibility of the property owner.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-15.  House Boilers
                All house boilers shall be constructed with one or more air holes near the top of the inlet pipe, and shall be sufficiently strong to bear the pressure of the atmosphere under the vacuum, and shall have an approved backflow preventer between the service pipe and the boiler. The valves and other appurtenances shall be sufficiently strong to bear the pressure of water in the mains.

 

§35-16.  Use of Water for Construction Purposes
                The Utilities Director shall have the authority to issue permits for the use of water for building and construction purposes. The regular charge shall be paid as though the water was taken by regular customer service.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-17.  City May Suspend Use of Water
                The City reserves the right to suspend the use of water for fountains, or for sprinkling yards, lawns and gardens or for any other purpose whenever in the opinion of the City Council the public exigency may require it.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-18.  Right of City to Shut Off Water
                The City may shut off the water supply at any time, from any or all premises, to repair the plant, pumps or mains, to make extensions or connections, or for violations of this chapter or failure to pay water charges, or for any other purpose that may be deemed necessary by the Utilities Director, any permit granted to the contrary notwithstanding, and no claim for damages shall be made against the City or the Utilities Director on account of any such shutoff or on account of a failure of the water supply from any cause.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-19.  Injuring Waterworks Property
                No person shall willfully or carelessly break, damage or deface, interfere with, or disturb any equipment, apparatus, fixtures, attachments or appurtenances of the water works of the City, or any public or private hydrant, valve, meter, water supply or service pipe, or any part thereof, or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of any of the above mentioned properties.

 

§35-20.  Notice When Premises Vacated
                If any consumer of City water shall move from the premises for which water is being supplied by the City, or if such premises shall be destroyed by fire, such consumer shall notify the Utilities Director thereof, who shall cause the water to be shut off from such premises.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-21.  Right of Entry to Examine Fixtures, Etc.
                All consumers of City water shall permit the Utilities Director, or person designated by the Director, during reasonable daytime hours, to enter their premises or buildings for the purpose of testing any meter, or to examine the pipes, meters or other fixtures.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-22.  Report of Leakage; Violations
                It shall be the duty of the police of the City to report to the Utilities Director all cases of leakage and of violations of this chapter or any other ordinances relating to the water works of the City that may be brought to their notice, and they shall enforce the observance of all such provisions, so far as they have that authority to do so.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-23.  Contract for Water; Violations
                All the rules, regulations and provisions of this Chapter shall be considered a part of the contract with every person who is supplied with water through the waterworks system of the City, and every such person, by taking water, shall be considered and held to consent to be bound thereby, and when any of them are violated, or such others as the City or Utilities Director may adopt, the water shall be cut off from the building or place of such violation, and the water shall not be turned on again except by order of the Utilities Director and on payment of the expenses of shutting off and turning on the same, and upon such other terms as the Utilities Director shall determine; provided, there is a satisfactory understanding with the offending party that no further cause for complaint shall arise.

 Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

Article II. Meters and Rates

 

§35-24.  Meter; Generally
                All water meters used in connection with the waterworks system of the City shall be of standard manufacture, approved by the Utilities Director, and put in place or removed by the Utilities Director or some other employee of the City designated for that purpose. The cost of such meters and the placing or removing or the keeping of the same in good order and repair shall be at the expense of the consumer. All work, repairs, and removals of such meters shall be done under the supervision and direction of the Utilities Director, and in such case the owner or consumer shall pay to the City the actual cost for such repairs, and, upon failing to do so, the Utilities Director may cause the water to be cut off from such premises.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-25.  Meters; Access
                The owner or tenant of any premises served with City water shall provide ready and convenient access to the water meter located on such premises so that it may be easily examined and read by the Utilities Director or any person designated by the Director to perform such functions.  If a meter reading is not available, the City may determine an estimated consumption based on historical consumption for billing purposes until a meter reading is available.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-26.  Water to be Furnished at Meter Rates
                All water furnished through the waterworks system of the City shall be furnished at meter rates.

 

§35-27.  Charges When Meter Out of Order
                Should any water meter get out of order or repair and fail to register properly, the consumer will be charged at the average monthly consumption, as shown by the meter when in order, for six months previous, or fraction thereof, if the same has not been used that long.

 

§35-28.  Billing; Nonpayment; When Bills Due
                All money due the City for water furnished will become due and payable upon billing by the City.

                It shall be the duty of the Utilities Director, on all water accounts remaining unpaid thirty days after the bill for the same is rendered, or within such thirty day period, if in the Director's discretion the circumstances warrant, to shut off the supply of water to such consumer and the same shall remain shut off until the account is paid in full, together with the cost of turning the same off and on. Bills for water furnished shall be rendered by the Utilities Director monthly or quarterly, and shall designate the number of cubic feet of water registered at the date of the bill and shall subtract therefrom the number of cubic feet of water registered at the date of last settlement, and compute the amount due for the difference in dollars and cents, in accordance with the rates fixed by this article or by resolution of the City Council. All officers of the Utilities Department are positively prohibited from allowing credit to any one.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-29.  Minimum Rates
                The minimum rates as set forth in this article shall be uniform and apply in all cases where water is furnished within or without the City as the case may be, and such minimum rate shall be credited to the account of each consumer, or the person to be charged, until the amount paid as a minimum rate shall be exhausted by water charges as aforesaid. The charges for water furnished at the rates set forth in this article shall be collected by the Utilities Director as provided by this article. If the amount of water consumed monthly is not sufficient to exhaust the minimum rate as herein below provided and charged by the City, such consumer or person to be charged shall not be entitled to any return or credit for any portion of such minimum rate. The minimum rate shall be charged for each dwelling unit which is directly or indirectly connected to the City water system. For the purposes of this article, a dwelling unit shall mean one or more rooms and a single kitchen designed as a unit for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes, and shall include a manufactured home. If more than one dwelling unit is served from a single water meter as in the case of apartments and manufactured home courts, a percentage of the minimum rate shall be charged against each unit, depending on the number of dwelling units per water meter as follows:

 

2-5 dwelling units…………………………

65%

6-10 dwelling units……………………….

60%

11-20 dwelling units………………………

55%

21 and over dwelling units………………..

50%

 

The above charges shall be computed upon the yearly average of the number of dwelling units occupied.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-30.  Schedule of Rates


SCHEDULE OF RATES WITHIN CITY

 

The rate to be charged for water furnished within the corporate limits of the City shall be as follows:

 

Monthly Billings

Cubic feet

per month

Rate per

100 cubic feet

First 500…………………………………...

$0.800

Next 500…………………………………..

1.040

Next 500…………………………………..

1.352

Next 2,500………………………………...

1.352

Next 6,000………………………………...

0.800

Next 90,000……………………………….

0.750

Next 100,000……………………………...

0.700

Over 200,000……………………………..

0.635

SCHEDULE OF RATES  OUTSIDE CITY

 

The rate to be charged for water furnished outside and beyond the corporate limits of the City shall be as follows:

 

Monthly Billings

Cubic feet

per month

Rate per

100 cubic feet

First 500…………………………………...

$0.800

Next 500…………………………………..

1.248

Next 500…………………………………..

1.622

Next 2,500………………………………...

1.622

Next 6,000………………………………...

0.960

Next 90,000……………………………….

0.900

Next 100,000……………………………...

0.840

Over 200,000……………………………..

0.762

 

*Plus a customer charge of $0.70 per month for unfunded federal mandates for the Clean Water Act and the City’s backflow program, in addition to the regular rates charged for water furnished to the customer.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8935, effective 10-01-2004
Amended by Ordinance No. 8987, effective 07-27-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9181, effective 10-01-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9371, effective 04-01-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9393, effective 08-02-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9613, effective 12-07-2016

 

In addition to consumption, a monthly fee would be charged according to the meter size supplying water to the property:

 

Meter Size

Monthly Fee

<= 1” ……………………………......

$6.50

1 ½”……………………………........

$12.00

2” ……………………………..........

$28.50

3” ……………………………..........

$48.50

4” ……………………………..........

$66.00

6” ……………………………..........

$225.00

8” ……………………………...........

$1,250.00

10” …………………………….........

$4,000.00

Amended by Ordinance No. 9371(A), effective 04-01-2012

Amended by Ordinance No. 9613, effective 12-07-2016

 

§35-31. Reserved

 

§35-32.  Sprinkler Systems
                Owners of all private fire sprinkler systems connected to City water mains shall pay the City an annual fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§35-33.  Water Charges To Be A Lien
                All water and meter rates shall be charged to and collected from the owner of the premises served and the same shall be a lien on such premises and real estate where used, and may be collected by the city at any time after the same becomes due by civil action in the courts. The Utilities Director may report the names of owners of any premises served with water that are delinquent in the payment of their water bills or charges, showing the amount due from each delinquent, together with a description of the property upon, or for which the water has been supplied, and thereupon the City Council shall, by resolution, direct the City Clerk to file with the City Treasurer a certified copy of such report and resolution, directing that the amount assessed against the different premises, as shown by such report, be placed upon the assessment rolls and tax books of the City for collection as other taxes.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

 

Article III. Mains Constructed By Private Parties

 

§35-34.  Water Mains; Department Standards
                The design and construction of all water mains connected, either directly or indirectly, by private persons or entities, to the existing City water system shall meet all standards and specifications established by the Grand Island Utilities Department and/or plumbing codes as adopted by the City of Grand Island.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-35.  Plans Signed by Engineer
                All water main construction plans and specifications shall bear the signature and seal of a registered professional engineer who has prepared them.

 

§35-36.  Review and Approval of Plans
                All water main construction plans and specifications shall be reviewed and approved by the Grand Island Utilities Director, the Fire Department, and Department of Public Works. Prior to commencement of construction, the private person or entity constructing the water main, shall obtain a construction permit and pay a permit fee from the Utilities Director and Building Department Director after the water main construction plans and specifications have been approved as set forth above and before any water main construction work has commenced.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

Amended by Ordinance No. 9613, effective 12-07-2016

 

§35-37.  Cost to Review Plans
                The Utilities and Building Department may charge to review plans submitted by persons or entities proposing to construct water mains in the planning area. The charge shall be the rate per hour established and published from time to time by the City Fee Schedule.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9613, effective 12-07-2016

 

§35-38.  Workmanship and Materials
                All workmanship and materials shall comply fully with the requirements of the approved plans and specifications. If at any time within one year after the date of the final inspection any defect shall appear which in the opinion of the Utilities Director is due to inferior materials or workmanship, the property owner shall do whatever is necessary to remedy the defect at no cost to the City of Grand Island. Either Director will notify the property owner in writing of the defects and repairs to be made. If the party notified fails to commence repairs within ten days, the Utilities Department may cause the defects to be remedied and charge the costs and expense involved to the property owner. The contractor surety shall not be relieved until the defects or repairs are corrected and approved and a written release is furnished to the surety by the requesting department.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-39.  Water Main Inspection and Approval
                The Utilities Department shall investigate and approve or reject the laying of all water mains. The City shall have the right to enter property containing water mains at all reasonable hours for inspection and investigation purposes.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-40.  Commencement of Service
                Before any water main which is constructed by a private person or entity and connected to the City water system will be accepted and service commenced, the following requirements must be met:

        (A) The water mains must pass all pressure tests required by the Utilities Department.

        (B) The water mains must pass all water quality tests required by the City of Grand Island or any state or federal agency.

        (C) The registered professional engineer must inspect and approve the water main and issue a certificate of completion attesting that the water mains were constructed in accordance with the water main construction plans and specifications.

        (D) The Public Works Director must accept the engineer's certificate of completion.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-41.  Service Pipes
                Private persons or entities may furnish and install water service pipes to within six inches of private property lines; provided, only the Utilities Department will be permitted to tap the water mains or distribution pipes or install corporation stops or appurtenances as required.

 

 

Article IV. Temporary Service And Abandonment

 

§35-42.  Temporary Connections
                No person may connect any temporary service pipe to the city water mains or distribution lines without the approval of the Utilities Director. Persons wishing to make a temporary service pipe connection shall file a written request for such connection with the Grand Island Utilities Director, specifying the connection desired to be made, giving the number of feet of service pipe required, a diagram of the premises and equipment to be served, and an estimate as to the duration of the temporary service pipe connection. The Director may, at his or her discretion, approve the temporary service pipe connection which shall be done at the expense of the applicant and under the supervision of the Director. Such temporary service pipe shall at all times be under the absolute control and supervision of the Utilities Department, and the City reserves the right to disconnect the temporary service pipe at any time there is reasonable cause to believe the applicant is failing to comply with the terms and conditions of the temporary connection permit or is jeopardizing either the City water system or the quality of water in the premises or equipment being served. The temporary service pipe permit shall expire at the earliest of either the applicant's estimated time of duration or the connection of the premises or equipment to an approved permanent service line. The applicant may obtain an extension of time on the temporary service pipe permit for good cause shown to the Director.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-43.  Abandonment of Service Pipes
                All persons abandoning any water service pipe shall have a licensed plumber turn off the line at the water main tap and shall cut and crimp the service pipe as close as possible to, not to exceed one foot from, the tap. The Utilities Department shall be notified whenever a service pipe is abandoned and shall be permitted to inspect and approve all work done in connection with such abandonment. Any person failing to abandon a service pipe in compliance with this section shall be guilty of a violation of the Grand Island City Code and shall pay the Utilities Department for the costs of properly shutting off, closing or crimping any abandoned service pipe and shall be liable for any damages to municipal property caused by the improperly abandoned service pipe. The Utilities Director may approve alternate means of closing and abandoning service pipes upon request if the foregoing procedure is impractical.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015


Article V. Backflow Prevention

 

§35-44.  Definitions
                Definitions of terms as stated in the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the City of Grand Island, are hereby adopted for the purposes of this Article.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-45.  Backflow Prevention
                In order to provide protection and prevent the potential of pollutants and contaminants from entering the public water system, backflow protection devices shall be required on all water service lines installed, replaced, or repaired after March 1, 1993. Backflow protection shall be in accordance with §35-47 and as approved by the Utilities Director in cooperation with the Building Department Director.

 

§35-46.  Backflow Protection for Existing Facilities
                The Utilities Director, in cooperation with the Building Department Director, shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, inspections as required to determine the backflow protection requirements of facilities connected to the City water system, such protection shall be in conformance with adopted plumbing codes. 

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-47.  Evaluation of Hazard and Backflow Protection Requirements
                Evaluation of hazard shall be in accordance with the adopted plumbing code for commonly encountered equipment, fixtures, facilities, and their use. For a more complete list, refer to the Manual of Cross-Connection Control, Eighth Edition, published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California, which is incorporated by reference as a part of this section.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9533, effective 05-05-2015

 

§35-48.  Device Certification
                Backflow preventers required by this Article shall have been tested and approved or listed for the intended use by one of the following organizations:

                (A) Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydrologic Research, University of Southern California, University Park, Los Angeles, California 90089.

                (B) American National Standards Institute, 1430 Broadway, New York, New York 10018.

                (C) Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 333 Pfingsten Road, Northbrook, Illinois 60062.

                (D) National Sanitation Foundation, 2355 West Stadium Boulevard, P. O. Box 1468, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106.

                (E) International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 5032 Alhambra Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90032.

 

§35-49.  Backflow Inspections
                The Building Department or Utilities Department may inspect any premise to determine what level of protection will be necessary to protect the public health and safety.

                In order to inspect a premise, the inspecting department shall give notice to the customer, setting forth a proposed date and time at least ten (10) working days in advance. If the customer cannot make the premises available for inspection on that date and time, the customer shall contact the Department to arrange another date and time for inspection. If the Department and the customer cannot agree on a date and time for inspection within 30 days of the initial notice, the water service line shall be shut off.

                All inspections shall be made during normal working hours.

 

§35-50.  Backflow Prevention; Order Authority
                The Utilities Director or Building Department Director shall have the authority to issue any order consistent with the provisions of this ordinance in order to protect the public health and safety. Any order of either department shall be in writing and shall clearly state the nature of the order, compliance requirements and set a reasonable date by which compliance must be met. All orders will be mailed to the customer certified mail, return receipt requested.

 

§35-51.  Appeal of Backflow Prevention Order
                The customer shall have the right to appeal any order issued in accordance with §35-50 to the Plumbing Board. This appeal shall be done in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26, Plumbing, of the Grand Island City Code.

 

§35-52.  Backflow Preventer; Installation, Maintenance, and Testing
                The cost of the installation, maintenance, and testing of backflow preventers in accordance with this Article shall be paid by the customer. All backflow prevention devices shall be installed in accordance with all manufacturers' instructions and guidelines, in a manner that the device shall be accessible for inspection and testing, and in accordance with §35-47. A reduced pressure principle backflow preventer shall not be installed in a pit or other location which may be subject to flooding.

 

§35-53.  Customers Responsibility
                Backflow prevention devices shall be maintained in good working condition by the customer.

        (A) The customer shall be responsible to cause all backflow, backpressure or back-siphonage protection devices equipped with test ports to be tested as often as required by the Utilities Director, but at least upon initial installation, when repaired, and once each year. All tests shall be done by a Backflow Preventer Test and Repair Technician, Grade VI Water Supply Operator, certified by the State of Nebraska Department of Health. Test results shall be forwarded to the Utilities Director on standard reporting forms. The test report shall be signed by the certified tester, attesting to proper backflow preventer operation. Devices equipped with test ports and installed on lawn sprinkling systems which are supplied with water from a service line equipped with a backflow, backpressure or back siphonage detection device shall be tested upon initial installation, replacement of integral parts, and every fifth year thereafter.

        (B) Public water supply system consumers are required to assess and report potential backflow hazards on their premises and take any steps necessary for protection of public health and safety as often as reasonably requested by the Utilities Director and which shall be no less often than every five years.

 

§35-54.  Backflow Prevention; Penal Provision; Violation; Penalty
                Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of this ordinance, or who modifies plumbing or backflow preventers so as to defeat the protection against backflow, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed each day of such failure to comply.

 

§35-55.  Reserved
§35-56.  Reserved
§35-57.  Reserved
§35-58.  Reserved
§35-59.  Reserved

 

 

Article VI. Groundwater Control Area No. 1

 

§35-60.  Purpose
                The United States Environmental Protection Agency issued a Record of Decision (ROD) for the Cleburn Street Well Superfund Site on June 7, 1996, which identified three sources of subsurface soil and groundwater contamination.  These sources included the former One Hour Martinizing facility, Liberty Cleaners and Shirt Launderers, and Ideal Cleaners.  The former Nebraska Solvent Company was identified as a possible fourth contamination source subject to subsequent evaluation and testing.  The ROD described selected remedies for the three source areas, an element of which required the City of Grand Island to enact and enforce institutional control ordinances designating a Groundwater Control Area No. 1 in which groundwater use would be restricted to prevent human exposure and consumption of potentially contaminated groundwater, requiring registration of existing wells and requiring approval and registration of new wells.  The institutional control ordinances are to remain in full force and effect until the groundwater contamination identified in the ROD is reduced to a level making the groundwater safe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to 42 USC §300g, et seq., the Safe Drinking Water Act, or its successor legislation.

 

§35-61.  Definitions
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:

Groundwater means water pumped from a well located within the Groundwater Control Area No. 1 described in  Section 35-62.

Groundwater Contamination means the chemicals of concern (COC) described in the United States Environmental Protection Agency Record of Decision (ROD) for the Cleburn Street Well Superfund Site dated June 7, 1996, which was received and accepted by the Mayor and City Council pursuant to Resolution 98-28.

Groundwater Control Area No. 1 means a defined area within the corporate limits of the City of Grand Island subject to the institutional controls provided in this Article which are intended to prohibit human consumption of potentially contaminated groundwater from wells.

Well means a hole or shaft sunk into the earth in order to obtain water from a natural subterranean supply or aquifer.

The definitions found in Neb. Rev. Stat., Chapter 46 - Irrigation and Regulation of Water are adopted by reference, except where such definitions are in conflict with those provided in this section above.

 

§35-62.  Groundwater Control Area Boundaries
                The outer boundaries of the Groundwater Control Area No. 1 are described as follows:  Commencing at the southeasterly corner of the intersection of 9th Street and Adams Street; thence running northeasterly along the south boundary of 9th Street to the southwesterly corner of the intersection of 9th Street and Sycamore Street; thence running southeasterly along the west boundary of Sycamore Street to the northwesterly corner of the intersection of Sycamore Street and 1st Street; thence running southwesterly along the north boundary of 1st Street to the northwesterly corner of the intersection of 1st Street and Locust Street; thence running southerly along the west boundary of Locust Street to the intersection of Locust Street and Division Street; thence running southwesterly along the north boundary of Division Street to the northeasterly corner of the intersection of Division Street and Adams Street; thence running northwesterly along the east boundary of Adams Street to the point of beginning.

 

§35-63.  Duration of Institutional Control Ordinance
                (A) This Article shall remain in full force and effect for an initial term of twenty-five (25) years from the effective date following approval and adoption by the Mayor and City Council. 

(B) The term of this Article may be extended by the Mayor and City Council if at the end of the initial term there remains groundwater contamination identified in the ROD described in Section 35-60 making the groundwater unsafe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act or its successor legislation.

(C) In the event the City of Grand Island is notified during the initial term by the Environmental Protection Agency that groundwater contamination within the Groundwater Control Area No. 1 has been reduced to a level making the groundwater safe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act or its successor legislation, the Mayor and City Council may proceed to repeal this Article forthwith.

 

§35-64.  Prohibited Groundwater Uses
                (A) Groundwater pumped from wells within the Groundwater Control Area No. 1 shall not be used for any human consumption including drinking water, cooking, washing or other household uses.  Because groundwater from wells within the groundwater control area may be contaminated and present a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of persons exposed to said water, any known human consumption of groundwater from wells within the Groundwater Control Area No. 1 is a violation of this Article and is declared a public nuisance subject to abatement as provided hereafter.

(B) This Article shall not apply to uses of groundwater pumped from wells within the Groundwater Control Area No. 1 which do not involve human consumption, including, but not limited to,  non-contact cooling water for industrial, commercial or residential uses and watering of vegetation other than gardens, plants and trees producing food for human consumption. 

 

§35-65.  Well Registration
                (A) All wells for which drilling has commenced or existing within the Groundwater Control Area No. 1 as of the effective date of this Article shall be registered with the Building Department by the person owning the real estate on which the well is located.  There shall be no fee for registering an existing well.

(B) No person shall drill or install a well within the Groundwater Control Area No. 1 prior to applying for and obtaining a well permit from the Building Department.  There shall be a nonrefundable fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule paid to the Building Department contemporaneously with making an application for a well permit.

 

§35-66.  Existing Well Registration, Information Required
                The following information shall be submitted to the Building Department in connection with registering a well in existence as of the effective date of this Article:

        (A)  The name and address of  the person owning the real estate on which the well is located.

        (B)  The address and legal description of the property on which the well is located.

        (C)  The address of all properties being served by groundwater pumped from the well.

        (D)  A description of  the uses of the water pumped from the well, including specifically whether such groundwater is used for human consumption including, but not limited to drinking, cooking, washing, or other household uses.

        (E)  Whether City water is available to the property currently served by the well.

        (F)  The depth of the well, if known.

        (G)  A diagram showing the location of the well.

 

§35-67.  New Well Registration, Application for Well Permit
The following information shall be submitted to the Building Department in connection with applying for a well permit for a new well in the Groundwater Control Area No. 1:

        (A)  The name and address of the person owning the real estate on which the proposed well is to be located.

        (B)  The address and legal description of the property on which the proposed well is to be located.

        (C)  The address of all properties to be served by groundwater pumped from the proposed well.

        (D)  A description of the uses to be made of water pumped from the proposed well, including a certification that said groundwater will not be used for human consumption, including but not limited to drinking, cooking, washing, or other household uses.

        (E) Whether City water is available to the property to be served by the proposed well.

        (F) The depth of the proposed well.

        (G) A diagram showing the location of the proposed well.

 

§35-68.  Violations of Institutional Control Ordinance, Abatement of Public Nuisance
                Whenever the Building Department Director, or his/her designee has inspected any well within the Groundwater Control Area No. 1 and determined that groundwater pumped from the well is being used in violation of this Article, he/she shall send a written notice to the owner of record or owner’s duly authorized agent, or person in possession, charge or control, or to the occupant by ordinary first-class mail and by certified mail, return receipt requested, notifying the addressee of the violation.  The written notice shall contain the following information:

        (A) The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises on which the well is located.

        (B) A brief and concise description of the acts or circumstances constituting a violation of this Article.

        (C) A brief and concise description of the corrective action required to be taken to render the well and groundwater uses in compliance with this code.

        (D) A brief and concise statement advising the addressee that if the well and groundwater uses are not brought into compliance with this Article within the time specified, that the Building Department Director, or his/her designee may order electrical power to the well disconnected and may request the City Attorney, with the consent of the Mayor, to file an action to abate the public nuisance and charge the costs thereof against the real estate, the owner of record and the addressee.

 

§35-69.  Procedure for Abatement of Public Nuisance
                If the addressee of the written notice described in Section 35-68 fails to abate said nuisance within the time specified, the City of Grand Island, at the written request of the Building Department Director, or his/her designee directed to the City Attorney, and with the consent of the Mayor, may proceed to abate said public nuisance pursuant to Section 20-15 of the Grand Island City Code, and charge the costs thereof against the real estate on which the well is located and the addressee of the written notice.

In the event the use of the groundwater in violation of this Article might cause irreparable harm or poses a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or the health, safety or welfare of the persons using the groundwater, the written notice to abate pursuant to Section 20-15 shall not be required as a condition precedent to commencing a legal action to obtain abatement of the nuisance.  The City of Grand Island, with the consent of the Mayor, may immediately file an action requesting such temporary and permanent orders as are appropriate to expeditiously and permanently abate said public nuisances and protect the public health, safety or welfare or the health, safety or welfare of persons using the groundwater in violation of this Article.

 

§36-70.  Reserved
§36-71.  Reserved
§36-72.  Reserved
§36-73.  Reserved

 

Article VII. Groundwater Control Area No. 2

 

§35-74.  Purpose
                The U.S. Army, in consultation with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), and the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (NDEQ), issued a Record of Decision and Record of Decision Amendment (collectively ROD) for the former Cornhusker Army Ammunition Plant (CHAAP) which identified soil and groundwater contamination consisting of explosives above the USEPA Health Advisory Levels. The revised proposed plan for OU1 ROD Amendment identifies the Preferred Remedial Alternative for remediating groundwater at Operable Unit One (OU1) of CHAAP and provides the rational for the OU1 ROD Amendment. The preferred remedial alternatives include remedies for the on-post and off-post groundwater plume containing explosives. The on-post explosives plume will be treated to remedial action objectives using existing extraction and treatment technologies.  The On-Post Plume Institutional Controls will include land use restrictions, enforcement of the Hall County Reuse Plan for agricultural and industrial zoning on CHAAP and prohibiting water supply well drilling in the plume area. The Health Advisory Level in effect as of March 1, 2001, is 2ug/1 (microgram per liter) or 2 ppb (parts per billion).

                Pending natural attenuation obtaining the remedial action objectives of the ROD, the U.S. Army has requested that the City of Grand Island enact and enforce an ordinance instituting Off-Post Plume Institutional Controls by designating a groundwater control area in which groundwater use would be restricted to prevent human exposure and consumption of potentially contaminated groundwater, requiring registration of existing wells, prohibiting installation of new wells supplying water for human consumption in the plume area, and requiring approval and registration of new wells.  The Institutional Control Ordinance is to remain in full force and effect until the explosive contamination identified in the ROD is attenuated to less than USEPA Health Advisory Levels.

 

§35-75.  Definitions
As used in this Article, the following terms mean:

                Groundwater means water pumped from a well located within Groundwater Control Area No. 2 described in Section 35-72.

                Groundwater Contamination means the explosives described in the U.S. Army Record of Decision and Record of Decision Amendment (ROD) for the former Cornhusker Army Ammunition Plant (CHAAP).

                Groundwater Control Area No. 2 means a defined area within the corporate limits and zoning jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island subject to the Off-Post Plume Institutional Controls provided in this Article.

                Off-Post Plume Institutional Controls means the provisions of this Article which are intended to prohibit human consumption of potentially contaminated groundwater from wells and contamination of otherwise uncontaminated water-bearing zones located within Groundwater Control Area No. 2.

                Well means a hole or shaft sunk into the earth in order to obtain water from a natural subterranean supply or aquifer.

 

The definitions found in Neb. Rev. Stat., Chapter 46 - Irrigation and Regulation of Water are adopted by reference, except where such definitions are in conflict with those provided in this section above.

 

§35-76.  Groundwater Control Area No. 2 Boundaries
                The boundaries of Groundwater Control Area No. 2 shall be maintained in the Hall County – City of Grand Island Cooperative Geographic Information System (GIS) using information supplied by the U.S. Army and modified in accordance with periodic monitoring data prepared by the U.S. Army and reviewed by the USEPA and NDEQ.

 

§35-77.  Duration of Institutional Control Ordinance
                (A) This Article shall remain in full force and effect for so long as there remains groundwater contamination identified in the ROD described in §35-70 making the groundwater unsafe to be used as a source of drinking water because of explosives contamination above the USEPA Health Advisory Levels then in effect.

                (B) When the City of Grand Island is notified by the U.S. Army or the USEPA that groundwater contamination within Groundwater Control Area No. 2 has been reduced to a level below the USEPA Health Advisory Levels, the Mayor and City Council may proceed to repeal this Article forthwith.

 

§35-78.  Prohibited Groundwater Uses
                (A) Groundwater pumped from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 2 shall not be used for any human consumption including drinking water, cooking, washing or other household uses. Because groundwater from wells within the groundwater control area may be contaminated and present a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of persons exposed to said water, any known human consumption of groundwater from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 2 is a violation of this Article and is declared a public nuisance subject to abatement as provided hereafter.

                (B) This Article shall not apply to uses of groundwater pumped from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 2 which do not involve human consumption, including, but not limited to, non-contact cooling water for industrial, commercial or residential uses and watering of vegetation other than gardens, plants, and trees producing food for human consumption.

 

§35-79.  Well Registration
                (A) All wells for which drilling has commenced or existing within Groundwater Control Area No. 2 as of the effective date of this Article shall be registered with the Building Department by the person owning the real estate on which the well is located. There shall be no fee for registering an existing well.

                (B) No person may drill or install a well within Groundwater Control Area No. 2 prior to applying for and obtaining a well permit from the Building Department. There shall be a nonrefundable fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule paid to the Building Department contemporaneously with making an application for a well permit.

                (C) No person may drill or install a well within Groundwater Control Area No. 2 which penetrates two or more water-bearing zones unless water-tight casings are installed which conform to the regulations governing water well construction, pump installation, and water well decommissioning standards of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services, Regulation and Licensure Division (178 NAC 12, Section 003.11D - Contaminated Water-Bearing Zones).

 

§35-80.  Existing Well Registration, Information Required
                The following information shall be submitted to the Building Department in connection with registering a well in existence as of the effective date of this Article:

  (A) The name and address of the person owning the real estate on which the well is located.

  (B) The address and legal description of the property on which the well is located.

  (C) The address of all properties being served by groundwater pumped from the well.

  (D) A description of the uses of the water pumped from the well, including specifically whether such groundwater is used for human consumption including, but not limited to drinking water, cooking, washing, or other household uses.

  (E) Whether City water is available to the property currently served by the well.

  (F) The depth of the well, if known.

  (G) A diagram showing the location of the well.

 

§35-81.  New Well Registration, Application for Well Permit
                The following information shall be submitted to the Building Department in connection with applying for a well permit for a new well in the Groundwater Control Area No 2:

  (A) The name and address of the person owning the real estate on which the proposed well is to be located.

  (B) The address and legal description of the property on which the proposed well is to be located.

  (C) The address of all properties to be served by groundwater pumped from the proposed well.

  (D) A description of the uses to be made of water pumped from the proposed well, including a certification that said groundwater will not be used for human consumption, including but not limited to drinking water, cooking, washing, or other household uses.

  (E) Whether City water is available to the property to be served by the proposed well.

  (F) The depth of the proposed well.

  (G) A diagram showing the location of the proposed well.

                Following installation of any new, permitted well in Groundwater Control Area No. 2, a copy of the well boring logs shall be filed with the Building Department and made a part of the records for the real estate on which the well is located.

 

§35-82.  Violations of Institutional Control Ordinance, Abatement of Public Nuisance
                Whenever the Building Department Director, or his/her designee has inspected any well within the Groundwater Control Area No. 2 and determined that groundwater pumped from the well is being used in violation of this Article, the Director shall send a written notice to the owner of record or owner’s duly authorized agent, or person in possession, charge or control, or to the occupant by ordinary first-class mail and by certified mail, return receipt requested, notifying the addressee of the violation. The written notice shall contain the following information:

  (A) The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises on which the well is located.

  (B) A brief and concise description of the acts or circumstances constituting a violation of this Article.

  (C) A brief and concise description of the corrective action required to be taken to render the well and groundwater uses in compliance with this code.

  (D) A brief and concise statement advising the addressee that if the well and groundwater uses are not brought into compliance with this Article within the time specified, that the Building Department Director, or his/her designee may order electrical power to the well disconnected and may request the City Attorney, with the consent of the Mayor, to file an action to abate the public nuisance and charge the costs thereof against the real estate, the owner of record and the addressee.

 

§35-83.  Procedure for Abatement of Public Nuisance
                If the addressee of the written notice described in Section 35-78 fails to abate said nuisance within the time specified, the City of Grand Island, at the written request of the Building Department Director, or his/her designee directed to the City Attorney, and with the consent of the Mayor, may proceed to abate said public nuisance pursuant to Section 20-15 of the Grand Island City Code, and charge the costs thereof against the real estate on which the well is located and the addressee of the written notice.

                In the event the use of the groundwater in violation of this Article might cause irreparable harm or poses a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or the health, safety or welfare of the persons using the groundwater, the written notice from the City Attorney to abate pursuant to Section 20-15 shall not be required as a condition precedent to commencing a legal action to obtain abatement of the nuisance. The City of Grand Island, with the consent of the Mayor, may immediately file an action requesting such temporary and permanent orders as are appropriate to expeditiously and permanently abate said public nuisances and protect the public health, safety or welfare or the health, safety or welfare of persons using the groundwater in violation of this Article.

 

 

Article VIII. Groundwater Control Area No. 3

 

§35-84.  Purpose

 (A)  The Parkview Well Superfund Site (“Site”) is located in the southwestern portion of the city of Grand Island in Hall County, Nebraska. The Site consists of two areas of groundwater contamination and associated source areas which resulted from the historical mismanagement of industrial solvents.

(B)  The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has issued an Interim Record of Decision dated September 26, 2006 (“Interim ROD”), and a Record of Decision dated September 30, 2007 (“Final ROD”), and an Explanation of Significant Differences for the Site. The RODs identified two contaminant source areas. A contaminant source area located at a facility at 3304 Engleman Road South has resulted in contamination in the groundwater which trends to the east. This groundwater contamination

is referred to in the RODs as the Southern Plume. A contaminant source area located at a facility at 3445 West Stolley Park Road has resulted in groundwater contamination which trends to the east. This groundwater contamination is referred to in the RODs as the Northern Plume.

(C)  The RODs presented the selected remedies for the source areas and the plumes. A component of the selected remedies in the Interim ROD is the enactment by the City of Grand Island of an institutional control ordinance designating a Groundwater Control Area through which groundwater use would be restricted to prevent human exposure and consumption of contaminated groundwater and prohibit the installation of new wells supplying water for human consumption in the plume areas. This institutional control ordinance is to remain in full force and effect until the groundwater contamination identified in the RODs is reduced to a level making the groundwater safe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 300f – 300j-26, or its successor legislation.

Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011

 

§35-85.  Definitions

As used in this Article, the following terms mean:

 

City means the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

Domestic use means human consumption and any use of groundwater for human health and sanitation including, but not limited to, drinking, cooking, washing, bathing, showering, and other similar household uses.

EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and any successor departments or

agencies of the United States. Submissions to be made to EPA hereunder shall be sent to: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 901 North 5th Street, Kansas City, Kansas 66101, and shall reference the “Parkview Well Superfund Site.”

Groundwater means water pumped from a well located within the Groundwater Control Area No.

3 described in § 35-86.

Groundwater contamination means the chemicals of concern described in the RODs for the Parkview Well Superfund Site.

Groundwater Control Area No. 3 means a defined area within the corporate limits of the City of

Grand Island subject to the institutional controls provided for in this Article which are intended to prohibit

human exposures to contaminated groundwater from wells.

NDEQ means the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality, and any successor departments

of agencies of the State of Nebraska.

NDNR means the Nebraska Department of Natural Resources, and any successor departments of

agencies of the State of Nebraska.

RODs mean those Records of Decision, and Explanation of Significant Differences described in §

35-84 above, as well as any subsequent Records of Decision, Record of Decision Amendments, and/or Explanation of Significant Differences, issued by EPA pertaining to the Site.

Well means a hole or shaft sunk into the earth in order to obtain water from a natural subterranean

supply or aquifer.

 

The definitions found in Neb. Rev. Stat., Chapter 46 - Irrigation and Regulation of Water - are

adopted herein by reference, except where such definitions are in conflict with those provided herein.

Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011

 

§35-86. Groundwater Control Area Boundaries

The boundaries of Groundwater Control Area No. 3 are described as follows and are shown on the attached map: Commencing at the southeasterly corner of the intersection of County Road 27/State Highway 34 and New State Highway 30; thence running easterly along the north boundary of State Highway 34 to the southwesterly corner of the intersection of Garland Street; thence running northerly and

then easterly along the west boundary of Garland Street to the northwesterly corner of the intersection of Garland Street and South Blaine Street; thence running northerly along the west boundary of South Blaine Street to the northwesterly corner of the intersection of South Blaine Street and Stagecoach Road; thence running easterly along the north boundary of Stagecoach Road to the intersection of Stagecoach Road and Stagecoach Road; thence running predominately northeasterly along the north boundary of Stagecoach Road to the northwesterly corner of the intersection of Stagecoach Road and South August Street; thence running northerly along the west boundary of South August Street to the southwesterly corner of the intersection of South August Street and West Stolley Park Road; thence running westerly along the south boundary of West Stolley Park Road to the southwesterly corner of the intersection of West Stolley Park Road and Old State Highway 30; thence running southwesterly along the south boundary of Old State Highway 30, merging with New State Highway 30 and continuing southeasterly along the south boundary of New State Highway 30 to the point of beginning. A map of the boundaries of Groundwater Control Area No. 3 shall be maintained in the City’s Geographical Information System MapSifter (or any successor application, if any) using information provided by EPA.

Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011

 

§35-87. Duration of Institutional Control Ordinance

(A)  This Article shall remain in full force and effect as long as there remains groundwater contaminated at levels that exceed the residential use cleanup levels provided for in the RODs making the groundwater unsafe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act or its successor legislation.

(B)  Following EPA notifying the City that the groundwater contamination within the roundwater  Control Area No. 3 has been reduced to a level making the groundwater safe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act, or its successor legislation, the City’s Mayor and City Council may proceed to repeal this Article forthwith.

Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011

 

§35-88.  Prohibited Groundwater Uses

(A)  Groundwater pumped from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 3 shall not be used for any domestic use which may result in human exposures. Such uses include drinking, food preparation, washing, bathing, showering, and other household uses which result in human exposures to contaminated groundwater. Because groundwater from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 3 may be contaminated and presents a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of persons exposed to such water, any human consumption or prohibited use of groundwater from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 3 is a violation of this Article and is declared to be a public nuisance subject to abatement as provided in §35-91 of this Article.

(B)  No new well with a design capacity of more than 50 gallons per minute (gpm) may be drilled or installed in Groundwater Control Area No. 3 unless and until the party proposing the well installation has demonstrated, by a hydrogeological study performed by a competent environmental consulting firm, that the operation of the well will not cause the movement of the groundwater contamination or adversely affect the remedial action provided for in the RODs for the Site. Any such hydrological study shall be submitted to EPA for review and approval prior to well installation.

(C)  This Section on Prohibited Groundwater Uses shall not prohibit uses of groundwater pumped from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 3 which do not result in human exposure to contaminated groundwater, including, but not limited to, groundwater monitoring wells, EPA or NDNR remediation wells, wells that produce 50 gpm or less for dewatering purposes, wells used for non-contact cooling water for industrial, commercial or residential uses, or wells used for watering vegetation not used for human consumption. Discharges from dewatering wells must be appropriately handled and disposed of in accordance with applicable City, State and Federal laws including National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permits under the Clean Water Act.

Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011

 

§35-89. Well Installation

(A)  No person shall drill or install a well with a design capacity of more than 50 gallons per minute within Groundwater Control Area No. 3 prior to applying for and obtaining a well permit from the Central Platte Natural Resource District.

(B)  No person may install a well within Groundwater Control Area No. 3 which penetrates two or more water-bearing zones unless water-tight casings are installed which conform to the regulations governing water well construction, pump installation, and water well decommissioning standards of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services, Regulation and Licensure Division (178 NAC 12, Section 003.11D - Contaminated Water-Bearing Zones).

Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011

 

§35-90. New Well Registration, Application for Well Permit

The following information shall be submitted to the City’s Building Department prior to drilling a

new well in Groundwater Control Area No. 3:

 

(1)           A copy of the well permit obtained from the Central Platte Natural Resources District.

(2)           The address and legal description of the property on which the proposed well is to be located.

(3)           The address of all properties to be served by groundwater pumped from the proposed well.

(4)           A description of the uses to be made of water pumped from the proposed well; including a certification that such groundwater will not be used for domestic use which may result in human exposures.

(5)           Whether City water is available to the property to be served by the proposed well.

(6)           The depth of the proposed well and pump intake.

(7)           A diagram showing the location of the proposed well.

(8)           An application for any dewatering well will include a plan for the appropriate handling and disposal of the discharge water in accordance with applicable City, State and Federal laws including NPDES permits.

(9)           A statement as to whether the design capacity of the proposed well exceeds 50 gpm. If the design capacity of the well exceeds 50 gpm, the owner of the well shall demonstrate, by a hydrogeological study performed by a competent environmental consulting firm in accordance with § 35-88(B) of this Article, that the operation of the well will not cause the movement of the groundwater contamination or adversely affect the remedial action provided for in the RODs for the Site.

Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011

 

§35-91. Violations of Institutional Control Ordinance; Abatement of Public Nuisance

Whenever the City’s Building Department Director, or his/her designee, has inspected any well within Groundwater Control Area No. 3 and determined that such well is being operated, or that the groundwater pumped from the well is being used, in violation of this Article, he/she will send a written notice to the owner of record of the real property where the well is located, or the owner’s agent, or the occupant of the property, by certified mail, return receipt requested, notifying such party of the violation. The written notice will contain the following:

 

(1)           The street address and/or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property where the well is located.

(2)           A description of the acts or circumstances constituting a violation of this Article.

(3)           A description of the corrective action required to be taken to render the well and groundwater uses in compliance with this Article .

(4)           A statement advising the addressee that if the well and groundwater uses are not brought into compliance with this Article within the time specified, the City’s Building Department Director, or his/her designee, may order electrical power to the well disconnected and may request the City Attorney, with the consent of the City’s Mayor, to file an action to charge the costs thereof against the real estate, the owner of record and the addressee. The charge shall constitute a lien against said property.

Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011

 

§35-92. Procedure for Abatement of Public Nuisance

(A)  If the addressee of the notice described in § 35-91 of this Article fails to abate said nuisance within the time specified, the City of Grand Island, at the written request of the City’s Building Department Director, or his/her designee, directed to the City Attorney, and with the consent of the Mayor, may abate said public nuisance pursuant to § 20-15 of the Grand Island City Code, and charge the costs thereof against the real estate on which the well is located and the addressee of the notice.

(B)  If the City, in its sole discretion, determines that the use of the groundwater in violation of this Article might cause irreparable harm or poses a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or the health, safety or welfare of the persons using the groundwater, the written notice to abate pursuant to § 20-15 of the Grand Island City Code shall not be required as a condition precedent to commencing a legal action to obtain abatement of the nuisance. The City, with the consent of the Mayor, may immediately file an action requesting such temporary and permanent orders as are appropriate to expeditiously and permanently abate such public nuisances and protect the public health, safety or welfare or the health, safety or welfare of persons using the groundwater in violation of this Article.

Added by Ordinance No. 9310, effective 08-30-2011

 

 

Article IX. Groundwater Control Area No. 4

 

§ 35-93. Purpose

(A) The Nebraska Solvents Company Site (“Site”) is located in the eastern portion of the City of Grand Island in Hall County, Nebraska, and in a portion of western Merrick County.  The Site consists of one area of groundwater contamination and an associated source area which resulted from the historical mismanagement of industrial solvents.

(B) The Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (NDEQ) approved on March 21, 2011 a Remedial Action Plan (RAP) dated February 1, 2010. The RAP identified one contaminant source area located at a facility at 1200 Highway 30 East that has resulted in contamination in the groundwater which trend to the east and then northeast.

(C) The RAP presented the selected remedies for the source area and the plume. A component of the selected remedies in the approved RAP is the enactment by the City of Grand Island of an institutional control ordinance designating a Groundwater Control Area through which groundwater use would be restricted to prevent human exposure and consumption of contaminated groundwater and prohibit the installation of new wells supplying water for human consumption in the plume area. This institutional control ordinance is to remain in full force and effect until the groundwater contamination identified in the RAP is reduced to a level making the groundwater safe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 300f –300j-26, or its successor legislation.

Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012

 

§35-94. Definitions

As used in this Article, the following terms mean:

 

City means the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

Domestic use means human consumption and any use of groundwater for human health and sanitation including, but not limited to, drinking, cooking, washing, bathing, showering, and other similar household uses.

EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

Groundwater contamination means the chemicals of interest described in the RAP for the Site.

Groundwater Control Area No. 4 means a defined area within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Grand Island subject to the institutional controls provided for in this Article which are intended to prohibit human exposures to contaminated groundwater from wells.

NDEQ means the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality, and any successor departments of agencies of the State of Nebraska.

NDNR means the Nebraska Department of Natural Resources, and any successor departments of agencies of the State of Nebraska.

RAP means the Remedial action Plan submitted to NDEQ and approved March 22, 2011.

Well means a hole or shaft sunk into the earth in order to obtain water from a natural subterranean supply or aquifer.

The definitions found in Neb. Rev. Stat., Chapter 46 – Irrigation and Regulation of Water – are adopted herein by reference, except where such definitions are in conflict with those provided herein.

Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012

 

§35-95. Groundwater Control Area Boundaries

The boundaries of Groundwater Control Area No. 4 are described as follows and are shown on the attached map. Commencing 135 feet to the west of the intersection of Museum Drive and East Seedling Mile Road; thence running westerly to the western lease boundary of the 1200 Highway 30 East Site; thence running southerly to the intersection of the lease boundary and Highway 30 East; thence running east-southeasterly to the intersection of Stuhr Road and an extension of East Gregory Street; thence running easterly along Gregory Street to Shady Bend Road, thence running east-northeasterly to East Seedling Mile Road; thence following East Seedling Mile Road to the intersection with Gunbarrel Road; thence southerly to the Wood River; thence east-northeasterly along a path 350 feet south of and parallel to Fort Kearney Road to the intersection with a southerly extension of Beck Road; thence running northerly along Beck Road to the farm access road 2,270 feet south of Highway 30 East, thence running westerly for 1,000 feet; thence running southwesterly along a path 1,130 feet south of and parallel to Highway 30 East to the point of beginning. A map of the boundaries of Groundwater Control Area No. 4 shall be maintained in the City’s Geographical Information System Mapsifter (or any successor application, if any).

Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012

 

§35-96. Duration of Institutional Control Ordinance

(A) This Article shall remain in full force and effect as long as there remains groundwater contaminated at levels that exceed the residential use cleanup levels provided for in the RAP making the groundwater unsafe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act of its successor legislation.

(B) Following NDEQ notifying the City that the groundwater contamination within the Groundwater Control Area No. 4 has been reduced to a level making the groundwater safe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act, or its successor legislation, the City’s Mayor and City Council may proceed to repeal this Article forthwith.

Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012

 

§35-97. Duration of Institutional Control Ordinance

(A) This Article shall remain if full force and effect as long as there remains groundwater contaminated at levels that exceed the residential use cleanup levels provided for in the RAP making the groundwater unsafe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act or its successor legislation.

(B) Following NDEQ notifying the City that the groundwater contamination within the Groundwater Control Area No. 4 has been reduced to a level making the groundwater safe to be used as a source of drinking water pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act, or its successor legislation, the City’s Mayor and City Council may proceed to repeal this Article forthwith.

Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012

 

§35-98. Prohibited Groundwater Uses

(A) Groundwater pumped from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 4 shall not be used for any domestic use which may result in human exposures. Such uses include drinking, food preparation, washing, bathing, showering, and other household uses which result in human exposures to contaminated groundwater. Because groundwater from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 4 may be contaminated and presents a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of persons exposed to such water, any human consumption or prohibited use of groundwater from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 4 is a violation of this Article and is declared to be a public nuisance subject to abatement as provided in §§35-101 to 35-102 of this Article.

(B) No new well with a design capacity of more than 50 gallons per minute (gpm) may be drilled or installed in Groundwater Control Area No. 4 unless and until the party proposing the well installation has demonstrated, by a hydrogeological study performed by a competent environmental consulting firm, that the operation of the well will not cause the movement of the groundwater contamination or adversely affect the remedial action provided for in the RAP for the Site. Any such hydrological study shall be submitted to NDEQ for review and approval prior to well installation.

(C) This Section on Prohibited Groundwater Uses shall not prohibit uses of groundwater pumped from wells within Groundwater Control Area No. 4 which do not result in human exposure to contaminated groundwater, including, but not limited to, groundwater monitoring wells, EPA, NDNR, or NDEQ remediation wells, wells that produce 50 gpm or less for dewatering purposes, for non-contact cooling water for industrial, commercial, or residential uses, or wells used for irrigation. Discharges from dewatering wells must be appropriately handled and disposed of in accordance with applicable City, State and Federal laws including National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permits under the Clean Water Act.

Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012

 

§35-99. Well Installation

(A) No person shall drill or install a well with a design capacity of more than 50 gallons per minute within Groundwater Control Area No. 4 prior to applying for and obtaining a well permit from the Central Platte Natural Resources District.

(B) No person may install a well within Groundwater Control Area No. 4 which penetrates two or more water-bearing zones unless water-tight casings are installed which conform to the regulations governing water well construction, pump installation, and water well decommissioning standards of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services, Regulation and Licensure Division (178 NAC 12, Section 003.11D – Contaminated Water-Bearing Zones).

Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012

 

§35-100. New Well Registration, Application for Well Permit

The following information shall be submitted to the City’s Building Department prior to drilling a new well in groundwater Control Area No. 4:

(1) A copy of the well permit obtained from the Central Platte Natural Resources District.

(2) The address and legal description of the property on which the proposed well is to be located.

(3) The address of all properties to be served by groundwater pumped from the proposed well.

(4) A description of the uses to be made of water pumped from the proposed well, if any; including a certification that such groundwater will not be used for domestic use which may result in human exposures.

(5) Whether City water is available to the property to be served by the proposed well.

(6) The depth of the proposed well and pump intake.

(7) A diagram showing the location of the proposed well.

(8) An application for any dewatering well will include a plan for the appropriate handling and disposal of the discharge water in accordance with applicable City, State and Federal laws including NPDES permits.

(9) A statement as to whether the design capacity of the proposed well exceeds 50 gpm.  If the design capacity of the well exceeds 50 gpm, the owner of the well shall demonstrate, by a hydrogeological study performed by a competent environmental consulting firm in accordance with §35-98(B) of this Article, that the operation of the well will not cause the movement of the groundwater contamination or adversely affect the remedial action provided for in the RAP for the Site.

Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012

 

§35-101. Violations of Institutional Control Ordinance; Abatement of Public Nuisance

                 Whenever the City’s Building Department Director, or his/her designee, has inspected any well within Groundwater Control Area No. 4 and determined that such well is being operated, or that the groundwater pumped from the well is being used, in violation of this Article, he/she will send a written notice to the owner of record of the real property where the well is located, or the owner’s agent, or the occupant of the property, by certified mail, return receipt requested, notifying such party of the violation. The written notice will contain the following:

(1) The street address and/or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property where the well is located.

(2) A description of the acts or circumstances constituting a violation of this Article.

(3) A description of the corrective action required to be taken to render the well and groundwater uses in compliance with this Article.

(4) A statement advising the addressee that if the well and groundwater uses are not brought into compliance with this Article within the time specified, the City’s Building Department Director, or his/her designee, may order electrical power to the well disconnected and may request the City Attorney, with the consent of the City’s Mayor, to file an action to charge the costs thereof against the real estate, the owner of record and the addressee. The charge shall constitute a lien against said property.

Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012

 

§35-102. Procedure for Abatement of Public Nuisance

(A) If the addressee of the notice described in §35-101 of this Article fails to abate said nuisance within the time specified, the City of Grand Island, at the written request of the City’s Building Department Director, or his/her designee, directed to the City Attorney, and with the consent of the Mayor, may abate said public nuisance pursuant to §20-15 of the Grand Island City Code, and charge the costs thereof against the real estate on which the well is located and the addressee of the notice.

(B) If the City, in its sole discretion, determines that the use of the groundwater in violation of this Article might cause irreparable harm or poses a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or the health, safety or welfare of the persons using the groundwater, the written notice to abate pursuant to §20-15 of the Grand Island City Code shall not be required as a condition precedent to commencing a legal action to obtain abatement of the nuisance. The City, with the consent of the Mayor, may immediately file an action requesting such temporary and permanent orders as are appropriate to expeditiously and permanently abate such public nuisances and protect the public health, safety or welfare of the health, safety or welfare of persons using the groundwater in violation of this Article.

Added by Ordinance No. 9370, effective 04-03-2012

 
 

CHAPTER 36

ZONING

 

Article I.  Title and Purpose

§36-1.  Title
This chapter may be known and may be cited and referred to as the zoning regulations of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

 

§36-2.  Purposes
This chapter has been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community; to lessen congestion in streets; to secure safety from fire and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to promote the distribution of population, land classifications and land development to support provisions for adequate transportation, water flows, water supply, drainage, sanitation, recreation, and other public requirements; to protect property against blight and depreciation; and to secure economy in governmental expenditures.

 

§36-3.  Reserved

§36-4.  Reserved

§36-5.  Reserved

 

 

Article II.  Definitions

§36-6.  Rules
For the purpose of this chapter the following rules shall apply:

          (A) Words and numbers used singularly shall include the plural.  Words and numbers used in the plural shall include the singular.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future.

          (B) The word "persons" includes a corporation, members of a partnership or other business organization, a committee, board, council, commission, trustee, receiver, agent or other representative.

          (C) The word "shall" is mandatory.

          (D) The words "use", "used", "occupy" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended", "arranged" or "designed" to be used or occupied.

          (E) The word "commission" shall refer to the Hall County Regional Planning Commission.

          (F) The phase “Planning Director” shall refer to the Planning Director of the Hall County Regional Planning Commission

          (G) The word “Inspector” shall refer to the Building Department and any employee of said department

          (H) Undefined words or terms not herein defined shall have their ordinary meaning in relation to the context.

 

§36-7.  Abbreviations and Acronyms
          For purposes of this chapter the following shall be standard abbreviations and acronyms found through the regulation.


AU                      =              Animal Unit

CAFO                 =              Confined Animal Feeding Operation

FCC                    =              Federal Communication Commission

GIS                     =              Geographic Information System

HCRPC             =              Hall County Regional Planning Commission

kV                       =              Kilovolt

kW                      =             Kilowatt

LFO                    =             Livestock Feeding Operation

NDA                   =              Nebraska Department of Aeronautics or successor department

NDEQ                =             Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality or successor department

NSFM                =              Nebraska State Fire Marshall or successor department

NHHS                =              Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services or successor department

NDOR                =             Nebraska Department of Roads or successor department

R.O.W.              =              right-of-way or rights-of-way

USDA                =             United States Department of Agriculture

 

§36-8.  Definitions
(A)

          Abandonment shall mean to cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent to resume as distinguished from short term interruptions such as during periods of remodeling, maintenance, or normal periods of vacation or seasonal closure.

          Abut, Abutting shall mean to border on, being contiguous with or have property or district lines in common, including property separated by an alley.

          Access or Access Way shall mean the place, means, or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this chapter.

          Accessory Building (see Building, accessory)

          Accessory Living Quarters shall mean living quarters within an accessory building located on the same premises with the main building, for use by temporary guests of the occupant of the premises, such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.

          Accessory Structure shall mean a detached subordinate structure located on the same lot with the principal structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure.

          Accessory Use shall mean a use incidental, related, appropriate and clearly subordinate to the main use of the lot or building, which accessory use does not alter the principal use of the subject lot or affect other properties in the district.

          Acreage shall mean any tract or parcel of land which does not qualify as a farm or development.

          Adjacent shall mean near, close, or abutting; for example, an Industrial District across the street or highway from a Residential District shall be considered as "Adjacent".

          Adult Cabaret shall mean cabaret that features go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers.

          Adult Companionship Establishment shall mean an establishment which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

          Adult Establishment shall mean any business which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," including, but without limitation, to adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, saunas, adult companionship establishments, adult health clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotel or motel, and adult body painting studios.

          Adult Hotel or Motel shall mean a hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

          Adult Massage Parlor, Health Club shall mean a massage parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

          Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater shall mean a business within an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting visual-media material if such business as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if said material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.

          Adult Motion Picture Arcade shall mean any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motor picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

          Adult Motion Picture Theaters shall mean a business within an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting visual media material if said business as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if said material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.

          Adult Novelty Business shall mean a business which has as a principal activity the sale of devices which simulate human genitals or devices, which are designed for sexual stimulation.

          Adult Sauna shall mean a sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."

          Aesthetic Zoning shall mean zoning to accomplish a standard of exterior architectural appeal and/or neighborhood harmony.

          Agricultural and Farm Buildings and Structures shall mean any building or structure which is necessary or incidental to the normal conduct of a farm including but not limited to residence of the operator, residence of hired men, barns, buildings and sheds for housing livestock, poultry and farm machinery, buildings for the storage or shelter of grain, hay and other crops, silos, windmills and water storage tanks.

          Agricultural Operations (see “Farming”)

          Agriculture shall mean the use of land for agricultural purposes, of obtaining a profit by raising, harvesting, and selling crops or by the feeding, breeding, management, and sale of, or the produce of, livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals, or honeybees, or for dairying and the sale of dairy products, or any other agricultural or horticultural use. Agricultural use shall not be construed to include any parcel of land of less than twenty acres or any non-agricultural commercial or industrial development.

          Airport shall mean any area which is used or is intended to be used for the taking off and landing of aircraft, including helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used or are intended to be used for airport buildings or facilities, including open spaces, taxiways, and tie-down areas.

          Airport Hazard Zone consists of Operation Zones, Approach Zones, Turning Zones and Transition Zones. The outer boundary of the Hazard Zone is composed of a series of connected tangents and simple curves that also constitute the outer boundaries of the Approach and Turning Zones.

          Alley shall mean a minor public service street or public thoroughfare 20 feet or less in width, through a block of lots primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street and to provide access to utility services located therein. Buildings facing an alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this chapter related to frontage on a dedicated street.

          Alteration shall mean any change, addition or modification in construction or occupancy of an existing structure.

          Alteration, Structural (see Structural alteration)

          Amendment shall mean a change in the wording, context, or substance of this chapter, an addition or deletion or a change in the district boundaries or classifications upon the zoning map.

          Amusement Arcade shall mean a building or a part of a building where five or more pinball machines, video games, or other similar player-orientated amusement devices are available and are maintained for use.

          Amusement Park shall mean a facility, primarily outdoors, that may include structures and buildings, where there are various devices for entertainment, including rides, booths for the conduct of games or sale of items, buildings for shows and entertainment, and restaurants and souvenir sales.

          Animal Hospital shall mean a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and shall be only incidental to such hospital use.

          Animals, Domestic (see Household pet)

          Animal Unit (see Livestock Feeding Operation)

          Animals, Farm shall mean livestock associated with agricultural operation, commonly kept or raised as a part of a agricultural operation including but not limited to horses, cattle, sheep, swine, goats, chickens and turkeys.

          Antenna see definition in §36-169 of this chapter.

          Antique Shops shall mean a place offering primarily antiques for sale. An antique for the purpose of this chapter shall be a work of art, piece of furniture, decorative object, or the like, of belonging to the past, at least 30 years old.

          Apartment shall mean a room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house or multiple family dwelling arranged, intended or designed for a place of residence of a single family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.  (Also, see Dwelling Unit.)

          Apartment House (see Dwelling, multiple family)

          Appearance shall mean the outward aspect visible to the public.

          Appropriate shall mean the sympathetic, or fitting, to the context of the site and the whole community.

          Appurtenances shall mean the visible, functional objects accessory to and part of buildings.

          Architectural Character see Architectural Concept

          Architectural concept shall mean the basic aesthetic idea of a building, or group of buildings or structures, including the site and landscape development that produces the architectural character.

          Architectural feature shall mean a prominent or significant part or element of a building, structure, or site. Architectural features may include special lines, massing, and/or texture.

(A)  Lines shall mean visual elements of the building, either within the façade or on the building edge, which are in a linear form either horizontally or vertically and may be composed of masonry, glass, or other related materials.

(B)  Mass shall pertain to the volume, bulk of a building or structure.

(C)  Texture shall mean the quality of a surface, ranging from mirror finish, smooth, to coarse and unfinished.

          Architectural style shall mean the characteristic form and detail, as of buildings of a particular historic period.

          Artisan Production Shop shall mean a building or portion thereof used for the creation of original handmade works of art or craft items by more than three but less than six artists or artisans, as either a principal or accessory use. 

          Artist Studio shall mean a place designed to be used, or used as, both a dwelling place and a place of work by an artist, artisan, or craftsperson, including persons engaged in the application, teaching, or performance of fine arts such as, but not limited to, drawing, vocal or instrumental music, painting, sculpture, and writing.

          Attached Permanently shall mean attached to real estate in such a way as to require dismantling, cutting away, unbolting from permanent foundation or structural change in such structure in order to relocate it to another site.

          Attractive shall mean having qualities that arouse interest and pleasure in the observer.

          Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) shall mean an automated device that performs banking or financial functions at a location remote from the controlling financial institution.

          Automobile Wrecking Yard see Salvage Yard as defined herein.

(B)

          Ballroom shall mean a place or hall used for dancing, other than those listed under the definition of “Adult Cabaret”. Ballrooms may also be used for reunions, weddings and receptions.

          Bar shall mean any establishment whose principal business is serving alcoholic beverages at retail for consumption on the premises.  (Also, see Nightclub.)

          Beacon shall mean any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.

          Bed and Breakfast Inn shall mean a house, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging rooms and meals are provided.  The operator of the inn shall live on the premises.

          Bedroom shall mean a room within a dwelling unit planned and intended for sleeping, separable from other rooms by a door or doorway.

          Berm shall mean a raised form of earth to provide screening or to improve the aesthetic character.

          Best Interests of Community shall mean interests of the community at large and not interest of the immediate neighborhood.

          Billboard shall mean an outdoor advertisement sign which directs attention to a business commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.

          Block shall mean a parcel of land platted into lots and bounded by public streets or by waterways, right-of-ways, unplatted land, City-County boundaries, or adjoining property lines.

          Block Frontage shall mean that section of a block fronting on a street between two intersecting streets or other block boundary.

          Board of Adjustment shall mean that board that has been created by the city and which has the statutory authority to hear and determine appeals, interpretations of, and variances to the zoning regulations.

          Boarding or Rooming House shall mean a building containing a single dwelling unit and provisions for not more than five (5) guests, where lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation.

          Brew-on Premises Store shall mean a facility that provides the ingredients and equipment for a customer to use to brew malt liquor at the store. Brew-on-premises stores do not include the sale of intoxicating liquor, unless the owner of the brew-on-premises store holds the appropriate liquor license.

          Brew Pub shall mean a restaurant or hotel which includes the brewing of beer as an accessory use. The brewing operation processes water, malt, hops, and yeast into beer or ale by mashing, cooking, and fermenting. By definition, these establishments produce no more than 10,000 barrels of beer or ale annually. The area, by definition, used for brewing, including bottling and kegging, shall not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area of the commercial space.

          Brewery shall mean an industrial use that brews ales, beers, meads and/or similar beverages on site. Breweries are classified as a use that manufactures more than 10,000 barrels of beverage (all beverages combined) annually.

(A)  Brewery, Craft shall mean a brew pub or a micro brewery.

(B)  Brewery, Micro shall mean a facility for the production and packaging of malt beverages of low alcoholic content for distribution, retail or wholesale, on or off premises, with a capacity of not more than 10,000 barrels per year. The development may include other uses such as standard restaurant, bar, or live entertainment as otherwise permitted in the zoning district.  

          Broadcasting Tower shall mean a structure for the transmission or broadcast of radio, television, radar, or microwaves which exceeds the maximum height permitted in the district in which it is located; provided, however, that noncommercial radio towers not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height shall not be considered broadcast towers.

          Buffer shall mean a strip of land established to protect one type of land use from another incompatible land use or between a land use and a private or public road.  (Also, see Screening.)

          Buffer Zone shall mean an area of land that separates two zoning districts and/or land uses that acts to soften or mitigate the effects of one use on the other.

          Building shall mean any structure built and maintained for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, but shall not include temporary buildings as defined in "Structure, Temporary". Operable and licensed trailers, with wheels, shall not be considered as buildings.

          Building Accessory shall mean any detached subordinate building that serves a function customarily incidental to that of the main building or main use of the premises.  Customary accessory building includes farm buildings, garages, carports, and small storage sheds.

          Building, Area of shall mean the sum in square feet of the ground areas occupied by all buildings and structures on a lot.

          Building Code shall mean the various codes of the City that regulate construction and requires building permits, electrical permits, mechanical permits, plumbing permits, and other permits to do work regulated by the adopted building code of the City, and other codes adopted by the City that pertain to building construction.

          Building, Height shall mean the vertical distance measured from the centerline of the improved street to the highest point of a roof surface, if a flat roof, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.

       Building Inspector shall mean the building inspectors for the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.


          Building Principal shall mean a building within which the main or primary use of the lot or premises is located and which is supplied with the main electric and/or sewer utility connections.  (Also, see Use, Principal.)

          Building Setback Line shall mean the minimum of distance as prescribed by this chapter between any property line and the closed point of the building wall line or face of any building or structure related thereto.

(C)

          Campground shall mean a parcel of land intended for the temporary occupancy of tents, campers, and major recreational vehicles and which primary purpose is recreational, having open areas that are natural in character.

          Car Wash shall mean a building or structure or an area of land with machine or hand operated facilities for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles, not including semi-trailer tractors, buses, and commercial fleets.

          Car Wash, Industrial shall mean a mechanical facility for the washing, waxing and vacuuming of heavy trucks and buses.

          Carport shall mean a permanent roofed structure with not more than two (2) enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage.

          Cellar shall mean a building space having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below the average adjoining grade lines.

          Cemetery shall mean land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for such purposes, including columbariums, crematoriums, and mausoleums.

          Channel shall mean the geographical area within either the natural or artificial banks of a watercourse or drainageway.

          Charitable shall mean a public or semi-public institutional use of a philanthropic, charitable, benevolent, religious, or eleemosynary character, but not including sheltering or caring of animals.

          Child Care Center shall mean a facility licensed to provide child care for thirteen (13) or more children. In addition to these regulations, Child Care Centers shall meet all requirements of the State of Nebraska.

          Church, Storefront shall mean a religious facility contained within a store or similar structure not typically used for religious activities that are now used as a meeting place for a congregation. Structures adapted for congregations including barns, stores, warehouses, old public buildings, and single-family dwellings. 

          City shall mean the City of Grand Island, Nebraska.

          Clear View Zone shall mean the area of a corner lot closest to the intersection that is kept free of visual impairment to allow full view of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.  (Also see Sight Triangle.)

          Club shall mean an association of persons (whether or not incorporated), religious or otherwise, for a common purpose, but not including groups which are organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business for profit.


          Cluster Development shall mean a development designed to concentrate buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and the preservation of environmentally sensitive areas.

Text Box:  
Example of a Cluster Subdivision














          Code shall mean the Grand Island City Code.

          Coffee Kiosk shall mean a retail food business in a freestanding building that sells coffee, or other beverages, and remade bakery goods from a drive-through window to customers seated in their automobiles for consumption off the premises and that provides no indoor or outdoor seating.

          Cohesiveness shall mean the unity of composition between design elements of a building and/or a group of buildings and the landscape development.

          Commercial Feeding Operation (See Livestock Feeding Operation)

          Commission shall mean the Hall County Regional Planning Commission.

          Common Area or Property shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which are shared by the owners of the individual building sites in a Planned Development or condominium development.

          Community Center shall mean a place, structure, or other facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve various segments of the community.

          Community Sanitary Sewer System shall mean an approved central sewer collecting system, meeting state and county requirements, available to each platted lot and discharging into a treatment facility. This does not include individual septic systems.

          Community Water Supply System shall mean a public water supply system which serves at least fifteen service connections used by year round residents or uses, or regularly serves 25 or more year round residents or uses.

          Compatibility shall mean harmony in the appearance of two or more external design features in the same vicinity.

          Compatible Uses shall mean a land use which is congruous with, tolerant of, and has no adverse effects on existing neighboring uses.  Incompatibility may be affected by pedestrian or vehicular traffic generation, volume of goods handled and environmental elements such as noise, dust, odor, air pollution, glare, lighting, debris generated, contamination of surface or ground water, aesthetics, vibration, electrical interference, and radiation.

          Comprehensive Development Plan shall mean the Comprehensive Development Plan of Grand Island, Nebraska as adopted by the City Council, setting forth policies for the present and foreseeable future community welfare as a whole and meeting the purposes and requirements set forth in state statutes.

          Conditional Use shall mean a use where allowed by the district regulations, that would not be appropriate generally throughout the zoning district without restrictions, but which, if controlled as to number, size, area, location, relationship to the neighborhood or other minimal protective characteristics would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare.

          Conditional Use Permit shall mean a permit issued by the City Council that authorizes the recipient to make conditional use of property in accordance with the provisions of Article 6 and any additional conditions placed upon, or required by said permit.

          Condominium shall be as defined in state statutes, whereby four or more apartments are separately offered for sale.

          Confinement shall mean totally roofed buildings, which may be open-sided (for ventilation purposes only) or completely enclosed on the sides, wherein animals or poultry are housed over solid concrete or dirt floors, or slatted (partially open) floors over pits or manure collection areas in pens, stalls, cages, or alleys, with or without bedding materials and mechanical ventilation.  The word "confinement" shall not mean the temporary confined feeding of livestock during seasonal adverse weather.

          Conflicting Land Use shall mean the use of property which transfers over neighboring property lines negative economic, or environmental effects, including, but not limited to, noise, vibration, odor, dust, glare, smoke, pollution, water vapor, mismatched land uses and/or density, height, mass, mismatched layout of adjacent uses, loss of privacy, and unsightly views.

          Congregate Care Facility shall mean a long-term care facility exclusively for persons 60 years of age or older, and which shall include, without limitation, common dining, social and recreational features, special safety and convenience features designed for the needs of the elderly, such as emergency call systems, grab bars and handrails, special door hardware, cabinets, appliances, passageways, and doorways designed for residents including: meal services, transportation, housekeeping, linen, and organized social activities.

          Congregate Housing shall mean a residential facility for four or more persons fifty-five (55) years of age or over, their spouses, or surviving spouses, providing living and sleeping facilities including meal preparation, dining areas, laundry services, room cleaning and common recreational, social, and service facilities for the exclusive use of all residents including resident staff personnel who occupy a room or unit in the residential facility.

          Conservation shall mean the protection and care that prevents destruction or deterioration of historical or otherwise significant structures, buildings or natural resources.

          Conservation Area shall mean environmentally sensitive and valuable lands protected from any activity that would significantly alter their ecological integrity, balance or character, except in overriding public interest, including but not limited to: wetlands, floodways, flood plains, drainage ways, river or stream banks, and areas of significant biological productivity or uniqueness.

          Conservation Easement shall mean an easement granting a right or interest in real property that is appropriate to retaining land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic, open, or wooded condition and retaining such areas as suitable habitat for fish, plants, or wildlife, or maintaining existing land uses or preserving the ability said land to be used for specific purposes such as on site wastewater treatment systems.

          Convenience Store shall mean a one-story, retail store that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a "supermarket.")  It is dependent on, and is designed to attract and accommodate large volumes of stop-and-go traffic.  (Also, see self-service Station.)

          Contiguous shall mean the same as "Abut".

          Copy Center shall mean a retail establishment that provides duplicating services using photocopying, blueprint, and offset printing equipment, and may include the collating and binding of booklets and reports.

          Country Club shall mean a land area and buildings containing golf courses, riding arenas, fishing or hunting facilities and/or similar facilities, a clubhouse, and customary accessory uses, open only to members and their guests.

          Court shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or buildings and abounded on three (3) or more sides by such buildings.

          Cul-de-Sac shall mean a short public way that has only one outlet for vehicular traffic and terminates in a vehicular turn-around.

          Curve Lot see "Lot, Curve".

(D)

          Dairy Farm shall mean any place or premises upon which milk is produced for sale or other distribution.

          Density shall mean the number of dwelling units per acre of land allowable on a given tract or parcel of land.

          Detention Cell shall mean a facility for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff.

          Developer shall mean any person, corporation, partnership, or entity that is responsible for any undertaking that requires a building or zoning permit, conditional use permit or sign permit.

          Development shall mean any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations for which necessary permits may be required.

          Development Concept Plan (See Site Plan.)

          Development Review shall mean the review, by the city of subdivision plats, site plans, rezoning requests, or permit review.

          District shall mean any defined area within the jurisdiction of the governmental entity that is designed to allow specific uses and structures as defined in the corresponding textual portion of the regulation.

          Dog Kennel (See Kennel, commercial; and Kennel, private.)

          Domestic Animals (See Household Pet.)

          Downzoning shall mean a change in zoning classification of land to a less intensive or more restrictive district such as from commercial district to residential district or from a higher density to a lower density residential district.

          Drive-In Facility shall mean an establishment where customers can be served without leaving the confinement of their vehicle.

          Driveway shall mean any vehicular access to an off-street parking or loading facility.

          Dump shall mean a place used for the disposal, abandonment, discarding by burial, incineration, or by any other means for any garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, rubble, waste material, offal or dead animals. Such use shall not involve any industrial or commercial process.

          Duplex shall mean the same as "Dwelling, Two (2) Family".

          Dwelling Any building or portion thereof which is designed and used exclusively for single family residential purposes.

          Dwelling, Farmstead shall mean any single family dwelling unit / residence associated with a farming operation either on a separate tract of land or located as a part of the larger operation area.

          Dwelling, Manufactured Home A factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation, which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a permanent site, which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles, and which bears a label certifying that it was built in compliance with standards promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

          Dwelling, Modular (Is considered a conventional type single-family dwelling). Any prefabricated structure, used for dwelling purposes, moved on to a site in an essentially complete constructed condition, in one or more parts, and when completed is a single family unit on a permanent foundation, attached to the foundation with permanent connections. To be a modular home it shall meet or be equivalent to the construction criteria as defined by the Nebraska State Department of Health and Human Services under the authority granted by Section 71-1555 through 71-1567 Revised Statutes of Nebraska 1943, in addition to any amendments thereto.

          Dwelling, Multiple shall mean a building or buildings designed and used for occupancy by three (3) or more families, all living independently of each other and having separate kitchen and toilet facilities for each family.

          Dwelling, Seasonal shall mean a dwelling designed and used as a temporary residence and occupied less than six months in each year.

          Dwelling, Single Family is a building having accommodations for or occupied exclusively by one family which meet all the following standards:

(A)  The home shall have no less than nine hundred (900) square feet of floor area, above grade, for single story construction;

(B)  The home shall have no less than an eighteen (18) foot exterior width;

(C)  The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two and one-half (2 1/2) inches for each twelve (12) inches of horizontal run;

(D)  The exterior material is of a color, material and scale comparable with those existing in residential site-built, single family construction;

(E)   The home shall have a non-reflective roof material that is or simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile, or is a standing seam residential grade steel material, or rock;

(F)   The home shall be placed on a continuous permanent foundation and have wheels, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus removed, and

(G)  The home shall meet and maintain the same standards that are uniformly applied to all single-family dwellings in the zoning district.

(H)  Permanent foundation: continuous perimeter base on which building rests to be constructed from either poured concrete, laid masonry block, brick or all-weather wood foundation on a footing to be placed a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches below the final ground level.

          Dwelling, Single-Family (Attached) shall mean a one-family dwelling unit that is attached to one additional single-family dwelling. Said dwelling units are separated by an unpierced common wall through the structure that also sits along the property line separating ownership of the structure.

          Dwelling, Two (2) Family shall mean a building designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of two (2) families living independently of each other and having separate kitchen and toilet facilities for each family.

          Dwelling Unit One room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separate from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent cooking, toilet and sleeping facilities.

(E)

          Easement shall mean a right to use a parcel of land, granted to the general public, utility, corporation or person(s) for a specific purpose or purposes.

          Educational Institution shall mean a public or nonprofit institution or facility which conducts regular academic instruction at preschool, kindergarten, elementary, secondary, and collegiate levels, including graduate schools, universities, junior colleges, trade schools, nonprofit research institutions and religious institutions.  Such institutions must either:  (1) Offer general academic instruction equivalent to the standards established by the State Board of Education; or (2) Confer degrees as a college or university or undergraduate or graduate standing; or (3) Conduct research; or (4) Give religious instruction.  Private schools, academies, or institutes incorporated or otherwise, which operate for a profit, commercial, or private trade schools are not included in this definition.

          Eleemosynary Institution shall mean any building or group of buildings devoted to and supported by charity.

          Encroachment shall mean an advancement or intrusion beyond the lines or limits as designated and established by this chapter, and to infringe or trespass into or upon the possession or right of others without permission.

          Enlargement shall mean the expansion of a building, structure, or use in volume, size, area, height, length, width, depth, capacity, ground coverage, or in number.

          Environmentally Controlled Housing shall mean any livestock operation meeting the definition of a Livestock Feeding Operation (LFO) and is contained within a building which is roofed, and may or may not have open sides and contains floors which are hard surfaced, earthen, slatted or other type of floor. The facility is capable of maintaining and regulating the environment in which the livestock are kept.

          Erected shall mean constructed upon or moved onto a site.

          Existing and Lawful shall mean the use of a building, structure, or land was in actual existence, operation, and use, as compared to the use being proposed, contemplated, applied for, or in the process of being constructed or remodeled.  In addition, the use must either have been permitted, authorized, or allowed by law or any other applicable regulation prior to the enactment of a zoning regulation when first adopted or permitted, authorized or allowed by the previous zoning regulation prior to the adoption of an amendment to that zoning regulation.

          Expressway shall mean a street or road that provides fast and efficient movement of large volumes of vehicular traffic between areas and does not provide direct access to property.

          Exterior building component shall mean an essential and visible part of the exterior of a building.

          External design feature shall mean the general arrangement of any portion of a building, sign, landscaping, or structure and including the kind, color, and texture of the materials of such portion, and the types of roof, windows, doors, lights, attached or ground signs, or other fixtures appurtenant to such portions as will be open to public view from any street, place, or way.

          Extra Territorial Jurisdiction shall mean the area beyond the corporate limits, in which the City has been granted the powers by the state to exercise zoning and building regulations and is exercising such powers.

(F)

          Facade shall mean the exterior wall of a building exposed to public view from the building's exterior.

          Factory shall mean a structure or plant within which something is made or manufactured from raw or partly wrought materials into forms suitable for use.

          Family shall mean a household head and one or more persons related to the head by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or duly authorized custodial relationship living together in a single dwelling, or no more than five (5) unrelated persons living together in a single dwelling.

          Family Child Care Home I shall mean a child care operation in the provider’s place of residence which serves between four (4) and eight (8) children at any one time. A Family Child Care Home I provider may be approved to serve no more than two (2) additional school-age children during non-school hours. In addition to these regulations, a Child Care Home shall meet requirements of the State of Nebraska.

          Family Child Care Home II shall mean a child care operation either in the provider’s place of residence or a site other than the residence, serving twelve (12) or fewer children at any one time. In addition to these regulations, a Child Care Home shall meet requirements of the State of Nebraska.

          Farm shall mean an area containing at least twenty (20) acres or more which is used for growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruit, and grain, and the storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals. The term farming includes the operating of such area for one or more of the above uses with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce and the feeding of livestock as hereinafter prescribed; provided such accessory uses do not include the feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.

          Farming shall mean the planting, cultivating, harvesting and storage of grains, hay or plants commonly grown in Nebraska with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce and the feeding of livestock as prescribed hereunder, provided such accessory uses do not include the feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals. 

          Farmstead In contrast to a farmstead dwelling, a tract of land of not less than 1 acre and not more than 20 acres, upon which a farm dwelling and other outbuildings and barns existed as of August 1, 2004, and was used for single-family resident purposes.

          Feed Lot shall mean the confinement of horses, sheep, pigs, and other food animals in buildings, lots, pens, pools or ponds which normally are not used for raising crops or for grazing animals.

          Fence shall mean a structure serving as an enclosure, barrier or boundary.

(A)  Fence, Open shall mean a fence, including gates, which has, for each one foot (1’) wide segment extending over the entire length and height of fence, fifty percent (50%) or more of the surface area in open spaces which affords direct views through the fence.

(B)  Fence, Solid shall mean any fence that does not qualify as an open fence.

          Flood see definition in §36-128 of this chapter.

          Flood Plain see definition in §36-128 of this chapter.

          Floodway see definition in §36-128 of this chapter.

          Floor Area whenever the term "floor area" is used in this chapter as a basis for requiring off-street parking for any structure, it shall be assumed that, unless otherwise stated, said floor area applies not only to the ground floor area but also to any additional stories of said structure. All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the exterior faces of walls.

          Food Sales shall mean establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food or household products for home consumption. Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy shops.

          Frontage shall mean that portion of a parcel of property which abuts a dedicated public street or highway.

(G)

          Garage, Private shall mean a detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot as a dwelling for the housing of vehicles of the occupants of the dwelling, including carports.

          Garage, Public shall mean any garage other than a private garage.

          Garage, Repair  shall mean a building designed and used for the storage, care, repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles including both minor and major mechanical overhauling, paint, and body work as a commercial business (Also, see Service Station).

          Garbage shall mean any waste food material of an animal or vegetable nature, including that which may be used for the fattening of livestock.

          Gated Communities shall mean residential areas that restrict access to normally public spaces. These are subdivisions of usually high-end houses. The type of gates can range from elaborate guard houses to simple electronic arms.

          Grade  shall mean the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building.  In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.

          Grand Island Fee Schedule shall mean the fee schedule adopted and maintained by the City of Grand Island, which establishes the required fees to be collected for various City services.

          Graphic element shall mean a letter, illustration, symbol, figure, insignia, or other device employed to express and illustrate a message or part thereof.

          Greenhouse shall mean a building or premises used for growing plants, preparation of floral arrangements for off-site delivery to customers, cold storage of flowers or dry storage of materials used for agricultural or horticultural purposes.

          Greenway shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, dedicated as an easement for access and/or recreation; usually a strip of land set aside for a walkway, bicycle trail, bridal path, or other similar access-way.

          Ground Cover shall mean plant material used in landscaping which remains less than twelve (12) inches in height at maturity.  (Also, see Landscaping.)

          Ground Water shall mean water occurring beneath the surface of the ground that fills available openings in the rock or soil materials such that they may be considered saturated.

          Group Care Home shall mean a home which is operated under the auspices of an organization which is responsible for providing social services, administration, direction, and control for the home which is designed to provide twenty-four hour care for individuals in a residential setting.

          Group Home shall include both Group Care Home and Group Home for the Disabled.  Group homes shall be classified by size as follows:

Group Home (Small) shall mean a home designed to accommodate no more than 5 persons and shall be allowed in all zoning districts that permit dwelling units in the same manner as other dwelling units. These homes shall be built to no less than an R3 residential standard as defined by the International Building Code.

Group Home (Medium) shall mean a facility designed to house between 6 and 16 persons and shall require a conditional use permit in the LLR, R1, R2, R3 and R4 Districts and permitted in the RO, B1, B2, B3 and M3 zoning districts. These facilities shall be built to no less than an R4 residential standard as defined by the International Building Code.

Group Home (Large) shall mean a facility designed to house more than 16 persons and shall be permitted in the RO, B1, B2, B3, and M3 zoning districts. These facilities shall be built to an Institutional standard as defined by the International Building Code

          Group Home for the Disabled shall mean a dwelling with resident staff shared by four or more handicapped persons who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential.  As used herein, the term "disabled" shall mean having: 

  (A) A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities so that such person is incapable of living independently;

  (B) A record of having such an impairment; or

  (C) Being regarded as having such impairment.

Handicap shall not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in state statutes.

          Group Housing shall mean two or more separate buildings on a lot, each containing one or more dwelling units.

          Guest Building shall mean an accessory building which is designed to be occupied by one (1) or more guests for sleeping purposes, having no kitchen facilities, not including dormitories.

(H)

          Half-Story shall mean a story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, plates of which are not more than three (3) feet above the floor of such story.

          Halfway House shall mean a licensed home for individuals on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, living together as a single housekeeping unit, wherein supervision, rehabilitation and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently.

          Hard Surfaced shall mean any surface used for movement of vehicular and / or pedestrians which is properly designed and paved with a permanent type, dust-free surface such as asphalt, concrete, or paving brick.

          Harmony shall mean a quality that represents an appropriate and congruent arrangement of parts, as in an arrangement of varied architectural and landscape elements.

          Hazardous Waste shall mean waste products of industrial or chemical process including finished surplus, used, contaminated, or unwanted fertilizer, herbicide, petroleum products, or other such processed waste material that requires special handling treatment , and disposal methods.

          Health Club shall mean privately owned for profit facilities such as gymnasiums, athletic clubs, health clubs, recreational clubs, reducing salons, and weight control establishments.

          Health Recreation Facility shall mean an indoor or outdoor facility including uses such as game courts, exercise equipment, locker rooms, whirlpool spa and/or sauna and pro shop.

          Hedge shall mean a plant or series of plants, shrubs or other landscape material, so arranged as to form a physical barrier or enclosure.

          Height of Building see definition of Building Height herein.

          Holding Pond shall mean an impoundment made by constructing an excavated pit, dam, embankment, or combination of these for temporary storage of liquid livestock wastes.

          Home for the Aged (see Long-Term Care Facility)

          Home Improvement Center shall mean a facility engaged in the retail sale of various basic hardware lines, such as tools, builders’ hardware, paint and glass, housewares and household appliances, garden supplies, and cutlery.

          Home Occupation shall mean an “in-home” or “home based” or entrepreneurial business operating from a residential dwelling within the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island. Home occupations are considered accessory uses to properties in all zoning districts.

          Homeowners Association shall mean a private, nonprofit corporation or association of homeowners of properties in a fixed area, established for the purpose of owning, operating, and maintaining various common properties and facilities.

          Hotel shall mean a building or portion thereof, or a group of buildings, offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public and providing services associated with restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities.  The word "hotel" includes motel, inn, automobile court, motor inn, motor lodge, motor court, tourist court, motor hotel.

          Household Pet shall mean an animal that is customarily kept for personal use or enjoyment within the home. Household pet shall include but not be limited to domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic tropical birds, fish, and rodents.

          Housing for the Elderly shall mean a multi-family structure, controlled by either a public entity, private for profit, institutional body, or non-profit corporation. The facility houses predominantly persons 62 years of age or older.

(I)

          Impervious Surface shall mean a surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material making the surface highly resistant to infiltration by water, such as rock, gravel, or clay and conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and driveways.

          Incidental Use shall mean a use, which is subordinate to the main use of a premise.

          Independent (restricted) Housing shall mean a residential facility limited to persons 62 years of age or over, or disabled persons.

          Industry shall mean the manufacture, fabrication, processing reduction or destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment thereof in such a manner as to change the form, character, or appearance thereof and including storage elevators, truck storage yards, warehouses, wholesale storage and other similar types of enterprise.

          Infill Development shall mean the construction of a building or structure on a vacant parcel located in a predominately built up area.

          Infill Site shall mean any vacant lot, parcel, or tract of land within developed areas of the city, where at least 80 percent of the land within a 300-foot radius of the site has been developed, and where water, sewer, streets, schools, and fire protection have already been constructed or are provided. 

          Institutional Building shall mean a public and public/private group use of a nonprofit nature, typically engaged in public service (i.e. houses of worship, nonprofit cultural centers, charitable organizations).

          Intensity shall mean the degree to which land is used referring to the levels of concentration or activity in uses ranging from uses of low intensity being agricultural and residential to uses of highest intensity being heavy industrial uses.  High intensity uses are normally uses that generate concentrations of vehicular traffic and daytime population and are less compatible with lower intensive uses.

          Intent and Purpose shall mean that the Commission and Council by the adoption of this Regulation, have made a finding that the health, safety, and welfare of the Community will be served by the creation of the District and by the regulations prescribed therein.

(J)

          Juice Bar (See Adult Establishment.)

          Junk shall be any worn-out, cast-off, old, or discarded articles of scrap, copper, brass, iron, steel, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.

          Junk Yard shall definition of Salvage Yard herein.

(K)

          Kennel, Boarding and Training shall mean any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs, cats or non-farm/non-domestic or any combination of five (5) or more thereof, at least four (4) months of age, are boarded, bred, or trained for a fee.

          Kennel, Commercial shall mean an establishment where three (3) or more dogs, cats, or other household pets, or non-farm/non-domestic or any combination of five (5) or more thereof, at least four (4) months of age are groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold as a business.

          Kennel, Private shall mean the keeping, breeding, raising, showing or training of four or more animals over six months of age for personal enjoyment of the owner or occupants of the property, and for which commercial gain is not the primary objective.

(L)

          Lagoon shall mean a wastewater treatment facility which is a shallow, artificial pond where sunlight, bacterial action, and oxygen interact to restore wastewater to a reasonable state of purity. This includes both human and livestock wastes. All lagoons shall meet the minimum design criteria established by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services. All lagoons shall have the proper permits approved prior to starting construction.

          Land Use Plan shall mean the same as Comprehensive Development Plan.

          Landfill shall mean a disposal site employing a method of disposing solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards in accordance with state and federal requirements.

          Landscape shall mean plant materials, topography, and other natural physical elements combined in relation to one another and to man-made structures.

          Landscaping shall include the original planting of suitable vegetation in conformity with the requirements of this Regulation and the continued maintenance thereof.

          Large Box Retail shall mean a singular retail or wholesale user that occupies no less than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area. These uses typically include: membership wholesale clubs emphasizing in large bulk sales, discount stores, pharmacies, grocery stores, especially warehouse style point of sale concepts and department stores.

          Laundry, Self Service shall mean an establishment that provides home-type washing, drying, and/or ironing facilities for customers on the premises.

          Life Care Facility shall mean a facility for the transitional residency of the elderly and/or disabled persons, progressing from independent living to congregate apartment living where residents share common meals and culminating in full health and continuing care nursing home facility.  (Also, see Congregate Housing and Housing for the Elderly.)

          Light Cut-Off Angle shall mean an angle from vertical, extending downward from a luminaries, which defines the maximum range of incident illumination outward at the ground plane.

          Limits of Grading shall mean the outermost edge of the area in which the existing topography is to be altered by cutting and/or filling.

                Liquids Manure shall mean that type of livestock waste that is in liquid form, collected in liquid manure pits or lagoons and which can be sprayed or injected beneath the surface.

                Liquid Manure Storage Pits shall mean earthen or lined pits wholly or partially beneath a semi or totally housed (ECH) livestock operation or at some removed location used to collect waste production.

                Livestock (See Animals, Farm.)

                Livestock Feeding Operation (LFO) shall mean any farming operation exceeding the per acre Animal Unit (A.U.) ratio as defined under “farming” or the feeding, farrowing, or raising cattle, swine, sheep, poultry, or other livestock, in a confined area where grazing is not possible, and where the confined area is for more than six (6) months in any one calendar year, and where the number of animals so maintained exceeds three hundred (300) Animal Units as defined below. The confined area of the livestock feeding operation shall include the pens, corrals, sheds, buildings, feed storage areas, waste disposal ponds, and related facilities.  Such facilities shall be constructed and operated in conformance with applicable county, state, and federal regulations. Two (2) or more livestock feeding operations under common ownership are deemed to be a single livestock feeding operation if they are adjacent to each other or if they utilize a common area of system for the disposal of livestock wastes.  Animal Units (A.U.) are defined as follows:

One (1) A.U.= One (1) Cow/Calf combination

One (1) A.U.= One (1) Slaughter, Feeder Cattle;

One (1) A.U.= One-half  (1/2) Horse;

One (1) A.U.= Seven Tenths (.7) Mature Dairy Cattle;

One (1) A.U.= Two and One Half (2.5) Swine (55 pounds or more);

One (1) A.U.= Twenty Five (25) Weaned Pigs (less than 55 pounds);

One (1) A.U.= Two (2) Sows with Litters;

One (1) A.U.= Ten (10) Sheep;

One (1) A.U.= One Hundred (100) Chickens;

One (1) A.U.= Fifty (50) Turkeys;

One (1) A.U.= Five (5) Ducks.

          Livestock Wastes shall mean animal and poultry excreta and associated feed losses, bedding, spillage, or overflow from watering systems, wash and flushing waters, sprinkling waters from livestock cooling, precipitation polluted by falling on or flowing onto a livestock operation, and other materials polluted by livestock or their direct product.

          Loading Space shall mean an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a main building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading, and which abuts a street, alley, or other appropriate means of ingress and egress.

          Logic of Design shall mean accepted principles and criteria of validity in the solution of the problem of design.

          Long-Term Care Facility shall mean a facility as defined in Title 15, Chapter 3 Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services and Neb. Rev. Stat. Section 71-2017.01. These facilities include:

Nursing facilities

Boarding home

Adult Care Home

Assisted Living Facility

Center for the Developmentally Disabled

Group Residence

Swing Bed

Adult Day Care

          Lot shall mean a parcel or tract of land which is or may be occupied by a use herein permitted, together with yards, and other open spaces herein required, that has frontage upon a street, and is a part of a recorded subdivision plat or has been recorded prior to April 22, 1968, or a parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey, lot-split or sub-parceling map as filed in the office of the County Register of Deeds and abutting at least one (1) public street or right-of-way.

          Lot Area shall mean the total area, on a horizontal plane, within the lot lines of a lot.

          Lot, Corner shall mean a lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets at an angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. If the angle is greater than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, the lot shall be considered an "Interior Lot".

          Lot Coverage shall mean the portion of a lot or building site which is occupied by any building or structure, excepting paved areas, and walks, regardless of whether said building or structure is intended for human occupancy or not.

          Lot, Curve shall mean a lot fronting on the outside curve of the right-of-way of a curved street, which street has a centerline radius of three hundred (300) feet or less.

          Lot Depth shall mean the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.

          Lot, Double Frontage shall mean a lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.

 

 


 

          Lot, Flag shall mean a lot with frontage and access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor. The measurement of the actual lot frontage shall be made along the widest portion of the lot along the line parallel to the street.

          Lot, Frontage shall mean the side of a lot abutting on a legally accessible street right-of-way other than an alley or an unimproved county road.  For the purposes of this definition, on corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets or roads shall be considered frontage.

          Lot, Key shall mean a lot: (1) abutting the entire length of at least one of its side lot lines, either directly or across an alley, the rear lot line of any other lot; or (2) situated between two such key lots.

          Lot, Interior shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.

          Lot Line shall mean the property line bounding a lot.

  (A) Lot Line, Front shall mean the property line abutting a street.

  (B) Lot Line, Rear shall mean a lot line not abutting a street which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.

  (C) Lot Line, Side shall mean any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line.

          Lot, Nonconforming shall mean a lot having less area or dimension than that required in the district in which it is located and which was lawfully created prior to the zoning thereof whereby the larger area or dimension requirements were established, or any lot, other than one shown on a plat recorded in the office of the Hall County Register of Deeds, which does not abut a public road or public road right-of-way and which was lawfully created.

          Lot Through shall mean a lot having frontage on two (2) dedicated streets, not including a corner lot.

          Lot of Record shall mean a lot held in separate ownership as shown on the records of the Hall County Register of Deeds at the time of the passage of a regulation or regulation establishing the zoning district in which the lot is located.

          Lot Width shall mean the average horizontal distance between the side lot line, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.

(M)

          Manufactured Home Park shall mean a parcel of land under single ownership that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured housing used or to be used for dwelling purposes and where manufactured home spaces are not offered for sale or sold.  The term "manufactured home park" does not include sales lots on which new or used manufactured homes are parked for the purposes of storage, inspection, or sale.

          Manufactured Home Subdivision shall mean any area, piece, parcel, tract or plot of ground subdivided and used or intended to be used for the purpose of selling lots for occupancy by manufactured homes.

          Manufacturing shall mean uses primarily engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products.  These uses are usually described as plants, factories, or mills and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment.  Uses engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products are also considered manufacturing if the new product is neither a structure nor other fixed improvement.  Also included is the blending of material such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors.  Manufacturing production is usually carried on for the wholesale market, for interplant transfer, or to order for industrial users, rather than for direct sale to the domestic consumer.

          Map, Official Zoning shall mean a map delineating the boundaries of zoning districts which, along with the zoning text, is officially adopted by the Grand Island City Council as "The Official Zoning Map of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska."

          Massage Establishment shall mean any building, room, place, or establishment other than a regularly licensed and established hospital or dispensary where non-medical or non-surgical manipulative exercises or devices are practiced upon the human body manually or otherwise by any person other than a licensed physician, surgeon, dentist, occupational and/or physical therapist, chiropractor, or osteopath with or without the use of therapeutic, electrical, mechanical, or bathing device. Said establishment shall comply with all state regulations.

          Massage Parlor (See Adult Massage Parlor.)

          Mechanical Equipment shall mean equipment, devices, and accessories, the use of which relates to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and similar purposes.

          Mini-Storage or Mini-Warehouse (See Self-Service Storage Facility.)

          Miscellaneous Structures shall mean structures, other than buildings, visible from public ways. Examples are: memorials, stagings, antennas, water tanks and towers, sheds, shelters, fences, and walls, kennels, transformers, drive-up facilities.

          Mixed Use shall mean properties where various uses, such as office, commercial, institutional, and residential, are combined in a single building or on a single site in an integrated development project with significant functional interrelationships and a coherent physical design.

          Mobile Home Park (See Manufactured Home Park.)

          Mobile Home Subdivision (See Manufactured Home Subdivision.)

          Monotony shall mean repetitive sameness, lacking variety and variation, and/or reiteration. 

          Motel (See Hotel.)

          Motor Vehicle shall mean every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated upon rails, except mopeds and self-propelled invalid chairs.

(N)

          Nebraska Revised Reissued Statutes, 1943 and the abbreviated term Nebr. R. R. S., 1943 are one and the same.

          Nightclub shall mean a commercial establishment dispensing beverages for consumption on the premises and in which dancing is permitted or entertainment is provided, except as defined under Adult Cabaret. (Also, see Bar.)

          Non-Agricultural Land shall mean any tract, parcel or lot that is used for any purpose that does not meet the definition of Agriculture in this section.

          Non-community Water Supply System shall mean any public water supply system that is not a community water supply system.

          Non-Conforming Building shall mean a building or portion thereof which was lawful when established but which does not conform to subsequently established zoning or zoning regulations.

          Non-Conforming Use shall mean a use lawful when established but which does not conform to subsequently established zoning or zoning regulation.

          Non-Farm Buildings are all buildings except those buildings utilized for agricultural purposes on a farmstead of twenty acres or more which produces one thousand dollars or more of farm products each year.

          Nursery shall mean the use of a premises for the propagation, cultivation, and growth of trees, shrubs, plants, vines, and the like from seed or stock, and the sale thereof, and including the sale of trees, shrubs, plants, vines, and the like purchased elsewhere and transplanted into the soil of the premises.  In connection with the sale of plants, such fungicides, insecticides, chemicals, peat moss, humus, mulches, and fertilizers as are intended to be used in preserving the life and health of the plants may be sold.

          Nursing Home see Congregate Care Facility

          Nursery School see Preschool

(O)

          Office shall mean a building or a portion of a building wherein services are performed involving, primarily, administrative, professional, or clerical operations.

          Official Map (See Map, Official Zoning District.)

          Off-Street Parking Area or Vehicular Use shall refer to all off street areas and spaces designed, used, required, or intended to be used for parking, including driveways or access ways in and to such areas.

          Open Lots shall mean pens or similar concentrated areas for livestock, including small shed-type areas or open-front buildings, with dirt, or concrete (or paved or hard) surfaces, wherein animals or poultry are substantially or entirely exposed to the outside environment except for possible small portions affording some protection by windbreaks or small shed-type areas.

          Open Space shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, primarily set aside for recreational use and enjoyment, exclusive of land areas used for streets, alleys, roads, driveways, parking areas, structures, and buildings.

          Open Space, Common shall mean a separate and distinct area set aside as open space within or related to a development, and not on individually owned lots or dedicated for public use, but which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development.  Rights-of-way, private streets, driveways, parking lots or other surfaces designed or intended for vehicular use or required yards shall not be included as common open space.

          Outlot shall mean a lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is intended as open space or other use, for which no building permit shall be issued for any private structure. Typically uses are limited within the subdivision agreement and/or plat.

          Overlay District shall mean a district in which additional requirements act in conjunction with the underlying zoning district.  The original zoning district designation does not change.

          Owner shall mean one or more persons, including corporations, who have title to the property, building or structure in question.

(P)

          Paintball shall mean all guns and other devices used for the purpose of firing pellets containing a latex paint at a person or target.

          Paintball Course, Commercial shall mean a commercial recreational park containing obstacle courses for the purpose of staging paintball battles. Said facility generally collects a fee, either as membership or on a visit by visit basis, that allows individuals to participate in paintball activities.

          Parcel shall mean a lot or a contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under single control, which may be considered as a unit for purposes of development.

          Park shall mean any public or private land available for recreational, educational, cultural, or aesthetic use.

          Parking Area, Private shall mean an area, other than a street, used for the parking of motor vehicles capable of moving under their own power and restricted from general public use.

          Parking Area, Public shall mean an area, other than a private parking area or street used for the parking of vehicles capable of moving under their own power, either free or for remuneration.

          Parking Space, Automobile shall mean an area, other than a street or alley, reserved for the parking of an automobile, such space having an area of not less than 180 square feet and no dimension of less than nine (9) feet, plus such additional area as is necessary to afford adequate ingress and egress.

          Parkway shall mean an arterial highway with full or partial control of access, and located within a park or ribbon of park like development.

          Performance Guarantee shall mean a financial guarantee to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required by this chapter will be completed in compliance with these regulations as well as with approved plans and specifications of a development. 

          Permanent Foundation shall mean a base constructed from either poured concrete, laid masonry rock, brick, or all-weather wood and placed on a footing located below ground level to a point below the frost line upon which a building or structure is permanently attached.

          Permanent Tree Protection Devices shall be structural measures, such as retaining walls or aeration devices that are designed to protect the tree and its root systems throughout its lifetime.

          Permanently Attached shall mean connected to real estate in such a way as to require dismantling, cutting away, or unbolting in order to remove, relocate, or replace.

          Permitted Use shall mean any land use allowed without condition within a zoning district.

          Person shall mean an individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, City, County, special district or any other group or combination acting as an entity, except that it shall not include Grand Island, Nebraska.

          Pet Shop shall mean a retail establishment primarily involved in the sale of domestic animals, such as dogs, cats, fish, birds, and reptiles, excluding exotic animals and farm animals such as horses, cattle, goats, sheep and poultry.

          Planned Unit Development shall mean a development designed to provide for an unusual or different arrangement of residential, business, or industrial uses in accordance with an approved development plan.

          Planning Commission shall mean the Hall County Regional Planning Commission.

          Plant Materials shall mean trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, grass, perennials, annuals, and bulbs.

          Plat shall mean a map showing the location, boundaries, and legal description of individual properties, including street rights-of-way, public utility easements, etc.

          Policy shall mean a statement or document of the City, such as the comprehensive plan, that forms the basis for enacting legislation or making decisions.

          Poultry, Commercial Feeding shall mean a poultry commercial feed lot, whether the confined feeding operations are enclosed or outdoors.

          Premises shall mean a tract of land, consisting of one lot or irregular tract, or more than one lot or irregular tract, provided such lots or tracts are under common ownership, contiguous, and used as a single tract.  A building or land within a prescribed area.

          Preschool shall mean an early childhood program which provides primarily educational services, where children do not nap and where children are not served a meal.

          Private Well shall mean a well that provides water supply to less than fifteen (15) service connections and regularly serves less than twenty-five (25) individuals.

          Prohibited Use shall mean any use of land, other than nonconforming, which is not listed as a permitted use or conditional use within a zoning district.

          Proportion shall mean a balanced relationship of parts of a building, landscape, structures, or buildings to each other and to the whole.

          Protected Zone shall mean all lands that fall outside the buildable areas of a parcel, all areas of a parcel required to remain in open space, and/or all areas required as landscaping strips according to the provisions of this chapter.

          Public Utility shall mean any business which furnishes the general public telephone service, telegraph service, electricity, natural gas, water and sewer, or any other business so affecting the public interest as to be subject to the supervision or regulation by an agency of the state or federal government.

          Public Water Supply shall mean a water supply system designed to provide public piped water fit for human consumption, if such system has at least fifteen (15) service connections or regularly serves at least twenty-five individuals.  This definition shall include:  (1) Any collection, treatment, storage, or distribution facilities under the control of the operator of such system and used primarily in connection with such system; and (2) Any collection or pretreatment storage facilities not under such control which are used primarily in the connection with such system.

(Q)

(R)

          Railroad shall mean the land use including the right-of-way (R.O.W.) abutting railroad properties occupied by uses pertinent to the railroad operation and maintenance, but not including properties owned by the railroad and leased for use by others.

          Recreational Facility shall mean facilities for the use by the public for passive and active recreation including tennis, handball, racquetball, basketball, track and field, jogging, baseball, soccer, skating, swimming, or golf.  This shall include country clubs and athletic clubs, but not facilities accessory to a private residence used only by the owner and guests, nor arenas or stadiums used primarily for spectators to watch athletic events. In addition, recreational facilities shall mean museums, amphitheaters, race tracks (including all motor powered vehicles) and wildlife conservation areas (used for public viewing), and theme parks.

          Recreational Vehicle (RV) shall mean a vehicular unit less than forty (40) feet in overall length, eight (8) feet in width, or twelve (12) feet in overall height, primarily designed as a temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use having either its own power or designed to be mounted on or drawn by a motor vehicle.  Recreational vehicle includes motor home, truck camper, travel trailer, camping trailer, and fifth wheel.

          Recreational Vehicle Pad: a space for parking a recreational vehicle within a campground or other

allowed place consisting of no less than 800 square feet with a minimum width of 12 feet. Improvements included within the pad space include 1 hard surfaced improved parking space of not less than 180 square feet (20 x 9 or 18 x 10) and 2 hard surfaced improved parallel tire pads of not less than 2.5 feet by 24 feet.

          Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park shall mean a tract of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes by campers, vacationers, or travelers.  A Recreational vehicle park on tract of land in excess of 20 acres used for seasonal events of not more than 14 consecutive days in duration may provide overflow pads not to exceed 25% of the Recreational Vehicle Pads provided in compliance with the required improvements.  Overflow pads shall be allowed without the required improvements.

          Residence shall mean a building used, designed, or intended to be used as a home or dwelling place for one (1) or more families.

          Restaurant shall mean a public eating establishment at which the primary function is the preparation and serving of food primarily to persons seated within the building.

  (A) Restaurant, Drive-In shall mean an establishment that has the facilities to serve prepared food and/or beverages to customers seated within motor vehicles for consumption either on or off the premises.

  (B) Restaurant, Entertainment shall mean an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed, within a building or structure that integrally includes electronic and mechanical games of skill, simulation, and virtual reality, play areas, video arcades or similar uses, billiards, and other forms of amusement. 

  (C) Restaurant, Fast Food shall mean an establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages in ready-to-consume individual servings, for consumption either within the establishment, for carryout, or drive-in; and where food and/or beverages are usually served in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers.

          Retail Trade shall mean uses primarily engaged in selling merchandise for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of goods.  Uses engaged in retail trade sell merchandise to the general public or to households for personal consumption.

          Retention Cell shall mean a pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent storage of stormwater runoff.

          Reverse Spot Zoning shall mean an arbitrary zoning or rezoning of a small tract of land that is not consistent with the comprehensive land use plan and that uniquely burdens an individual owner largely to secure some public benefit.  Reverse spot zoning usually results from downzoning a tract of land to a less intensive use classification than that imposed on nearby properties.

          Rezoning shall mean an amendment to or change in the zoning regulations either to the text or map or both.

          Rezoning, Piecemeal shall mean the zoning reclassification of individual lots resulting in uncertainty in the future compatible development of the area.

          Right-of-Way shall mean an area or strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable right of passage has been dedicated, recorded, or otherwise legally established for the use of vehicles or pedestrians or both.

          Road shall mean the same as "Street".

          Road, Private shall mean a way, other than driveways, open to vehicular ingress and egress established for the benefit of certain, adjacent properties.  (Also, see right-of-way and Street.)

          Road, Public shall mean a public right-of-way reserved or dedicated for street or road traffic.  (Also, see right-of-way and Street.)

          Room shall mean an un-subdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit, excluding bathroom, kitchen, closets, hallways, and service porches.

(S)

          Salvage Yard shall mean any building, lot, yard or premise used for the collection, processing, salvage, storage, bailing or shipping of junked vehicles, vehicle parts, paper, cardboard, glass, plastic, metals, rags, scrap materials, junk, or material similar to those listed herein.

          Satellite Dish Antenna shall mean a round, parabolic antenna incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, or cone and used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves.

          Scale shall mean a proportional relationship of the size of parts to one another and to the human figure.

          School, Day shall mean a preschool or nursery school for children.

          School, Day, Pre-, or Nursery shall mean a school or center for children under school age, whether licensed as a day care center or not, shall be approved by the Nebraska State Fire Marshall as being in safety conformance with the National Fire Protection Association, Pamphlet 101, known as the Life Safety Code and shall be approved by the Nebraska Department of Health and Welfare as meeting their health and welfare standards.

          Screening shall mean a structure or planting that conceals from view from public ways the area behind such structure or planting.

          Selective Clearing shall be the careful and planned removal or trees, shrubs, and plants using specific standards and protection measures.

          Self-Service Station shall mean an establishment where motor fuels are stored and dispensed into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than the service station attendant and may include facilities available for the sale of other retail products.

          Self-Service Storage Facility shall mean a building or group of buildings containing individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers for storage.

          Separate Ownership shall mean ownership of a parcel of land by a person who does not own any of the land abutting such parcel.

          Service Stations shall mean buildings and premises where the primary use is the supply and dispensing at retail of motor fuels, lubricants, batteries, tires, and motor vehicle accessories and where light maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrications, and washing may be conducted, but not including heavy maintenance and repair such as engine overhauls, painting, and body repair.

          Setback Line, Front Yard shall mean the line which defines the depth of the required front yard. Said setback line shall be parallel with the right-of-way line or highway setback line when one has been established.

          Setback Line, Rear Yard or Side Yard shall mean the line which defines the width or depth of the required rear or side yard. Said setback line shall be parallel with the property line, removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the yard in the district.

          Shopping Center shall mean a group of commercial establishments planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provisions for goods delivery that is separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations, and protection from the elements.

          Shopping Center, Commercial Strip shall mean a commercial development, usually one store deep, that fronts on a major street for a distance of one city block or more. Includes individual buildings on their own lots, with or without on-site parking and small linear shopping centers with shallow on-site parking in front of the stores.

          Shopping Center, Outlet shall mean a commercial development that consists mostly of manufacturers’ outlet stores selling their own brands at a discounted price. This definition includes all forms of centers, such as strip style, enclosed mall style, and village clustered style centers.

          Shrub shall mean a multi-stemmed woody plant other than a tree.

          Sidewalk Café shall mean an area adjacent to a street level eating or drinking establishment located adjacent to the public pedestrian walkway and used exclusively for dining, drinking, and pedestrian circulation.  The area may be separated from the public sidewalk by railings, fencing, or landscaping or a combination thereof.

          Sight Triangle is an area at a street intersection in which nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision. The area and restrictions of the sight triangle are further defined in Chapter 32 of this code.

          Sign Base shall mean any decorative, functional element extending upward from grade to the start of the sign.

          Similar Use shall mean the use of land, buildings, or structures of like kind or general nature with other uses within a zoning district as related to bulk, intensity of use, traffic generation and congestion, function, public services requirements, aesthetics or other similarities

          Site Break shall mean a structural or landscape device to interrupt long vistas and create visual interest in a site development.

          Site Plan shall mean a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, drives, parking, drainage, landscape features, and other principal site development improvements for a specific parcel of land.

          Site, Septic shall mean the area bounded by the dimensions required for the proper location of the septic tank system.

          Skate, In-Line shall mean a boot-type device, which is placed on an individual’s feet. In-line skates contain wheels on the bottom of the boot, which are attached in linear fashion.

          Skate Park shall mean a recreational facility containing skateboard ramps and other obstacle courses and devices for use with skateboards and in-line skates.

          Skateboard shall mean a foot board mounted upon four or more wheels and is usually propelled by the user who sometimes stands, sits, kneels, or lays upon the device while it is in motion.

          Skateboard Pipe shall mean an outdoor structure which is shaped into a half circle or oval, that are designed and principally intended to permit persons on skateboards to move continuously from one side to the other.

          Skateboard Ramp shall mean an outdoor structure with an upward inclined surface, essentially one of the sides of a pipe, which are designed and principally intended to permit persons on skateboards to move from horizontal to vertical and back to horizontal.

          Sludge shall mean solids removed from sewage during wastewater treatment and then disposed of by incineration, dumping, burial, or land application.

          Solid Waste shall mean waste materials consisting of garbage, trash, refuse, rubble, sewage, offal, dead animals, or paunch manure.

          Specified Anatomical Areas shall mean anatomical areas consisting of less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttock, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola.

          Specified Sexual Activities shall mean sexual activities prohibited by state law.

          Spot Zoning shall mean an arbitrary zoning or rezoning of a small tract of land that is not consistent with the comprehensive land use plan and primarily promotes the private interest of the owner rather than the general welfare.  Spot zoning usually results from an upzoning to a more intensive use classification.

          Standard System shall mean a sewage treatment system employing a building sewer, septic tank, and a standard soil absorption system.

          State shall mean the State of Nebraska.

          Storage shall mean the keeping, in a roofed or unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles on the same tract or premises for more than thirty (30) days.

          Storm Drain shall mean a conduit that carries natural storm and surface water drainage but not sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.

          Stormwater Detention shall mean any storm drainage technique that retards or detains runoff, such as a detention or retention basin, parking lot storage, rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells, or any combination thereof. Said detention shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer and approved by the City.

          Stormwater Management shall mean the collecting, conveyance, channeling, holding, retaining, detaining, infiltrating, diverting, treating, or filtering of surface water, or groundwater, and/or runoff, together with applicable managerial (non-structural) measures.

          Stormwater Runoff shall mean surplus surface water generated by rainfall that does not seep into the earth but flows over land to flowing or stagnant bodies of water.     

          Story, One-Half shall mean the same as "Half-Story".

          Street shall mean a public thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded, or condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except as excluded in this chapter.

          Street, Arterial shall mean a street of considerable continuity connecting various sections of the City, designated as an arterial street on the official street plan of the City.

          Street, Collector shall mean a street or highway that is intended to carry traffic from minor streets to major streets. Collector streets are usually the principal entrance streets to residential developments and the streets for circulation within the development as designated in the Comprehensive Development Plan.

          Street, Curvilinear shall mean local streets that deviate from straight alignment and change direction without sharp corners or bends.

          Street, Local shall mean a street designed for local traffic that provides direct access to abutting residential, commercial, or industrial properties.

          Street, Looped shall mean a continuous local street without intersecting streets and having its two (2) outlets connected to the same street.

          Streets, Major shall mean a street or highway used primarily for fast or high volume traffic, including expressways, freeways, boulevards, and arterial streets as designated in the Comprehensive Development Plan.

          Street, Private shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a street or alley dedicated to the public, but permanently established as the principal means of vehicular access to abutting properties.  The term "private street" includes the term "place."

          Street, Side shall mean that street bounding a corner or reversed corner lot and which extends in the same general direction as the line determining the depth of the lot.

          Street Centerline shall mean the centerline of a street right-of-way as established by official surveys.

          Street Frontage shall mean the distance for which a lot line of a zone lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street.

          Street, Frontage Access shall mean a street parallel and adjacent to a major street, major inter-regional highway, or major collection road and primarily for service to the abutting properties, and being separated from the major street by a dividing strip.

          Street Hardware shall mean man-made objects other than buildings that are part of the streetscape. Examples are: lamp posts, utility poles, traffic signs, benches, litter containers, planting containers, letter boxes, fire hydrants.

          Street Line shall mean a dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and the contiguous street.

          Streetscape shall mean the scene as may be observed along a public street or way composed of natural and man-made components, including buildings, paving, plantings, street hardware, and miscellaneous structures.

          Structure shall mean anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, including swimming and wading pools and covered patios, signs and towers, excepting outdoor areas such as paved areas, walks, tennis courts, and similar recreation areas.

          Structure, Temporary shall mean a structure without any foundation or footing and removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.

          Structural, Alteration shall mean any change in the support members of a building, such as in a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joists, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles, or retaining walls or similar components.

          Subdivision shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, provided that the smallest lot created by the division is less than ten (10) acres in size.

          Surface Waters shall mean all waters within the jurisdiction of this state, including all streams, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes, wetlands, watercourses, waterways, springs, canal systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, natural or artificial, public or private, situated wholly or partly within or bordering upon the state.

(T)

          Tanning Studio shall mean any business that uses artificial lighting systems to produce a tan on an individual’s body. These facilities may be either a stand-alone business or as an accessory use in spas, gymnasiums, athletic clubs, health clubs, and styling salons. This use is not included with any type of adult establishment. 

          Tattoo Parlor / Body Piercing Studio shall mean an establishment whose principal business activity is the practice of tattooing and/or piercing the body of paying customers.

          Tavern  (See Bar.)

          Temporary Use shall mean a use intended for limited duration to be located in a zoning district not permitting such use.

          Theater shall mean a building or structure used for dramatic, operatic, motion pictures, or other performance, for admission to which entrance money is received and no audience participation or meal service.

          Tower see definition in §36-169 of this chapter.

          Townhouse shall mean a one-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance, which part of a structure whose dwelling units are attached horizontally in a linear arrangement, and having a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for access, light, and ventilation.

          Trailer, Automobile see definition in §22-1 of this code.

          Truck Repair shall mean the repair, including major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or other work that may include noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in gasoline service stations, of trucks having a hauling capacity of over one (1) ton and buses but excluding pickups and other vehicles designed for the transport of under eight (8) passengers.

(U)

          Upzoning shall mean a change in zoning classification of land to a more intensive or less restrictive district such as from residential district to commercial district or from a single family residential district to a multiple family residential district.

          Use shall mean the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained.

          Use, Best shall mean the recommended use or uses of land confined in an adopted comprehensive plan.  Such use represents the best use of public facilities, and promotes health, safety and general welfare.

          Use, Highest shall mean an appraisal or real estate market concept that identifies the use of a specific tract of land that is most likely to produce the greatest net return on investment.

          Use, Permitted shall mean any land use allowed without condition within a zoning district.

          Use, Principal shall mean the main use of land or structure, as distinguished from an accessory use.  (Also, see Building, Principal.)

          Use, Prohibited shall mean any use of land, other than nonconforming, which is not listed as a permitted use or conditional use within a zoning district.

          Utilitarian Structure shall mean a structure or enclosure relating to mechanical or electrical services to a building or development.

          Utility Easement shall mean the same as "Easement".

          Utility Hardware shall mean devices such as poles, crossarms, transformers and vaults, gas pressure regulating assemblies, hydrants, and buffalo boxes that are used for water, gas, oil, sewer, and electrical services to a building or a project.

          Utilities, Overhead or Underground "Local Distribution" System of shall mean the local service distribution circuit or lines and related appurtenances served from a substation, town border station, reservoir, or terminal facility which is served from a main supply line, main transmission line, or main feeder line as may be applicable to electric, communications, gas, fuel, petroleum, fertilizer, or other chemical utilities. Local electric distribution systems shall be limited to include all lines and appurtenances carrying a primary voltage of less than 161 KV from an electric transformer substation to the consumer. The local telephone distribution system shall be limited to include the local exchange lines, the local toll lines, and the local communications equipment facilities structure.

          Utilities, Overhead or Underground "Transmission Line, Supply Line, Wholesale Carrier or Trunk Line, Main Feeder Line" or other applicable designation shall mean the main supply or feeder line serving a local distribution system of utilities, and shall include but is not limited to pumping stations, substations, regulating stations, generator facilities, reservoirs, tank farms, processing facilities, terminal facilities, towers, and relay stations, and treatment plants.

          Utility Service shall mean any device, including wire, pipe, and conduit, which carries gas, water, electricity, oil, wastewater and communications into a building or development.

(V)

          Variance shall mean a relief from or variation of the provisions of this chapter, other than use regulations, as applied to a specific piece of property, as distinct from rezoning.

          Vegetation shall mean all plant life; however, for purposes of this chapter it shall be restricted to mean trees, shrubs, and vines.

          Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

          Vehicle, Motor (See Motor Vehicle.)

(W)

          Warehouse shall mean a building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.

          Warehouse and Distribution shall mean a use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment.

          Waste Handling System shall mean any and all systems, public or private, or combination of said structures intended to treat human or livestock excrement and shall include the following types of systems:

  (A) Holding pond shall mean an impoundment made by constructing an excavated pit, dam, embankment or combination of these for temporary storage of liquid livestock wastes, generally receiving runoff from open lots and contributing drainage area.

  (B) Lagoon shall mean an impoundment made by constructing an excavated pit, dam, embankment or combination of these for treatment of liquid livestock waste by anaerobic, aerobic or facultative digestion. Such impoundment predominantly receives waste from a confined livestock operation.

  (C) Liquid manure storage pits shall mean earthen or lined pits located wholly or partially beneath a semi or totally housed livestock operation or at some removed location used to collect waste production.

  (D) Sediment shall mean a pond constructed for the sole purpose of collecting and containing sediment.

          Wastewater Lagoon (See Lagoon.)

          Waters of the State shall mean all waters within the jurisdiction of this state, including all streams, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes, wetlands, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water surface or underground, material or artificial, public or private, situated wholly within or bordering upon the state.

          Wetland shall mean an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that, under normal circumstances, does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soiled conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.

          Wholesale Establishment shall mean an establishment for the on-premises sale of goods primarily to customers engaged in the business of reselling the goods.

          Wholesale Trade shall mean a use primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies.  The principal types of establishments included are:  Merchant wholesalers; sales branches and sales offices (but not retail stores) maintained by manufacturing enterprises apart from their plants for the purpose of marketing their products; agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and  commission merchants; petroleum bulk storage, assemblers, buyers, and associations engaged in cooperative marketing of farm products.  The chief functions of uses in wholesale trade are selling goods to trading establishments, or to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm and professional; and bringing buyer and seller together.  In additional to selling, functions frequently performed by wholesale establishments include maintaining inventories of goods; extending credit; physically assembling, sorting and grading goods in large lots, breaking bulk and redistribution in smaller lots; delivery; refrigeration; and various types of promotion such as advertising and label designing.

(X)

(Y)

          Yard shall mean any open space on the same lot with a building or a dwelling group, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward to the sky, except for building projections or for accessory buildings or structures permitted by this chapter.

          Yard, Front shall mean a space between the front yard setback line and the front lot line or highway setback line, and extending the full width of the lot. On corner lots, the front yard shall always be on the narrow side of the lot.

          Yard, Rear shall mean a space between the rear yard setback line and the rear lot line, extending the full width of the lot.

          Yard, Side shall mean a space extending from the front yard, or from the front lot line where no front yard is required by this chapter, to the rear yard, or rear lot line, between a side lot line and the side yard setback line.

(Z)

          Zone Lot shall mean a parcel of land in single ownership that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use, and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by this chapter.

          Zoning Official shall mean the person or persons authorized and empowered by the city to administer and enforce the requirements of this chapter.

          Zoning District shall mean the same as "District".

          Zoning District, Change of shall mean the legislative act of removing one (1) or more parcels of land from one (1) zoning district and placing them in another zoning district on the Official Zoning Map.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8976, effective 06-08-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9208, effective 04-08-2009

Amended by Ordinance No. 9294, effective 05-31-2011

Amended by Ordinance No. 9534, effective 05-01-2015

Amended by Ordinance No. 9574, effective 03-15-2016


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



§36-9.  Reserved
§36-10.  Reserved
§36-11.  Reserved
§36-12.  Reserved
§36-13.  Reserved


 

Article III.  General Provisions

 

§36-14.  Planning Commission Recommendations
              Pursuant to state statutes, it shall be the purpose of the Planning Commission to recommend the boundaries of the various original districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein.

              The Commission shall make a preliminary report and hold public hearings thereon before submitting its final report, and the City Council shall not hold its public hearings or take action until it has received the final report of the Commission.

 

§36-15.  District Regulations, Restrictions, Boundary Creation
          No such regulation, restriction, or boundary shall become effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.  Notice of the time and place of such hearings shall be given by publication thereof in a paper of general circulation in the City at least one (1) time ten (10) days prior to such hearing.

 

§36-16.  Jurisdiction
              The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, and within the territory beyond said corporate limits as now or hereafter fixed, for a distance of two (2) miles, as established on the map entitled "The Official Zoning Map of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska", and as may be amended by subsequent annexation.

 

§36-17.  Provisions Declared to be Minimum Requirements
          In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare.  Whenever the provisions of this chapter require a lower height of building or lesser size of yards, courts or other spaces, or require a lower height of building or lesser number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required in any other regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.  Wherever the provisions of any other regulation requires a greater width or size of yards, courts, or other open spaces, or requires a lower height of building or a lesser number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required by the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of such chapter shall govern.

 

§36-18.  Zoning Affects Every Structure and Use

          No structure or land shall hereafter be reused and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless for a use expressly permitted by and in conformity with the regulations herein or as specified within the zoning district in which it is located, except that any structure damaged or destroyed may be restored if such structure does not involve a non-conforming use.

 

§36-19.  Lot
          Every structure hereafter erected, reconstructed, converted, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot or lot of record and in no case shall there be more than one (1) principal building on a lot unless otherwise provided.

 

§36-20.  Reductions in Lot Area Prohibited
          Every building hereafter erected, reconstructed, converted, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot or lot of record and in no case shall there be more than one (1) principal building on a lot unless otherwise provided.

 

§36-21.  Obstructions to Vision at Street Intersections Prohibited
          Obstructions on corner lots that impede vision in the sight triangle are prohibited. The requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall.

 

§36-22.  Yard Requirements
          (A) Yard requirements shall be set forth under the Schedule of Lot, Yard, and Bulk Requirements for each zoning district. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations hereinafter indicated and shall be unobstructed from the ground level to the sky, except as herein permitted.

 (B) All accessory buildings that are attached to principal buildings (e.g., attached garages) shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building, as  otherwise specified. Residential Garages with overhead doors facing the street shall provide a 25 foot setback between the garage door and the property line.

(C) Front Yard: There shall be a front yard setback as required herein, provided, that where fifty percent or more of the frontage on one street in any block is built up with buildings, no new building setback shall be less than either the required setback or the setback of any existing building which next exceeds the required setback, whichever is greater. This regulation shall not require a setback of more than 50 feet, and in blocks where the lots have a street frontage of 100 feet or more the regulation shall not require a setback of more than 30 feet.

          (D) Side Yard: Any interior side yard may be reduced to zero; provided, that the opposite side yard meets the required interior side yard setback. Where the zero side yard setback is used, the abutting property must be held under the same ownership at the time of initial construction or the owners of the abutting property must be agreeable to the zero setback. A separation of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided between adjacent structures on abutting sites where the zero side yard setback is utilized. This requirement shall not apply in an RD Zone or where the same interior property line is utilized for zero side yard construction on both properties.

          For the purpose of upkeep and repair of structures located on an interior property line, a four (4) foot maintenance easement shall be recorded between the owner of the property containing said structure and the owner of the property upon which entry must take place in order to perform maintenance activities. Such easement shall be an irrevocable covenant and shall run with the land. Proof of said recorded easement shall be submitted to the Building Department prior to issuance of a building permit.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 01-05-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9294, effective 05-31-2011

Amended by Ordinance No. 9689, effective 06-12-2018

§36-23.  Through Lots
Through Lots shall follow the following criteria:

          (A) Where a through lot abuts a major thoroughfare and access is made from the other frontage street and access along said thoroughfare is restricted, the rear yard setback for fences and screening devices shall be zero feet. The rear yard setback for accessory buildings shall follow the prescribed setback within the zoning district.

          (B) Where a through lot is part of a triple frontage lot and abuts a major thoroughfare, the rear yard shall meet the standards of §36-23(A), while the other two frontages shall be treated as a corner lot with a front yard setback and a street side yard setback.

          (C) Where a through lot occurs, other than along a major thoroughfare, the following shall apply:

   (1) Where all principal structures in the development face the same frontage, then the rear yard setback for fences and screening shall be zero feet and all accessory buildings shall meet the prescribed setback within the zoning district. This shall apply similarly at triple frontage lots, provided the remaining two frontages are treated like a typical corner lot.

   (2) Where principal structures face different directions along both frontages, the rear yard setback for fences and screening shall be the same as any prescribed rear yard setback within the zoning district. This shall apply similarly at triple frontage lots, provided the remaining two frontages are treated like a typical corner lot. All accessory buildings in this condition, shall comply with the minimum rear yard setbacks rather than the reduced setback allowed for accessory buildings.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

 

§36-24.   Interpretation of Regulations

          The planning director and chief building official together are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code.  The planning director and building official together shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions.  Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code.  Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9294, effective 05-31-2011


§36-25.  Permitted Obstructions in Required Yards
The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards:

          (A) All Yards: Steps and accessibility ramps used for wheelchair and other assisting devices which are four (4) feet or less above grade which are necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a lot from a street or alley; chimneys and window wells projecting twenty-four (24) inches or less into the yard; approved freestanding signs; arbors and trellises; flag poles; window unit air conditioners projecting not more than eighteen (18) inches into the required yard; and fences or walls subject to applicable height restrictions are permitted in all yards.

          (B) Front Yards: Bay windows projecting three (3) feet or less into the yard are permitted.

Rear and Side Yards: Open off-street parking spaces or outside elements of central air conditioning systems.

          (C) Building Groupings: For the purpose of the side yard regulation a group of business or industrial buildings separated by a common party wall shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one (1) lot.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

 

§36-26.  Projections from Buildings

(A) Cornices, eaves, canopies, belt courses, sills, ornamental features, and other similar architectural features may project not more than one (1) foot into any required yard or into any required open space, except that eaves may encroach three (3) feet into a yard when such yard is ten (10) feet or more in width, provided that such required yard or open space meets the current minimum yard standards.

(B) Open, uncovered porches or terraces may extend three feet into any required side yard, ten feet into any required front yard, and any distance into any required rear yard. No railing or other barrier higher than 42 inches shall be placed on such porch or terrace within five feet of any property line except as provided within this ordinance. Any such porch or terrace located on a lot at the intersection of two streets or a street and an alley shall comply with the provisions designed to insure proper sight distances as set forth in this chapter for fences and hedges. A covered porch or terrace, not exceeding sixty square feet, may extend a maximum of six feet into the required front or rear yard, provided, such porch or terrace shall not be enclosed except by a railing or other barrier as previously mentioned.

          (C) Provided further, that no railing or other barrier shall be placed around such deck or porch in a rear yard or side yard and no such barrier which interferes appreciably (more than twenty-five (25) percent) with the passage of light or air shall be constructed within the required front yard or within five (5) feet of any side or rear yard lot line. Any such deck or porch when located on a lot at the intersection of two (2) streets or a street and an alley, shall comply with the provisions designed to ensure proper sight distances as set forth in this code for fences and hedges. Any side yard on a corner lot when such yard is twenty (20) feet or more in width, may be considered as a front yard for purposes of determining permitted encroachments as provided herein.

          (D) Vertical supports shall meet the City’s Building Code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8976, effective 06-08-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9202, effective 02-15-2009

 

§36-27.  Accessory Building and Uses
          (A) Accessory buildings shall not be located within the required front yard setback of the lot and or within an easement.
          (B) An accessory building on a corner lot shall have a setback from all public streets equal to or greater than the requirement for the existing principal building.
          (C) There shall be a minimum setback of six (6) feet between accessory buildings.
          (D) If an accessory building has a door opening of over six (6) feet in width on a side parallel to an alley, then such accessory building shall be located not less than eight (8) feet from the lot line abutting the alley.
          (E) Detached accessory buildings shall not be allowed on more than 50% of the allowable lot coverage and no single detached accessory building shall exceed 35% of the allowable lot coverage (e.g. A 52.8' x 132' [6969.6 sq. ft.] lot in an R2 zoning district [35% allowable coverage] could cover 2438.31 sq. ft. of the lot with buildings. 1219.155 of that could be devoted to detached accessory buildings with no single building exceeding 853.4085 sq. ft.)
          (F) Detached accessory buildings on parcels or lots with less than five (5) buildable acres shall not exceed the height of the principal building by more than 25% (e.g. a house with a peak height of 16 feet could have an accessory building with a peak height of 20 feet.)
          (G) Detached accessory buildings on parcels or lots with five (5) or more buildable acres shall be limited by the height regulations that apply to the zoning district.
          (H) In Business and Manufacturing Zoning Districts:
          (1) Accessory buildings shall comply with all requirements of this code for the principal building.

(I) In Agricultural and Residential Zoning Districts:
          (1) Accessory buildings shall be permitted only on the same platted lot as the principal building.  (2)Accessory buildings shall comply with all requirements of this code for the principal building if located within fifteen (15) feet of the principal building or when any part of the accessory building is located in the area between the required front yard setback and a line extending from the back of the principal building to the side lot line.
          (3) Accessory buildings on lots with a width of 100 feet or more shall have a minimum side and rear yard of five feet.
          (4) Accessory buildings on lots with a width of less than 100 feet shall have a minimum side and rear yard of two feet.

          (J) No accessory building shall be constructed prior to beginning construction of the principal building. No accessory building shall be used unless the main building is under construction; however, in no event shall such building be used as a dwelling unless a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such use.
          (K) Regulation of accessory uses shall be as follows:
          (1) Except as herein provided, no accessory building shall project beyond a required yard line along any street.
          (2) Any accessory building built within fifteen (15) feet of the principal structure shall meet all the requirements for the principal structure.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9419, effective 02-15-2013

 

§36.27.01  Portable Storage Units  For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
          Definitions:
          Portable storage unit shall mean any container designed for the storage of personal property which is typically rented to owners or occupants of residential (single or multi-family) property for their temporary use and which is delivered and removed by truck.
          Site shall mean a piece, parcel, tract, lot, or plot of land occupied or to be occupied by one or more residential buildings or uses and their accessory buildings and accessory uses which generally considered to be one unified parcel.

 

§36.27.02  Number, Duration and Removal of Portable Storage Units for On-Site Storage.

                There shall be no more than one portable storage unit per site no larger than eight (8’) feet wide, twenty (20’) feet long and eight (8’) feet high. No portable storage unit shall remain at a site in a residential district in excess of fifteen (15) consecutive days.

                The building official may permit the placement of a portable storage container on a residential property for more than twenty-one (21) days, subject to the building setback requirements, provided that the property owner has a valid building permit or had demonstrated that extenuating circumstances exist to justify the extension. Extenuating circumstances shall include but not be limited to, disaster such as tornado, flood or fire.

 

§36.27.03  Placement

                Portable storage units shall be placed only in the driveway or back yard and be set back a minimum of ten (10’) feet from the front property line or five (5’) feet from the rear property line.

 

§36.27.04  Signage

                Signs on any portable storage container shall not exceed two (2) in number not more than six (6’) square feet each, not to exceed one (1) per side. In the event that an extension of the twenty-one (21) day time limit for placement of a portable storage container on a residential property is granted by the building official, all signs must be removed or covered.

 

§36.27.05  Placard

                All portable storage containers must include a “placard” not to exceed one (1) square foot in area which is clearly visible from the right-of-way which includes the container identification number, date of its placement on the property, date that removal will be required, and a local or toll free telephone number of the company.

 

§36-28.  Permitted Modifications of Height Regulations
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to:

Belfries                                                      Public Monuments

Chimneys                                                  Ornamental Towers and Spires

Church Spires                                           Radio and Television

Conveyors                                                Towers less than 100 feet in height

Cooling Towers                                        Silos

Elevator Bulkheads                                Smoke Stacks

Fire Towers                                               Stage Towers or Scenery Lots

Water Towers and Standpipes              Tanks

Flag Poles                                                  Air-Pollution Prevention Devices

Mechanical Penthouses                          Helistop, Heliports, Helipads

 

When permitted in a zoning district, public or semi-public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, or schools may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet when each required yard line is increased by at least one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the zoning district in which the building is located.

 

§36-29.  Occupancy of Basements and Cellars
          No basement or cellar shall be occupied for residential purposes until the remainder of the building has been substantially completed.

 

§36-30.  Nonconforming Buildings and Uses; Continuation
          The lawful use of land or buildings existing on June 30, 1969, although such does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued except as provided herein, but if continuous operation is suspended, ceased or discontinued for a period of twelve months, any further use of said land or buildings shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.

 

§36-31.  Nonconforming Buildings and Uses; Repairs or Alterations
          No structural alterations shall be made to any building which will increase its degree of nonconformity except as may be ordered or required by law, ordinance or regulations. This shall not be construed to prohibit maintenance and repair work necessary to keep a building in sound condition.

 

§36-32.  Nonconforming Buildings and Uses; Change of Use
          If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to a different use if that use is more conforming in nature. No use or building shall be permitted to increase the degree of nonconformity. The principal permitted uses listed under a specific zoning district shall be interpreted to have the same degree of nonconformity in applying this chapter. A residential use located in an industrial zone shall be interpreted as having a high degree of nonconformity.

 

§36-33.  Nonconforming Buildings and Uses; Destruction and Reconstruction
          Any nonconforming building which has been damaged by fire, flood, wind, riot, or any other cause to an extent of more than fifty percent of its replacement value exclusive of land and foundation, at the time of such damage or destruction, shall not be reconstructed except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. If damage is less than fifty percent, it may be restored and used as before, provided, that such restoration is commenced within twelve months. If construction is not commenced within twelve months, the use of such land or building shall thereafter conform with the provisions of this chapter.

 

§36-34.  Nonconforming Buildings and Uses; Discontinuance or Abandonment
          A building, structure or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, which is, or hereafter becomes, vacant and remains unoccupied or is not used for a continuous period of twelve months, shall be conclusively presumed to have been discontinued and abandoned as a nonconforming use, and shall not thereafter be occupied or used except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.

 

§36-35.  Nonconforming Buildings and Uses; Extension of Nonconforming Uses
          The city council may, when it deems proper, permit repairs, alterations, extensions, expansions, and the remodeling or rebuilding of such structures or extensions or expansions of a land use in all cases where a refusal to do so would bring hardship to the owner or occupants and in all cases where justice requires the granting of the same. The city council may attach appropriate conditions to the granting of any such relief. Whenever a use district shall be hereafter changed, any then existing nonconforming use in such changed district may be continued or changed to a use permitted in that zoning district, provided, all other regulations governing the new use are complied with.

 

§36-36.  Fees
          All fees for any zoning or subdivision related action shall be required prior to the issuance or investigation of any said permit request. Fees shall be as set out in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

 

§36-37.  Reserved
§36-38.  Reserved
§36-39.  Reserved
§36-40.  Reserved

§36-41.  Reserved

§36-42.  Reserved

 

 

Article IV.  Zoning Districts and Official Map

 

§36-43.  Zoning Districts
          In order to regulate and restrict the height, location, size and type of buildings, structures and uses allowed on land in the City and the area within two miles of the corporate boundaries, the City is hereby divided into zoning districts.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9534, effective 05-01-2015

 

§36-44.  Provision for Official Zoning Map
                (A) The City is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words:  "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in §36-44 of the Grand Island City Code".

                If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in the zoning district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council.

                (B) In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council may by Ordinance adopt a new Official Zoning Map.  The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof.  The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor attested by the City Clerk and bearing the seal of the City under the following words:  "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map dated ______ and adopted by Resolution ______ on ________."

          Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.

 

§36-45.  Annexation

Any lands coming under the jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island as a result of annexation or addition shall immediately become classified in conformance with the zones noted herein and shall remain so zoned until an amendment to the official zoning map or this chapter shall place such land in a different zone or zones.

Equivalent Zones

Hall County Zone

Merrick County Zone

City of Grand Island Zone

AG-1, AG-2

AG-1, AG-2

AG

TA-1, TA-2

TA

TA

R1, R2

R1

LLR

HC, LC

C3

B2

L1

I-1

M1

GI

I-2

M2 (or M2-A)

RC

--

TD

AG-SC, AG-SE

--

AG-SC, AG-SE

AG-SI, SRC

--

AG-SI, SRC

PUD

--

CD-RD

 

 

§36-46.  Airport Approach and Turning Zones

              (A)       Height Restrictions: Notwithstanding height restrictions specified for any specific zone set forth herein, no building, vegetation, or use of land shall be constructed, moved in, or permitted to grow to a height exceeding the limits indicated on the zoning map entitled “Airport Approach and Turning Zone” as shown on a zoning map prepared by the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics, Engineering Division, dated November 12, 1974, revised January 17, 1985 and as amended July 17, 2002, by the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics Engineering Division for the Central Nebraska Regional Airport, Grand Island, Nebraska, and on file with the city clerk, which is part of this ordinance.

          Amended by Ordinance No. 9364, effective 03-01-2012

 

§36-47.  Reserved
§36-48.  Reserved
§36-49.  Reserved

 

 

Article V.  Zoning Districts

 

§36-50.  Zoning Districts; Use
For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Grand Island and its extra-territorial jurisdiction is hereby divided into 27 zoning districts, designated as follows:

AG-1                          Primary Agricultural Zone

AG-2                          Secondary Agricultural Zone

AG-SC                       Special Agricultural / Conservation Zone

AG-SE                        Special Agricultural / Events Zone

AG-SI                         Special Agricultural / Industrial Zone

SRC                            Special Recreation / Conservation Zone

TA                              Transitional Agricultural Zone

LLR                            Large Lot Residential Zone

R-1                             Suburban Residential Zone

R-2                             Low Density Residential Zone

R-3                             Medium Density Residential Zone

R3-SL                      Medium Density Small Lot Residential Zone

R-4                             High Density Residential Zone

RO                              Residential Office Zone

B-1                             Light Business Zone

B-2                             General Business Zone

AC                              Arterial Commercial Overlay Zone

B-3                             Heavy Business Zone

ME                             Industrial Estates Zone

M-1                            Light Manufacturing Zone

M-2                            Heavy Manufacturing Zone

M-3                            Mixed Use Manufacturing Zone

CD                              Commercial Development Zone

TD                              Travel Development Zone

RD                              Residential Development Zone

A                                 Airport Zone

GCO                           Gateway Corridor Overlay District

M and MD                Manufactured Home Overlay Zone

                                                                  Amended by Ordinance No. 9706, effective 10-2-2018

 

§36-51.  Zoning Districts; Boundaries
          The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska."  Said map and all explanatory matters thereon accompany and are hereby made a part of this chapter as if fully written herein.  The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, and attested by the City Clerk.  No changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map except as may be required by amendments to this chapter. Such changes shall be promptly indicated on the Official Zoning Map with the ordinance number, nature of change, and date of change noted on the map.

 

§36-52.  Rules for Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:

          (A) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;

          (B) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;

          (C) Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits;

          (D) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks;

          (E) Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines;

          (F) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated herein shall be so construed.  Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map;

          (G) Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered herein, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries;

          (H) Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership as of August 1, 2004, the Board of Adjustment may permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the zoning district line into the remaining portion of the lot.

 

§36-53.  Classification of Zoning Districts and Conformance with the Comprehensive
Development Plan
          Areas annexed into the corporate limits of Grand Island shall be zoned to conform to the Comprehensive Development Plan.

 

§36-54.  (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zone
          Intent: The (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zoning District regulations are intended to provide for the preservation of lands best suited for agricultural uses of all types including feed lots and the commercial feeding of livestock and accessory uses; to prevent encroachment of uses of land that could be mutually incompatible and continue to provide for agricultural uses as a major asset to the economy of the area of the use and conservation of agricultural land, to protect the value of such land, and to protect it from indiscriminate residential and urban development and other incompatible and conflicting land uses. The (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zoning District is also intended to conserve and protect the value of open space, wooded areas, streams, mineral deposits and other natural resources and to protect them from incompatible land uses and to provide for their timely utilization. The zoning district intends to provide for the location and to govern the establishment and operation of land uses that are compatible with agriculture and are of such nature that their location away from residential, commercial and industrial areas is most desirable. In addition, to provide for the location and to govern the establishment of residential uses which are accessory to and necessary for the conduct of agriculture and to provide the location and to govern the establishment and use of limited non-agricultural residential uses. Such non-agricultural residential uses shall not be so located as to be detrimental to or conflict with other uses that are named as permitted or conditional uses in this zoning district and are appropriate to other property in the area.

          The nature of the (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zoning District and the uses allowed outright or by conditional use permit precludes the provision of services, amenities and protection from other land uses which are afforded to residential uses by the regulations of other zoning districts, and it is not intended that the (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zoning District regulations afford such services, amenities and protection to residential uses located therein.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (AG-1) Primary Agriculture Zoning District:

(1) Agricultural operations, and the usual agricultural and farm buildings and structures, including the residences of owners and their families and any tenants and employees who are engaged in agricultural operations on the premises.

(a) State agencies shall govern all use of farm chemicals, including application of pesticides and herbicides, and applicants using restricted-use pesticides shall be required to be certified as required by law.

(b) The spreading of manure by a "farming" operation (as defined in §36-8 of this chapter)

(c) Agricultural operations having up to 1,000 animal units are considered a farm and are permitted by right, provided other requirements in this district are met and submission of a no-fee livestock registration permit to the Hall County Regional Planning Director is done.

(d) Operations having more than 301 animal units and up to 1,000 animal units shall locate at least 1,320 feet from a platted residential area, public park, recreational area, church, cemetery, religious area, school, and residential district.

(2) Ranch and farm dwellings, subject to §36-54(e)

(3) Recreational camps, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, country clubs, tennis courts, riding academies and other similar recreational uses

(4) Single family dwelling subject to §36-54(e)

(5) Utility substation, pumping station, water reservoir and telephone exchange

(6) Fire stations

(7) Churches, seminary and convent

(8) Public and parochial school; college

(9) Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities such as community centers, auditoriums, libraries, museums

(10) Private kennels and facilities, provided that all buildings and facilities be at least one hundred feet from the property line and three hundred feet from any neighboring residence

(11) Roadside stands offering agricultural products for sale on the premises

(12) Seed and feed sales, machine repair shop, livestock equipment construction and sales, as a primary occupation in conjunction with an agricultural operation and be operated on the premises

(13) Farm and industrial equipment sales

(14) Public and private riding academies provided that no stable, building or structure in which horses or other animals are kept are no closer than one hundred (100) feet from the property line

(15) All other Permitted Uses as indicated as permitted within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zoning District:

(1) Bed and breakfast residence subject to the following conditions in addition to those imposed by the City Council

(a) The bed and breakfast residence shall be within a conforming single-family dwelling

(b) Guest rooms shall be within the principal residential building only and not within an accessory building

(c) Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit plus one (1) off-street parking space for each sleeping room designated for guests. Such parking areas shall not be within the required front or side yards

(d) One (1) identification sign on not more than four (4) square feet of sign area shall be permitted

 (2) Publicly and privately owned dude ranches, forest and conservation areas, and golf driving ranges, motorized cart tracks, or other outdoor recreational areas such as gun clubs, and archery, trap and skeet ranges

(3) Industrial uses as provided in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto] and provided the following minimum conditions are met:

(a) Meets minimum lot requirements as established in this chapter

(b) Meets minimum off-street parking requirements as established by this chapter

(c) The lot(s) take access from an improved county road or highway or are along a developed public or private road that accesses an improved county road or highway

(4) Commercial uses as provided in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto] and provided the following minimum conditions are met:

(a) Meets minimum lot requirements as established in this chapter

(b) Meets minimum off-street parking requirements as established by this chapter

(c) The lot(s) take access from an improved county road or highway or are along a developed public or private road that accesses an improved county road or highway

(5) All other Conditional Uses as indicated within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto], provided the following minimum conditions are met:

(a) Meets minimum lot requirements as established in this chapter

(b) Meets minimum off-street parking requirements as established by this chapter

(c) The lot(s) take access from an improved county road or highway or are along a developed public or private road that accesses an improved county road or highway

(6) Radio, cellular and television towers and transmitters and subject to the Supplementary Regulations herein.

(7) Airports

(8) Manufacture of light sheet metal products including heating and ventilation equipment

(9) Manufacture and/or processing of agricultural products including but not limited to ethanol plants and mills

(10) Truck and freight terminals

(11) Commercial mining, quarries, sand and gravel pits and accessory uses

(12) Storage of trucks, tractors, and trailers engaged in the transportation of explosives

(13) Race tracks, drag strips and similar uses and associated accessory uses

(14) Wind Energy devices

(15) Community sewage disposal facilities

(16) Sanitary landfill siting or expansion conducted in a manner and method approved by the City Council provided said landfill is not closer than one thousand (1,000) feet to a municipal well and/or one mile to any village or city limits or any subdivision, addition or residence. See Supplementary Regulations herein.

(17) Lawn and garden nurseries

(18) Commercial kennels and facilities for the raising, breeding and boarding of dogs and other small animals, including exotic, non-farm and non-domestic animals, provided that all buildings and facilities be at least one hundred (100) feet from the property line and three hundred (300) feet from any neighboring residence.

(19) The spreading, stockpiling, or composting of dead livestock, sludge, by-products from manufacturing or any processing plant, and/or paunch manure on agricultural land by municipalities or operations inside or outside of the Grand Island jurisdiction

(20) The application of livestock manure within the jurisdiction of Grand Island by operations located outside Hall County

(21) Livestock feeding operations, subject to the licensure requirements, waste disposal requirements and recommendations of the State of Nebraska and the Land Use specifications of the Grand Island Comprehensive Development Plan

(22) Single wide manufactured homes may be permitted only when the land is used or intended to be used only for agricultural operations. All single wide manufactured homes require a conditional use permit which must be renewed periodically and which shall be subject to the conditions of the permit in districts where they are allowed. No single wide manufactured home on any type of foundation nor a double wide manufactured home without a permanent foundation shall constitute a farmstead that can be split from the large parcel per §36-54(e).

(C) Standards for Livestock Feeding Operations:

(1) The following setbacks and design standards are the minimum sanitation and odor practices for the City of Grand Island and its extra-territorial jurisdiction. In addition, the City Council of Grand Island, when considering the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, may impose more restrictive requirements. These requirements should consider such things as:

(a) property values

(b) dust

(c) lighting

(d) waste disposal

(e) dead livestock

(2) A Conditional Use Permit may be approved after public notice has been given and public hearing is conducted as required by law

(3) Agricultural operations of 1,000 animal units and under are considered a farm as defined in §36-8 and do not require a Conditional Use Permit, see §36-54(A)(1)(c) hereof

(4) All existing livestock feeding operations that have been granted a conditional use permit may expand within their designated level; except for the 20,000 animal units and above which requires a new Conditional Use Permit for each expansion beyond 20,000 animal units as outlined in Table 1, without applying for another conditional use permit. All new livestock feeding operations and those expanding to the next level shall require a Conditional Use Permit and shall be located no less than at a distance from non-farm residences or other residences not on an owner's property in any affected zoning district as hereafter described:

(a) Livestock feeding operations (LFO) will be categorized either as Environmentally Controlled Housing (ECH) operations or Open Lot Operations. Livestock feeding operations having more than one type of feeding operation at one location shall be categorized according to the operation which constitutes the majority of the total operation. Each operation type shall be classified in one of four levels according to total number of animal units in the operation at any one time. Levels will include:

Class I facility = 301 - 1,000 animal units

Class II facility = 1,001 – 5,000 animal units

Class III facility = 5,001 – 20,000 animal units

Class IV facility = 20,001 or more animal units

Livestock Feeding Operations having more than one type of feeding operation at one location shall be categorized according to the total number of animal units

 

TABLE 1: Livestock Feeding Operations Spacing and Distance (Distances given in feet)

Size of Proposed LFO in Animal Units.

Non-farm or Other Residence and Other LFOs (feet)

Class I

301-1000

ECH

1,320

OPEN

1,320

Class II

1001-5000

ECH

5,280

OPEN

2,640

Class III

5001-20,000

ECH

5,280

OPEN

2,640

Class IV

20,000+

ECH

7,920

OPEN

3,960

ECH = Environmentally Controlled Housing

OPEN = Open Lot Operations

(b) Livestock feeding operations having more than 1,000 animal units shall also locate at a distance as specified under the environmentally controlled housing or open lots, in Table 1 from a platted residential area, public park, recreational area, church, cemetery, religious area, school, historical site, and residential district

(c) All livestock feeding operations over 20,000 animal units shall be required to obtain a new Conditional Use Permit prior to any expansion, unless it meets the standards of the exceptions in the Exceptions Section

(d) The applicant shall have a Pre-Submission meeting with the Hall County Regional Planning Director and the Grand Island Building Director or his/her designee to discuss tentative plans and layouts prior to formal submission of the Conditional Use Permit for Livestock Feeding Operations

(i) A proposed site plan and conditions or requirements of this regulation pending approval of application for a proposed operation and waste disposal plan from the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (NDEQ) or any other applicable state agency

(ii) The applicant shall submit all pertinent materials and designs, as per the Conditional Use Permit application for Livestock Feeding Operations

(iii) The applicant shall file a copy of the proposed Operation and Maintenance Plan and proposed Manure Management Plan. The approved plans shall be submitted after NDEQ approval if different from the proposed. Said plans shall be filed with the Hall County Regional Planning Director

(iv) The applicant shall file a copy of all approved NDEQ plans and permits with the Hall County Regional Planning Director within thirty (30) days after they are issued by the NDEQ

(v) An annual manure management plan shall be submitted to the Hall County Regional Planning Director which shall follow "best possible management practices" as specified by NDEQ in order to protect the environment, as well as the health, safety and general welfare of the public and their property values

(vi) If stockpiling of animal waste and/or composting of dead carcasses, as per state statutes, is part of the manure management plan, the waste shall be maintained in an area as outlined in Table 1 of this section. Said area shall also be located on the proposed site plan indicated in Subsection (A) above

(vii) All ground surfaces within outside livestock pens shall be maintained to insure proper drainage of animal waste and storm or surface runoff in such a manner as to minimize manure from being carried into any roadway ditch, drainage area or onto a neighbor's property

(viii) In no event shall any manure storage unit or system be constructed where the bottom of the unit or system is either in contact with or below the existing water table where the unit or system is to be constructed. Application of manure in flooded areas of standing water shall be prohibited

(ix) All runoff or waste generated by a livestock feeding operation facility shall be contained within the associated farming operation, or, on the premises upon which the confined feeding facility or feedlot is located. The applicant must verify that all runoff control ponds, lagoons, methods of manure disposal and dust control measures are designed to minimize offal and air pollution, and avoid surface or groundwater contamination as regulated by the State of Nebraska

(x) The setbacks from a livestock feeding operation to any non-farm dwelling, other residence, or other livestock feeding operations are as follows in Table 2.

(5) Exceptions:

(a) Any Class I livestock feeding operation use in existence as of August 1, 2004, and which is located within the minimum space distance in Table 1 to any church, school, public use, other livestock feeding operation or single-family dwelling within the current class or to the next class may expand in animal units and/or land area under a Conditional Use Permit, provided the proposed expansion complies with all the following limitations:

(i) Such expansion will not decrease the distance from the livestock feeding operation use to any church, school, public use, other livestock feeding operation or single-family swelling not of the same ownership and not on the same premises with said livestock feeding operation which is less than the minimum prescribed spacing distance

(ii) Any physical expansion of the existing livestock feeding operation shall be immediately contiguous with the facilities of the existing livestock feeding operation

(iii) Such expansion may occur in phases over time, but in no event shall such expansion(s) result in a livestock feeding operation that is more than fifty (50) percent larger in animal units than the one-time capacity of the use which existed as of August 1, 2004. Any expansion beyond this limitation is prohibited unless a Conditional Use Permit for expansion that meets all requirements is heard by and authorized by the City Council

(iv) If such expansion results in such livestock feeding operation being required to obtain a new construction permit from NDEQ, introduction of additional animals shall be prohibited until said permit is issued by NDEQ or other applicable or successor agency has been issued and such livestock feeding operation shall be operated at all times in a manner consistent with the requirements of said permit and applicable regulations of this chapter.

(D) Accessory Uses: The following accessory buildings and uses are permitted in the (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zoning District.

(1) Buildings and uses customarily incidental to the permitted and conditional uses

(2) Home occupation

(3) Temporary buildings and uses incidental to construction work which shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work

(E) Lot Requirements and Intensity of Use: The following table lists the minimum lot requirements and maximum building requirements in an (AG-1) Primary Agricultural Zoning District. These requirements shall be followed unless otherwise modified.

 

 

 

 

Setbacks

 

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Uses

Min Lot Area (acres)

Min. Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear  Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side   Yard (feet)

Max. Lot Coverage

Min Lot Area per dwelling unit (sq. ft.)

Max. Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses

20

100

35

35

20

20

10%

20,000

351

Conditional Uses

20

100

35

35

20

20

10%

20,000

351

Agricultural Uses

1

100

35

35

20

20

10%

20,000

351

1 For structures intended for human occupancy, all others no restrictions.

2 The following requirements are allowed in specific situations within the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island. These requirements are:

(A)      Any person or persons who:

(1) owns a tract of 80 acres or more may sell one tract per 80 acres for a single family dwelling, providing such sale has not been previously exercised on the large tract; and/or

(2) owns an existing ranch or farm dwelling excluding a single-wide manufactured home that is ten years old or more may sell a tract containing such dwelling;

(3) providing the following space limitations are complied with:

 

 

 

 

Setbacks

 

 

Min Lot Area

(sq. ft.)

Min. Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear  Yard (feet)

Side   Yard (feet)

Max. Lot Coverage

Max. Building Height (feet)

20,000

100

30

25

15

25%

351

1 for structures intended for human occupancy, all others no restrictions.

(F) Prohibited Uses:

(1) Any use not specifically listed as a permitted principal use, conditional use or permitted accessory use.

(G) Supplementary Regulations:

(1) Residential dwelling units on non-agricultural land existing as of August 1, 2004, may construct accessory structures, make repairs, replace, remodel, rebuild, or replace the residential structure in case of damage regardless of the percent of damage or extent of structural change provided the use does not change.

(2) All new and existing livestock feeding operations and farms with livestock of 300 animal units or less shall require a no-fee livestock registration permit. In addition, all new or expanded Livestock Feeding Operations of over 1,000 animal units shall require a Conditional Use Permit as subject to §36-54(C).

(a) New non-farm residences in the AG-1 or AG-2 districts shall be located no less than at the following distances as those shown in Table 2: Non-farm Residence Spacing and Distance, from an existing agricultural operation having between 50 and 300 animal units and an LFO based upon the type of operation.

TABLE 2: NON-FARM RESIDENCE SPACING AND DISTANCE (Distances given in feet)
 

SIZE OF EXISTING AGRICULTURAL OPERATION AND LFO IN A.U.

 

100-300

301-1,000

1,001-5,000

5,001-10,000

10,000+

New Non-farm Residence

0

1,980

3,960

3,960

5,940

 

 

§36-55.  (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zone
          Intent: The (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zoning District regulations are intended to provide for the preservation of lands best suited for agricultural uses of all types including feed lots and the commercial feeding of livestock to specific limits and accessory uses; to prevent encroachment of uses of land that could be mutually incompatible and continue to provide for agricultural uses as a major asset to the economy of the area of the use and conservation of agricultural land, to protect the value of such land, and to protect it from indiscriminate residential and urban development and other incompatible and conflicting land uses. The (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zoning District is also intended to conserve and protect the value of open space, wooded areas, streams, mineral deposits and other natural resources and to protect them from incompatible land uses and to provide for their timely utilization. The zoning district intends to provide for the location and to govern the establishment and operation of land uses that are compatible with agriculture and are of such nature that their location away from residential, commercial and industrial areas is most desirable. In addition, to provide for the location and to govern the establishment of residential uses which are accessory to and necessary for the conduct of agriculture and to provide the location and to govern the establishment and use of limited non-agricultural residential uses. Such non-agricultural residential uses shall not be so located as to be detrimental to or conflict with other uses that are named as permitted or conditional uses in this zoning district and are appropriate to other property in the area.

          The nature of the (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zoning District and the uses allowed outright or by conditional use permit precludes the provision of services, amenities and protection from other land uses which are afforded to residential uses by the regulations of other zoning districts, and it is not intended that the AG-2 Secondary Agricultural Zoning District regulations afford such services, amenities and protection to residential uses located therein.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (AG-2) Secondary Agriculture Zoning District.

(1) Agricultural operations, and the usual agricultural and farm buildings and structures, including the residences of owners and their families and any tenants and employees who are engaged in agricultural operations on the premises

(a) State agencies shall govern all use of farm chemicals, including application of pesticides and herbicides, and applicants using restricted-use pesticides shall be required to be certified as required by law

(b) The spreading of manure by a "farming" operation (as defined in §36-8 of this chapter)

(c) Agricultural operations having up to 300 animal units are considered a farm and are permitted by right, provided other requirements in this zoning district are met and submission of a no-fee livestock registration permit to the Hall County Regional Planning Director is done

(d) Operations having up to 300 animal units shall locate at least 300 feet from a platted residential area, public park, recreational area, church, cemetery, religious area, school, and residential district

(2) Ranch and farm dwellings, subject to §36-55(e)

(3) Recreational camps, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, country clubs, tennis courts, and other similar recreational uses

(4) Single family dwelling subject to §36-55(e)

(5) Utility substation, pumping station, water reservoir and telephone exchange

(6) Fire stations

(7) Churches, seminary and convent

(8) Public and parochial school; college

(9) Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities such as community centers, auditoriums, libraries, museums

(10) Private kennels and facilities, provided that all buildings and facilities be at least one hundred feet from the property line and three hundred feet from any neighboring residence

(11) Roadside stands offering agricultural products for sale on the premises

(12) Seed and feed sales, machine repair shop, livestock equipment construction and sales, as a primary occupation in conjunction with an agricultural operation and be operated on the premises

(13) Farm and industrial equipment sales

(14) Public and private riding academies provided that no stable, building or structure in which horses or other animals are kept are no closer than one hundred (100) feet from the property line

(15) All other Permitted Uses as indicated as permitted within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zoning District:

(1) Bed and breakfast residence subject to the following conditions in addition to those imposed by the City Council

(a) The bed and breakfast residence shall be within a conforming single-family dwelling

(b) Guest rooms shall be within the principal residential building only and not within an accessory building

(c) Each room that is designated for guest occupancy must be provided with a smoke detector which is kept in good working order

(d) Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit plus one (1) off-street parking space for each sleeping room designated for guests. Such parking areas shall not be within the required front or side yards

(e) One (1) identification sign on not more than four (4) square feet of sign area shall be permitted

(2) Publicly and privately owned dude ranches, forest and conservation areas, and golf driving ranges, motorized cart tracks, or other outdoor recreational areas such as gun clubs, and archery, trap and skeet ranges

(3) Industrial uses as provided in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto] and the following minimum conditions are met:

(a) Meets minimum lot requirements as established in this chapter

(b) Meets minimum off-street parking requirements as established by this chapter

(c) The lot(s) take access from an improved county road or highway or are along a developed public or private road that accesses an improved county road or highway

(4) Commercial uses as provided in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto] and the following minimum conditions are met:

(a) Meets minimum lot requirements as established in this chapter

(b) Meets minimum off-street parking requirements as established by this chapter

(c) The lot(s) take access from an improved county road or highway or are along a developed public or private road that accesses an improved county road or highway

(5) All other Conditional Uses as indicated within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto], provided the following minimum conditions are met:

(a) Meets minimum lot requirements as established in this chapter

(b) Meets minimum off-street parking requirements as established by this chapter

(c) The lot(s) take access from an improved county road or highway or are along a developed public or private road that accesses an improved county road or highway

(6) Development of natural resources and the extraction of raw materials such as rock, gravel, sand, etc., including gas and oil extraction and exploration, and subject to the requirements of the Supplementary Regulations herein

(7) Radio, cellular and television towers and transmitters and subject to the requirements of the Supplementary Regulations herein

(8) Airports

(9) Manufacture of light sheet metal products including heating and ventilation equipment

(10) Manufacture and/or processing of agricultural products including but not limited to ethanol plants and mills

(11) Truck and freight terminals

(12) Commercial mining, quarries, sand and gravel pits and accessory uses

(13) Storage of trucks, tractors, and trailers engaged in the transportation of explosives

(14) Race tracks, drag strips and similar uses and associated accessory uses

(15) Wind Energy devices

(16) Community sewage disposal facilities

(17) Sanitary landfill siting or expansion conducted in a manner and method approved by the City Council provided said landfill is not closer than one thousand (1,000) feet to a municipal well and/or one mile to any village or city limits or any subdivision, addition or residence. See the Supplementary Regulations herein

(18) Lawn and garden nurseries

(19) Commercial kennels and facilities for the raising, breeding and boarding of dogs and other small animals, including exotic, non-farm and non-domestic animals, provided that all buildings and facilities be at least one hundred (100) feet from the property line and three hundred (300) feet from any neighboring residence.

(20) The spreading, stockpiling, or composting of dead livestock, sludge, by-products from manufacturing or any processing plant, and/or paunch manure on agricultural land by municipalities or operations inside or outside of the Grand Island jurisdiction

(21) The application of livestock manure within the jurisdiction of Grand Island by operations located outside Hall County

(22) Livestock feeding operations, subject to the licensure requirements, waste disposal requirements and recommendations of the State of Nebraska and the Land Use specifications of the Grand Island Comprehensive Development Plan

(C) Standards for Livestock Feeding Operations:

(1) The following setbacks and design standards are the minimum sanitation and odor practices for Grand Island and its extra territorial jurisdiction. In addition, the City Council of Grand Island, when considering the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, may impose more restrictive requirements. These requirements should consider such things as:

(a) property values

(b) dust

(c) lighting

(d) waste disposal

(e) dead livestock

(2) A Conditional Use Permit may be approved after public notice has been given and public hearing is conducted as required by law

(3) Agricultural operations of 300 animal units and under are considered a farm as defined in these regulations and do not require a Conditional Use Permit, see §36-8 of this chapter

(4) All existing livestock feeding operations over 300 animal units shall be required to meet specific density requirements for a Class I facility. These density requirements are:

(a) One (1) acre of ground for the first animal unit and one-half (1/2) acre for each additional animal unit. Class II, III, IV facilities are not permitted in the (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zoning District

(5) All existing livestock feeding operations that have been granted a conditional use permit may expand within their designated level, as outlined in Table 1, without applying for another conditional use permit. All new livestock feeding operations and those expanding to the next level shall require a Conditional Use Permit and shall be located no less than at a distance from non-farm residences or other residences not on an owner's property in any affected zoning district as hereafter described:

(a) Livestock feeding operations (LFO) will be categorized either as Environmentally Controlled Housing (ECH) operations or Open Lot Operations. Livestock feeding operations having more than one type of feeding operation at one location shall be categorized according to the operation which constitutes the majority of the total operation. Each operation type shall be classified in one of four levels according to total number of animal units (A.U.) in the operation at any one time. Levels will include:

Class I facility = 301 - 1,000 animal units

Class II facility = 1,001 – 5,000 animal units

Class III facility = 5,001 – 20,000 animal units

Class IV facility = 20,001 or more animal units

Livestock feeding operations having more than one type of feeding operation at one location shall be categorized according to the total number of animal units

 

TABLE 3: Livestock Feeding Operations Spacing and Distance (Distances given in feet)

Size of Proposed LFO in Animal Units

Non-farm or Other Residence and Other LFOs (feet)

Class I

301-1000

ECH

1,320

OPEN

1,320

Class II

1001-5000

ECH

Not allowed in the AG-2 Zoning District

OPEN

Not allowed in the AG-2 Zoning District

Class III

5001-20,000

ECH

Not allowed in the AG-2 Zoning District

OPEN

Not allowed in the AG-2 Zoning District

Class IV

20,000+

ECH

Not allowed in the AG-2 Zoning District

OPEN

Not allowed in the AG-2 Zoning District

ECH = Environmentally Controlled Housing

OPEN = Open Lot Operations

(b) The applicant shall have a Pre-Submission meeting with the Hall County Regional Planning Director and the Grand Island Building Director or his/her designee to discuss tentative plans and layouts prior to formal submission of the Conditional Use Permit for Livestock Feeding Operations

(i) A proposed site plan and conditions or requirements of this regulation pending approval of application for a proposed operation and waste disposal plan from the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (NDEQ) or any other applicable state agency

(ii) The applicant shall submit all pertinent materials and designs, as per the Conditional Use Permit application for Livestock Feeding Operations

(iii) The applicant shall file a copy of the proposed Operation and Maintenance Plan and proposed Manure Management Plan. The approved plans shall be submitted after NDEQ approval if different from the proposed. Said plans shall be filed with the Hall County Regional Planning Director

(iv) The applicant shall file a copy of all approved NDEQ plans and permits with the Hall County Regional Planning Director within thirty (30) days after they are issued by the NDEQ

(v) An annual manure management plan shall be submitted to the Hall County Regional Planning Director which shall follow "best possible management practices" as specified by NDEQ in order to protect the environment, as well as the health, safety and general welfare of the public and their property values

(vi) If stockpiling of animal waste and/or composting of dead carcasses, as per state statutes, is part of the manure management plan, the waste shall be maintained in an area as outlined in Table 1 of this section. Said area shall also be located on the proposed site plan.

(vii) All ground surfaces within outside livestock pens shall be maintained to insure proper drainage of animal waste and storm or surface runoff in such a manner as to minimize manure from being carried into any roadway ditch, drainage area or onto a neighbor's property

(viii) In no event shall any manure storage unit or system be constructed where the bottom of the unit or system is either in contact with or below the existing water table where the unit or system is to be constructed. Application of manure in flooded areas of standing water shall be prohibited

(ix) All runoff or waste generated by a livestock feeding operation facility shall be contained within the associated farming operation, or, on the premises upon which the confined feeding facility or feedlot is located. The applicant must verify that all runoff control ponds, lagoons, methods of manure disposal and dust control measures are designed to minimize offal and air pollution, and avoid surface or groundwater contamination as regulated by the State of Nebraska

(x) The setbacks from a livestock feeding operation to any non-farm dwelling, other residence, or other livestock feeding operation are as follows in Table 3.

(5) Exceptions:

(a) Any Class I livestock feeding operation use in existence as of August 1, 2004, and which is located within the minimum spacing distance in Table 1 to any church, school, public use, other livestock feeding operation or single-family dwelling within the current class or to the next class may expand in animal units and/or land area under a Conditional Use Permit, provided the proposed expansion complies with all the following limitations:

(i) Such expansion will not decrease the distance from the livestock feeding operation use to any church, school, public use, other livestock feeding operation or single-family dwelling not of the same ownership and not on the same premises with said livestock feeding operation which is less than the minimum prescribed spacing distance

(ii) Any physical expansion of the existing livestock feeding operation shall be immediately contiguous with the facilities of the existing livestock feeding operation

(iii) Such expansion may occur in phases over time, but in no event shall such expansion(s) result in a livestock feeding operation that is more than fifty (50) percent larger in animal units than the one-time capacity of the use which existed as of August 1, 2004. Any expansion beyond this limitation is prohibited unless a Conditional Use Permit for expansion that meets all requirements is heard by and authorized by the City Council of Grand Island

(iv) If such expansion results in such livestock feeding operation being required to obtain a new construction permit from NDEQ, introduction of additional animals shall be prohibited until said permit is issued by NDEQ or other applicable or successor agency has been issued and such livestock feeding operation shall be operated at all times in a manner consistent with the requirements of said permit and applicable regulations of this chapter

(D) Accessory Uses: The following accessory buildings and uses are permitted in the (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zoning District.

(1) Buildings and uses customarily incidental to the permitted and conditional uses

(2) Home occupation

(3) Temporary buildings and uses incidental to construction work which shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work

(E) Lot Requirements and Intensity of Use: The following table lists the minimum lot requirements and maximum building requirements in an (AG-2) Secondary Agricultural Zoning District. These requirements shall be followed unless otherwise modified by this chapter.

 

 

 

 

Setbacks

 

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Uses

Min Lot Area (acres)

Min. Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear  Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side   Yard (feet)

Max. Lot Coverage

Min Lot Area per dwelling unit (sq. ft.)

Max. Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses

20

100

35

35

20

20

10%

20,000

351

Conditional Uses

20

100

35

35

20

20

10%

20,000

351

Agricultural Uses

1

100

35

35

20

20

10%

20,000

351

1 for structures intended for human occupancy, all others no restrictions.

2 The following requirements are allowed in specific situations within the jurisdiction of Grand Island. These requirements are:

 

(A)      Any person or persons who:

(1) owns a tract of 80 acres or more may sell one tract per 80 acres for a single family dwelling, providing such sale has not been previously exercised on the large tract; and/or

(2) owns an existing ranch or farm dwelling excluding a single-wide manufactured home that is ten years old or more may sell a tract containing such dwelling;

(3) providing the following space limitations are complied with:

 

 

 

Setbacks

 

 

Min Lot Area

(sq. ft.)

Min. Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear  Yard (feet)

Side   Yard (feet)

Max. Lot Coverage

Max. Building Height (feet)

20,000

100

30

25

15

25%

351

1 for structures intended for human occupancy, all others no restrictions.

(F) Prohibited Uses:

(1) Any use not specifically listed as a permitted principal use, conditional use or permitted accessory use.

(G) Supplementary Regulations:

(1) Residential dwelling units on non-agricultural land, may construct accessory structures, make repairs, replace, remodel, rebuild, or replace the residential structure in case of damage regardless of the percent of damage or extent of structural change provided the use does not change.

(2) All new and existing livestock feeding operations and farms with livestock of 300 animal units or less shall require a no-fee livestock registration permit. In addition, all new or expanded livestock feeding operations of over 300 animal units shall require a Conditional Use Permit.

(a) New non-farm residences in the AG-1 or AG-2 zoning districts shall be located no less than at the following distances as those shown in Table 4: Non-farm Residence Spacing and Distance, from an existing agricultural operation having between 50 and 300 animal units and a livestock feeding operation based upon the type of operation.

 

TABLE 4: NON-FARM RESIDENCE SPACING AND DISTANCE (Distances given in feet)
 

Size of Existing Agricultural Operation and Livestock Feeding Operation in Animal Units

 

100-300

301-1,000

1,001-5,000

5,001-10,000

10,000+

New Non-farm Residence

0

1,980

3,960

3,960

5,940

 

 

§36-56.  (AG-SC) Special Agriculture/Conservation Zone
          Intent: This special use zoning district is to maintain lands in a predominately agricultural use, yet allow for limited, low impact recreational uses associated with pedestrian and equestrian trails, in accordance with the Cornhusker Army Ammunition Plant (CAAP) Comprehensive Reuse Plan. Ranch and farm dwellings are not allowed due to Environmental Protection Agency issues with the CAAP site.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (AG-SC) Special Agriculture/Conservation Zoning District.

(1) Agricultural uses excluding feed lots and the commercial feeding of livestock

(2) Raising of field crops and horticulture

(3) Pedestrian and equestrian trails and associated low impact recreational uses, when consistent with the CAAP Comprehensive Land Use Plan

(4) Groundwater treatment facilities, contaminated soil remediation facilities

(5) All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as Permitted with the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (AG-SC) Special Agriculture/Conservation Zoning District.

(1) Utility substations, communication towers

(2) Flood control facilities/improvements

(3) Stock yard, feed yards and accessory uses – provided the use can meet the separation distances found in Table 3 in §36-55.

(4) All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Other buildings or uses accessory to a permitted use

 (D) Prohibited Uses:

(1) Any use not specifically listed as a permitted principal use, conditional use or permitted accessory use

(2) Ranch and/or farm dwellings


 

(E) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (acres)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
20

100

35

-

-

-

30%

-

Conditional Uses
20

100

35

-

-

-

30%

-

 

 (F) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary district regulations shall be complied with as required herein.

 

§36-57.  (AG-SE) Special Agriculture/Events Zone
          Intent: This special use zoning district is to allow for agricultural uses as well as special agricultural demonstration events, expositions and trade shows that require large land areas, in accordance with the Cornhusker Army Ammunition Plant (CAAP) Comprehensive Reuse Plan. Ranch and farm dwellings are not allowed due to Environmental Protection Agency issues with the CAAP site.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (AG-SE) Special Agriculture/Events Zoning District.

(1) Agricultural uses excluding feed lots and the commercial feeding of livestock

(2) Raising field crops and horticulture

(3) Agricultural related demonstration events, expositions and trade shows

(4) Pedestrian and equestrian trails and associated low impact recreational uses, when consistent with the CAAP Comprehensive Land Use Plan

(5) All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (AG-SE) Special Agriculture/Events Zoning District

(1) Utility substations, communication towers

(2) Flood control facilities/improvements

(3) All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Other buildings or uses accessory to a permitted use

(D) Prohibited Uses:

(1) Any use not specifically listed as a permitted principal use or permitted accessory use

(2) Ranch and/or farm dwellings


(E) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

Minimum Parcel Area (acres)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
20

100

35

-

-

-

65%

-

Conditional Uses
20

100

35

-

-

-

65%

-

 

(F) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary district regulations shall be complied with as required herein.

 

§36-58.  (AG-SI) Special Agriculture/Industrial Zone
          Intent: This special use zoning district is to allow for agricultural uses as well as manufacturing, processing, fabrication, research, warehousing, storage and wholesaling facilities in accordance with the Cornhusker Army Ammunition Plant (CAAP) Comprehensive Reuse Plan. Ranch and farm dwellings are not allowed due to the Environmental Protection Agency issues with the CAAP site.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (AG-SI) Special Agriculture/Industrial Zoning District.

(1) Agricultural uses excluding feed lots and the commercial feeding of livestock

(2) Raising of field crop and horticulture

(3) Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, research, warehousing, storage and wholesaling facilities

(4) Pedestrian and equestrian trails and associated low impact recreational uses, when consistent with the CAAP Comprehensive Land Use Plan

(5) Groundwater treatment facilities, contamination soil remediation facilities

(6) All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (AG-SI) Special Agriculture/Industrial Zoning District

(1) Industrial uses with more significant health and safety concerns: wrecking, scrap or garbage disposal/recycling yard; explosives manufacture or storage; chemical, acid or petroleum refining or storage; meat packing plants; milling and smelting of ores

(2) Utility substations, communication towers

(3) Flood control facilities/improvements

(4) Stock yards, feed yards and accessory uses provided the use can meet the separation distances found in Table 1 in §36-54

(5) All other Conditional Uses indicated conditional within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Other buildings or uses accessory to a permitted use or conditional use

(D) Prohibited Uses:

(1) Ranch and/or farm dwellings

(2) Any use not specifically listed as a permitted principal use, conditional use or permitted accessory use

(E) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (acres)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Agricultural Uses
20

100

35

-

-

-

65%

-

Non Agricultural Uses
1

100

35

-

-

-

65%

-

 

(F) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary district regulations shall be complied with as required herein.

 

§36-59.  (SRC) Special Recreation/Conservation Zone
          Intent: This zoning district use is to allow for special outdoor recreational shooting facilities, recreational vehicle campgrounds as well as low impact recreational uses associated with pedestrian and equestrian trails, in accordance with the Cornhusker Army Ammunition Plant (CAAP) Comprehensive Reuse Plan.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (SRC) Special Recreation/Conservation Zoning District.

(1) Agricultural uses excluding feed lots and the commercial feeding of livestock

(2) Raising of field crops and horticulture

(3) Low impact recreational uses associated with pedestrian and equestrian trails, when consistent with the CAAP Comprehensive Land Use Plan

(4) Recreational vehicle campgrounds

(5) Outdoor recreational shooting facilities

(6) All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (SRC) Special Recreation/Conservation Zoning District.

(1) Caretaker dwelling associated with outdoor recreational shooting facilities and recreational vehicle campgrounds

(2) All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Other buildings or uses accessory to a permitted use or conditional use

(D) Prohibited Uses:

(1) Any use not specifically listed as a permitted principal use, conditional use or permitted accessory use


(E) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (acres)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
20

100

35

35

20

20

30%

-

Conditional Uses
20

100

35

35

20

20

30%

-

 

(F) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary district regulations shall be complied with as required herein.

 

§36-60.  (TA) Transitional Agriculture Zone
          Intent: To provide for a transition from rural to urban uses, and is generally located on the fringe of the urban area. This zoning district permits both farm and non-farm dwellings at a maximum density of two dwelling units per acre, as well as other open space and recreational activities. The intent of the zoning district also would allow the raising of livestock to a limit and within certain density requirements.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses. The following principal uses are permitted in the (TA) Transitional Agriculture Zoning District.

(1) Dwelling units

(2) Raising of field crops, and horticulture

(3) Country clubs as defined in §36-8 of this chapter

(4) Recreational camps, public parks, and recreational areas

(5) Greenhouses and the raising of trees and nursery stock

(6) Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility (but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities) when located according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and having a ten foot landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties. Installation shall not be subject to minimum area or width regulations.

(7) Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or facilities

(8) The raising of livestock up to 300 animals as defined in Section 5-18 of this code provided that the owner has one-half (1/2) acre for each animal, and provided that the shelters, pens, enclosures for such animals are located no closer than 300 feet to a neighboring residential structure. The acres used for calculating the maximum number of animals must be capable of supporting pasture for grazing said animal.

(9) All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (TA) Transitional Agriculture Zoning District.

(1) Cemeteries, memorial parks, crematories, mausoleums, and columbariums

(2) Commercial mines, quarries, sand and gravel pits and accessory uses

(3) Public and quasi-public buildings and uses of an administrative, educational, religious, cultural, or public service facility, but not including hospitals, sanitoriums or corrective institutions

(4) Riding academies

(5) Recreational Vehicle Parks

(6) Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and similar facilities

(7) Towers

(8) Veterinary clinics and animal hospitals

(9) All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Guest building

(2) Customary home occupations

(3) Buildings, corrals, stables or pens in conjunction with the permitted uses

(4) Buildings for the display and sale of products grown or raised on the premises, provided, the floor area does not exceed 500 square feet

(5) Offices incidental to and necessary for a permitted use

(6) Other buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal uses

(7) Landscape contractor business with limited retail sales when the following conditions are met:

(a) The business accessory to a farm, and located on a farm size parcel (20 acres or more); and

(b) A sod farm, greenhouse, and/or tree farm operation is located on the site; and

(c) Total retail floor area within a building on the site does not exceed 1,000 square feet, and

(d) Total outdoor retail storage area for items not grown on site does not exceed 20,000 square feet, and

(e) Signage for the business shall be regulated by the Grand Island sign code for signs in a residential district, and

(f) Offstreet parking spaces shall be provided on site in a manner and number consistent with the requirements of the parking and loading standards included in this chapter for retail establishments.

(D) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (acres)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
20

100

30

25

15

20

20%

351

Conditional Uses
20

100

30

25

15

20

20%

351

1 for structures intended for human occupancy, all others no restrictions.

 

(E) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein

(2) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein

(3) The following requirements are allowed in specific situations within the jurisdiction of Grand Island:

   (i)    Any person or persons who:

(1) owns a tract of 80 acres or more may sell one tract per 80 acres for a single family dwelling, providing such sale has not been previously exercised on the large tract; and/or

(2) owns an existing ranch or farm dwelling that is ten years old or more may sell a tract containing such dwelling;

(3) providing the following space limitations are complied with:

 

 

 

Setbacks

 

 

Min Lot Area

(sq. ft.)

Min. Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear  Yard (feet)

Side   Yard (feet)

Max. Lot Coverage

Max. Building Height (feet)

20,000

100

30

25

15

25%

351

1 for structures intended for human occupancy, all others no restrictions.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005
Amended by Ordinance No. 9047, effective 6-7-2006

 

§36-61.  (LLR) Large Lot Residential Zone
          Intent: To provide for a transition from rural to urban uses, and is generally located on the fringe of the urban area. This zoning district permits residential dwellings at a maximum density of two dwelling units per acre, as well as other open space and recreational activities.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (LLR) Large Lot Residential Zoning District.

(1) Dwelling units

(2) Raising of field crops and horticulture

(3) Country clubs as defined herein

(4) Public parks

(5) Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility (but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities) when located according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and having a ten foot landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties. Installation shall not be subject to minimum area or width regulations.

(6) Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or facilities

(7) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious worship and instruction of a quiet nature

(8) All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (LLR) Large Lot Residential Zoning District.

(1) Greenhouses and the raising of trees and nursery stock

(2) Cemeteries, memorial parks, crematories, mausoleums, and columbariums

(3) Commercial mines, quarries, sand and gravel pits and accessory uses

(4) Riding academies

(5) Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and similar facilities

(6) Towers

(7) Veterinary clinics and animal hospitals

(8) All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Guest building

(2) Customary home occupations

(3) Buildings for the display and sale of products grown or raised on the premises, provided, the floor area does not exceed 500 square feet

(4) Offices incidental to and necessary for a permitted use

(5) Other buildings or uses accessory to the permitted principal uses

(D) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
20,000

20,000

100

30

25

15

20

25%

35

Conditional Uses
20,000

20,000

100

30

25

15

20

25%

35

 

(E) Miscellaneous Provisions

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein

(2) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

 

§36-62.  (R-1) Suburban Residential Zone
          Intent: To provide for residential neighborhoods at a maximum density of four to five dwelling units per acre with supporting community facilities.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses:

(1) Dwelling units

(2) Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale at retail of such products on the premises

(3) Public parks and recreational areas

(4) Country clubs as defined herein

(5) Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent to an elementary or higher educational level and colleges offering courses of general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other related living structures when located on the same site as the college.

(6) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious worship and instruction of a quiet nature

(7) Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility (but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities, and other general system facilities) when located according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and having a ten foot landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties.

(8) Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use

(9) Railway right-of-way but not including railway yards or facilities

(10) All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of grounds in the (R-1) Suburban Residential Zoning District as approved by City Council.

(1) Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and similar facilities

(2) Towers

(3) Off-street parking areas for schools and places of religious worship/instruction on lands adjacent to and within three hundred (300.0) feet of the principal building associated with the aforementioned uses.

(4) All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Guest buildings

(2) Customary home occupations

(3) Other buildings or uses accessory to the permitted principal uses

(D) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
9,000

9,000

70

25

20

10

12 ½

30%

35

Conditional Uses
9,000

9,000

70

25

20

10

12 ½

30%

35

 

(E) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein

(2) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein

 

§36-63.  (R-2) Low Density Residential Zone
          Intent: To provide for residential neighborhoods at a maximum density of seven dwelling units per acre with supporting community facilities.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (R-2) Low Density Residential Zoning District.

(1) Dwelling units

(2) Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale at retail of such products on the premises

(3) Public parks and recreational areas

(4) Country clubs as defined herein

(5) Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent to an elementary or higher educational level and colleges offering courses of general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other related living structures when located on the same site as the college

(6) Churches, synagogues, chapels and similar places of religious worship and instruction of a quiet nature

(7) Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities, and other general system facilities when located according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties.

(8) Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use

(9) Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or facilities

(10) All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (R-2) Low Density Residential Zoning District as approved by City Council.

(1) Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes and similar facilities

(2) Towers

(3) Off-street parking areas for schools and places of religious worship/instruction on lands adjacent to and within three hundred (300.0) feet of the principal building associated with the aforementioned uses.

(4) All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Customary home occupations

(2) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use

(D) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
6,000

6,000

50

25

20

5

12 ½

35%

35

Conditional Uses
6,000

6,000

50

25

20

5

12 ½

35%

35

 

(E) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein

(2) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein.

 

§36-64.  (R-3) Medium Density Residential Zone
                    Intent: To provide for residential uses at a maximum density of fourteen to fifteen dwelling units per acre with supporting community facilities. This zoning district is sometimes used as a transitional zone between lower density residential zones and higher density residential, office, business, or manufacturing zones.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (R-3) Medium Density Residential Zoning District.

(1) Dwelling units

(2) Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale at retail of such products on the premises

(3) Public parks and recreational areas

(4) Country clubs as defined herein

(5) Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent to an elementary or higher educational level and colleges offering courses of general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories and other related living structures when located on the same site as the college.

(6) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious worship and instruction of a quiet nature.

(7) Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties.

(8) Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use

(9) Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or facilities

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (R-3) Medium Density Residential Zoning District as approved by City Council.

(1) Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments other than those providing living accommodations

(2) Driveways, parking lots, or buildings when directly associated with or accessory to a permitted principal use in an adjacent zone.

(3) Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and similar facilities

(4) Towers

(5) Off-street parking areas for schools and places of religious worship/instruction on lands adjacent to and within three hundred (300.0) feet of the principal building associated with the aforementioned uses.

(6) All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Customary home occupations

(2) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use

 (D) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

MaximumBuilding Height (feet)

Permitted Uses

6,000

3,000

50

20

15

5

10

50%

35

Conditional Uses

6,000

3,000

50

20

15

5

10

50%

35

 

(E) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein

(2) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein.

§36-64.1  (R-3SL) Medium Density-Small Lot Residential Zone
          Intent: To provide for residential uses at a maximum density of fourteen to fifteen dwelling units per acre with supporting community facilities. This zoning district is sometimes used as a transitional zone between lower density residential zones and higher density residential, office, business, or manufacturing zones. Specifically this zoned is intended to provide market flexibility regarding lot size and housing configuration.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (R-3SL) Medium Density Small Lot Residential Zoning District.

(1) Dwelling units

(2) Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale at retail of such products on the premises

(3) Public parks and recreational areas

(4) Country clubs as defined herein

(5) Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent to an elementary or higher educational level and colleges offering courses of general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories and other related living structures when located on the same site as the college.

(6) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious worship and instruction of a quiet nature.

(7) Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties.

(8) Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use

(9) Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or facilities

(10) Off street parking lots for residents and guests

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (R-3SL) Medium Density Small Lot Residential Zoning District as approved by City Council.

(1) Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments other than those providing living accommodations

(2) Driveways, parking lots, or buildings when directly associated with or accessory to a permitted principal use in an adjacent zone.

(3) Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and similar facilities

(4) Towers

(5) Off-street parking areas for schools and places of religious worship/instruction on lands adjacent to and within three hundred (300.0) feet of the principal building associated with the aforementioned uses.

(6) All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Customary home occupations

(2) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use

D) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses

3,000

3,000

35

20*

15

5

10

50%

35

Conditional Uses

3,000

3,000

35

20*

15

5

10

50%

35

Attached Single Family Dwelling Units  3 or more attached)

2100

2100

34 exterior

24 interior

20*

15

10 exterior

lot

10

exterior lot

50%

35

 

(E) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein

(2) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein.

(3) Front yard setback may be reduced to 10 foot if paved access easements and parking (garage counts as parking) is provide at the back of each lot.

(4) Sideyard setback for attached single family dwellings shall be reduced to 0 feet on all lots with contiguous attached units

Added by Ordinance 9653, effective 10-11-2017

Amended by Ordinance No. 9706, effective 10-2-2018

 

§36-65.  (R-4) High Density Residential Zone
          Intent: To provide for residential uses at a maximum density of forty-three dwelling units per acre with supporting community facilities. This zoning district is also used as a transitional zone between lower density residential zones and office, business, or manufacturing zones.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses:

(1) Dwelling Units

(2) Boarding and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses

(3) Truck, bush and tree farming, provided there is no display or sale at retail of such products on the premises

(4) Public parks and recreational areas

(5) Country clubs as defined herein

(6) Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent to an elementary or higher educational level and colleges offering courses of general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories and other related living structures when located on the same site as the college.

(7) Churches, synagogues, chapels and similar places of religious worships and instruction of a quiet nature

(8) Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other general system facilities when located according to the yard space rules set forth in the section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such design as to harmonize with nearby properties.

(9) Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use.

(10) Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or facilities.

(11) Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishment.

(12) Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes and similar facilities

(13) All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (R-4) High Density Residential Zoning District as approved by the City Council.

(1) Driveways, parking lots or buildings when directly associated with or accessory to a permitted principal use in an adjacent zone.

(2) Towers

(3) Off-street parking areas for schools and places of religious worship/instruction on lands adjacent to and within three hundred (300.0) feet of the principal building associated with the aforementioned uses.

(4) Group Care Home for less than eight (8) individuals

(5) Elderly Home, Assisted Living

(6) All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Customary home occupations

(2) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal uses

(D) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
6,000

1,000

50

10

10

5

10

60%

80

Conditional Uses
6,000

1,000

50

10

10

5

10

60%

80

 

(E) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein

(2) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein.

 

§36-66.  (RO) Residential Office Zone
          Intent: To provide the highest density of residential uses as well as for various office, personal services and professional uses. This zoning district is also used as a transitional zone between lower density residential zones and business or manufacturing zones.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (RO) Residential Office Zoning District.

(1) Dwelling units

(2) Boarding and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses

(3) Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale at retail of such products on the premises

(4) Public parks and recreational areas

(5) Country clubs as defined herein

(6) Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent to an elementary or higher educational level, and colleges offering courses of general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other related living structures when located on the same site as the college.

(7) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious worship and instruction of a quiet nature

(8) Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties.

(9) Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use.

(10) Railway right-of-way but not including railway yards or facilities.

(11) Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments.

(12) Hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent or rest homes.

(13) Radio and television stations (no antennae), private clubs and meeting halls

(14) Vocational or trade schools, business colleges, art and music schools and conservatories, and other similar uses.

(15) Beauty parlors and barber shops.

(16) Office and office buildings for professional and personal services such as real estate, insurance, savings and loan associations, banks, accountants, architects, engineers, photographers, doctors, dentists, optometrists, chiropractors, podiatrists, etc.

(17) Retail activities shall be permitted but limited to uses pertaining to professional prescription services such as pharmacies, opticians, audiology, medical supply shops or items clearly accessory with the service such as picture frames to the photographer, shampoo and hair care items to the beauty and barber shop where retail space is limited to 20% of the total floor area

(18) Mortuaries, funeral homes, and funeral chapels.

(19) Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and similar facilities.

(20) Group Care Home with less than eight (8) individuals

(21) Elderly Home, Assisted Living

(22) All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (RO) Residential Office Zoning District as approved by City Council.

(1) Driveways, parking lots or buildings when directly associated with or accessory to a permitted principal use in an adjacent zone.

(2) Towers

(3) Off-street parking areas for schools and places of worship/instruction on lands adjacent to and within three hundred (300.0) feet of the principal building associated with the aforementioned uses.

(4) All other Conditional Uses indicated as conditional within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Customary home occupations

(D) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
6,000

-

50

10

10

5

10

75%

150

Conditional Uses
6,000

-

50

10

10

5

10

75%

150

 

(E) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein

(2) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein.

 

§36-67.  (B-1) Light Business Zone
          Intent: To provide for neighborhood shopping and service facilities this will serve the needs of the surrounding residential area. Residential uses are permitted at the density of the (R-4) High Density Residential Zoning District.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (B-1) Light Business Zoning District.

(1) Agencies as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(2) Boarding and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses

(3) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious worship and instruction of a quiet nature

(4) Colleges offering courses of general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other related living structures when located on the same site as the college

(5) Country clubs

(6) Dwelling units

(7) Elderly Home, Assisted Living

(8) Group Care Home with less than eight (8) individuals

(9) Hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent or rest homes

(10) Mortuaries, funeral homes, and funeral chapels

(11) Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments

(12) Office and office buildings for professional and personal services as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(13) Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and similar facilities

(14) Public parks and recreational areas

(15) Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent to an elementary or higher educational level

(16) Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use

(17) Radio and television stations (no antennae), private clubs and meeting halls

(18) Railroad right-of-way but not including railway yards or facilities

(19) Stores and shops that conduct retail business, provided, all activities and display goods are carried on within an enclosed building except that green plants and shrubs may be displayed in the open, as per the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(20) Truck, bush and tree farming, provided there is no display or sale at retail of such products on the premises

(21) Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties

(22) Vocational or trade schools, business colleges, art and music schools and conservatories, and other similar uses

(23) Other uses as indicated in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (B-1) Light Business Zoning District as approved by City Council.

(1) Towers

(2) Other uses as indicated in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use.

(D) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
3,000

30

10

10

5

10

75%

35

Conditional Uses
3,000

30

10

10

5

10

75%

35

 

(E) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.

(2) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein.

 

§36-68.  (B-2) General Business Zone
          Intent: The intent of this zoning district is to provide for the service, retail and wholesale needs of the general community. This zoning district will contain uses that have users and traffic from all areas of the community and trade areas, and therefore will have close proximity to the major traffic corridors of the City. Residential uses are permitted at the density of the (R-4) High Density Residential Zoning District.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (B-2) General Business Zoning District.

(1) Stores and shops that conduct retail business, provided, all activities and display goods are carried on within an enclosed building except that green plants and shrubs may be displayed in the open, as per the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(2) Office and office buildings for professional and personal service as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(3) Agencies as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(4) Dwelling units

(5) Board and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses

(6) Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale at retail of such products on the premises

(7) Public parks and recreational areas

(8) Country clubs

(9) Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent to an elementary or higher educational level

(10) Colleges offering courses of general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other related living structures when located on the same site as the college

(11) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious worship and instruction of a quiet nature

(12) Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties

(13) Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use

(14) Railway right-of-way but not including railway yards or facilities

(15) Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments

(16) Hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent or rest homes

(17) Radio and television stations (no antennae), private clubs and meeting halls

(18) Vocational or trade schools, business colleges, art and music schools and conservatories, and other similar use

(19) Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and similar facilities

(20) Group Care Home with less than eight (8) individuals

(21) Elderly Home, Assisted Living

(22) Stores and shops for the conduct of wholesale business, including sale of used merchandise

(23) Outdoor sales and rental lots for new and used automobiles, boats, motor vehicles, trailers, manufactured homes, farm and construction machinery, etc.

(24) Specific uses such as: archery range, billboards, drive-in theater, golf driving range, storage yard (no junk, salvage or wrecking)

(25) Manufacture, fabrication or assembly uses incidental to wholesale or retail sales wherein not more than 20% of the floor area is used

(26)  Parking Lots

(27) Other uses as indicated in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (B-2) General Business Zoning District as approved by City Council.

(1) Recycling business

(2) Towers

(3) Other uses as indicated in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Building and uses accessory to the permitted principal use.

(D) Space Limitations:

 

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
3,000

30

10

01

02

10

100%

55

Conditional Uses
3,000

30

10

01

02

10

100%

55

1 No rear yard setback is required if bounded by an alley, otherwise a setback of 10 feet is required.

2 No side yard setback is required, but if provided, not less than five feet, or unless adjacent to a parcel whose zone requires a side yard setback, then five feet.  When adjacent to a public alley, the setback is optional and may range from 0 feet to 5 feet.

 

(E) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein

(2) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

Amended by Ordinance No 9151, effective 12-18-2007

 

§36-69.  (AC) Arterial Commercial Overlay Zone
          Intent: The intent of this zoning district is to provide an overlay of the (B-2) General Business Zoning District in order to require increased front setbacks, landscaping, and the limitation of some uses within areas along entrance corridors of the city. As the name implies, the overlay will be most commonly used along an arterial street corridor.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (AC) Arterial Commercial Overlay District

(1) Agencies as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(2) Boarding and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses

(3) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious worship and instruction of a quiet nature

(4) Colleges offering courses of general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other related living structures when located on the same site as the college

(5) Country clubs

(6) Dwelling units

(7) Elderly Home, Assisted Living

(8) Group Care Home with less than eight (8) individuals

(9) Hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent or rest homes

(10) Manufacture, fabrication or assembly uses incidental to wholesale or retail sales wherein not more than 20% of the floor area is so used

(11) Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments

(12) Office and office buildings for professional and personal service as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(13) Outdoor sales and rental lots for new or used automobiles, boats, motor vehicles, trailers, manufactured homes, farm and construction machinery, etc.

(14) Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and similar facilities

(15) Public parks and recreational areas

(16) Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent to an elementary or higher educational level

(17) Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use

(18) Radio and television stations (no antennae), private clubs and meeting halls

(19) Railway right-of-way but not including railway yards or facilities

(20) Specific uses such as: archery range, drive-in theatre, golf driving range

(21) Stores and shops that conduct retail business, provided, all activities and display goods are carried on within an enclosed building except that green plants and shrubs may be displayed in the open, as per the Zoning Matrix (Attachment A hereto)

(22) Stores and shops for the conduct of wholesale business, including sale of used merchandise.

(23) Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale at retail of such products on the premises

(24) Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties

(25) Vocational or trade schools, business colleges, art and music schools and conservatories, and other similar uses

(26) Other uses as indicated in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (AC) Arterial Commercial Overlay District as approved by City Council.

(1) Towers

(2) Campgrounds including those serving recreational vehicles subject to following conditions:

  a) Developer shall submit a diagram of the proposed camp ground including a plot plan of the pads, landscaping plan, utility plan and interior street plan with the application for a conditional use permit

  b) A minimum of one toilet and one lavatory shall be provided for each sex up to the first 25 sites.  An additional toilet and lavatory for each sex shall be provided for each additional 25 sites or fraction thereof not provided with sewer connections.

  c) All RV pads shall be provided with a landscape buffer yard or street yard as identified in the landscaping section of this code.

  d) Pads shall not be accessible from any public way.

 

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal uses

(2) Automotive body repair may be accessory to new or used automotive sales or rental, provided, no outside storage of parts shall be permitted.

 (D) Space Limitations:

 

 

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses

5,000

50

20

01

02

10

80%

55

Conditional Uses

5,000

50

20

01

02

10

80%

55

1 No rear yard setback is required if bounded by an alley, otherwise a setback of 10 feet is required.

2 No side yard setback is required, but if provided, not less than 5 feet, or unless adjacent to a parcel whose zone requires a side yard setback, then 5 feet.

 

(E) Procedure:

(1) An application for an amendment to the arterial commercial zone on the Official Zoning Map shall follow all procedural requirements as set forth in this Section.

(F) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.

(2) Only one principal building shall be permitted on any one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein.

(3) Landscaping shall be provided and maintained within the 20 foot front yard setback. Landscaping shall mean lawn areas and may also include trees, shrubs, and flowers. Crushed or lava rock, gravel, bark chips, etc. shall not substitute for lawn area.

(4) All improvements and uses shall be designed to direct primary vehicular and pedestrian traffic to arterial street access and reduce such traffic on adjacent non-arterial streets and alleys.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 01-05-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9202, effective 02-15-2009

Amended by Ordinance No. 9349, effective 01-31-2012

 

§36-70.  (B-3) Heavy Business Zone
          Intent: The intent of this zoning district is to provide for the multiple uses within the central business district. Residential uses are permitted at the density of the (RO) Residential Office Zone.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (B-3) Heavy Business Zoning District.

(1) Agencies as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(2) Boarding and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses

(3) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious worship and instruction of a quiet nature

(4) Colleges offering courses of general instruction, including convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other related living structures when located on the same site as the college

(5) Country clubs

(6) Dwelling units

(7) Elderly Home, Assisted Living

(8) Group Care Home with less than eight (8) individuals

(9) Hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent or rest homes

(10) Hotel and motel uses

(11) Mortuaries, funeral homes, and funeral chapels

(12) Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments

(13) Office and office buildings for professional and personal services as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(14) Parking Lots

(15) Preschools, nursery schools, day care centers, children's homes, and similar facilities

(16) Public parks and recreational areas

(17) Public, parochial and private schools having a curriculum equivalent to an elementary or higher educational level

(18) Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use

(19) Radio and television stations (no antennae), private clubs and meeting halls

(20) Railway right-of-way but not including railway yards or facilities

(21) Retail activities of a prescriptive service provided it is limited to being secondary to said use. Retail space is limited to 25% of the total floor area

(22) Stores and shops that conduct retail business, provided, all activities and display goods are carried on within an enclosed building except that green plants and shrubs may be displayed in the open, as per the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(23) Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale at retail of such products on the premises

(24) Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties

(25) Vocational or trade schools, business colleges, art and music schools and conservatories, and other similar uses

(26) Other uses as indicated in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (B-3) Heavy Business Zoning District as approved by City Council.

(1) Manufacture, fabrication or assembly uses incidental to wholesale or retail sales wherein not more than 20% of the floor area is so used

(2) Outdoor sales and rental lots for new or used automobiles, boats, motor vehicles, trailers, manufactured homes, farm and construction machinery

(3) Stores and shops for the conduct of wholesale business, including sale of used merchandise.

(4) Towers

(5) Automobile body repair; subject to the following minimum standards:

      No storage of parts or unlicensed vehicles outside of an enclosed building.

      The facility shall meet or exceed all building and fire code requirements.

(6) Other uses as indicated in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use.

(D) Space Limitations:

 

 

 

 

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
3,000

30

10

01

02

10

100%

 

Conditional Uses
3,000

30

10

01

02

10

100%

 

1 No rear yard setback is required if bounded by an alley, otherwise a setback of 10 feet is required.

2 No side yard setback is required, but if provided, not less than 5 feet or unless adjacent to a parcel whose zone requires a side yard setback, then 5 feet.

 

(E) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.

(2) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

Amended by Ordnance No. 9166, effective 5-13-2008

Amended by Ordnance No. 9738, effective 7-10-2019

 

§36-71.  (ME) Industrial Estates Zone
                    Intent: The intent of this zoning district is to provide for a variety of manufacturing, truck, trailer, and truck/trailer parts retailing, truck, trailer, and truck/trailer parts wholesaling, warehousing, administrative and research uses within an area of comparatively high visibility and having quality standards to promote an industrial park atmosphere.
(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (ME) Industrial Estates Zoning District.
          (1) Any industrial/manufacturing use found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto] shall be permitted within this zoning district, provided, such use is in compliance with miscellaneous provisions and performance standards listed in this section, or unless specifically excluded, or a conditional use as listed below.
          (2) Administrative offices for the wholesale distribution of propane when bottles are filled from    bulk propane tanks not to exceed 70,000 gallons and when such tanks are installed to provide a source of heat for a building on the lot.

(3) Bus Garaging and Equipment Maintenance, Truck and Trailer Storage, Motor Freight Terminals

(4) Other uses found in Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]
(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (ME) Industrial Estates Zoning District as approved by the City Council.
          (1) Explosives manufacturing
          (2) Towers (radio, television, satellite, etc.)
          (3) Gravel, sand or dirt removal, stockpiling, processing or distribution and batching plant
          (4) Trade and vocational schools
          (5) Commercial Recreational Vehicle Storage
(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:
          (1) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal uses or approved permitted conditional 
          uses.
(D) Specifically Excluded Uses:
          (1) Automotive wrecking or salvage yards
          (2) Billboards
          (3) Churches, schools, institutions and other similar public and semi-public uses except for trade   and vocational schools
          (4) Concrete or cement products manufacturing and batching plants
          (5) Contractor's storage yard or plant
          (6) Milling or smelting of ores
          (7) Petroleum refining
          (8) Residential uses, any
          (9) Stock or feed yards and auction houses for livestock
          (10) Storage, dump, or yard for the collection, salvage or bailing of scrap paper, bottles, iron, rags,  junk, or any other materials
          (11) Storage of explosives
          (12) Storage tanks or facilities for fuel oils, petroleum, acids, flammable liquids and chemicals
          (13) Tanning, curing, or storage of hides or skins
 (E) Space Limitations:



 

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (acres)

Minimum LotWidth (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

MaximumBuilding Height (feet)

Permitted Uses

2.5

250

50

20

20

50

50%

50

Conditional Uses

2.5

250

50

20

20

50

50%

50

Through Lots shall require that the Front Yard Setback be met on both sides adjacent to streets.

(F) Miscellaneous Provisions:

          (1) Landscaping shall be provided in the entire area of all required front yards except for necessary paving of walkways and of driveways to reach parking and loading areas in the side or rear yards, provided, that any driveways in the front yard shall not be wider than thirty (30) feet. Landscaping shall include, but is not limited to, screen plantings, lawn area, pools, trees, shrubs, fences, and walls. Crushed rock, gravel, bark chips, etc., shall not substitute for lawn area.

          (2) Any outside storage of inoperable or unassembled parts or equipment shall be visually screened from the surrounding area by fences, walls, plantings, earth berm or other barrier and such screening shall be opaque.

          (3) No loading facilities shall be located within a required front yard. Loading facilities located between a building and an adjacent street or residential district shall be visually screened to the same standards as any outside storage.

          (4) No galvanized or other raw metal sheeting shall be used for the exterior construction of any principal or accessory building.

          (5) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.

          (6) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein.

                                                                        Amended by Ordinance No. 9047, effective 06-07-2006
                                                                                                      Amended by Ordinance No. 9154, effective 01-08-2008

                             Amended by Ordinance No. 9294, effective 05-31-2011

Amended by Ordinance No. 9295, effective 07-05-2011

 

§36-72.  (M-1) Light Manufacturing Zone
                   Intent: The intent of this zoning district is to provide for light fabrication, service, warehousing, administrative and research uses within a zoning district having generally limited public contact and requiring some minimal landscaping standards.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (M-1) Light Manufacturing Zoning District.

(1) Administrative, executive, professional, research and similar office use having limited contact with the public

(2) Agriculture, including the raising of field crops, tree and bush crops, animals and fowls, but not including feed lots, poultry farms, fur farms, and commercial kennels

(3) Buildings and installations for public utilities; facilities shall observe yard space requirements but shall not be subject to minimum area or width requirements

(4) Railway right-of-way, but not including railway yards or facilities

(5) Radio and television stations, private clubs, and meeting halls

(6) Manufacture, processing, assembly, fabrication or storage of non-hazardous products and materials

(7) Parking Lot

(8) Other uses found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (M-1) Light Manufacturing Zoning District as approved by City Council.

(1) Gravel, sand, or dirt removal, stockpiling, processing or distribution, and batching plant

(2) Concrete or cement products manufacturing and batching plant.

(3) Truck terminal, tractor, trailer, or truck storage, including maintenance facilities

(4) Contractor's storage yard or plant

(5) Motels and hotels

(6) Towers

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Sales of new merchandise when same is manufactured, processed, assembled, fabricated or stored on the premises

(2) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use

(3) A single dwelling unit occupying not more than 50% of the space located within the permitted principal structure on the property and not to exceed 750 square feet. Building shall conform to all building and life safety codes necessary for the mix of uses.

.

(D) Specifically Excluded Uses:

(1) Residences as a principal use

(2) Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks

(3) Churches, schools, institutions and other public and semi-public uses except for trade and vocational schools

(E) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses

20,000

100

351

20

10

10

50%

50

Conditional Uses

20,000

100

351

20

10

10

50%

50

1with 15 feet adjacent to a street landscaped to satisfaction of the zoning official.

(F) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein

(2) Landscaping shall be provided and maintained by the owner or developer within the 15 feet adjacent to a street; landscaping shall include but is not limited to, screen planting, lawn area, trees, shrubs, fences and walls; all landscaping shall be planned and maintained to the satisfaction of the zoning official.

(3) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9256, effective 4-7-2010

Amended by Ordinance No. 9706, effective 10-2-2018

 

§36-73.  (M-2) Heavy Manufacturing Zone
          Intent: The intent of this zoning district is to provide for the greatest amount of manufacturing, warehousing, wholesaling and business uses. Conditional use permits are required for those uses with more significant health and safety concerns.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses:

(1) Administrative, executive, professional, research and similar office use having limited contact with the public

(2) Agencies as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(3) Agriculture, including the raising of field crops, tree and bush crops, animals and fowl, but not including feed lots, poultry farms, and fur farms

(4) Concrete or cement products manufacturing and batching plant

(5) Contractors storage yard or plant

(6) Gravel, sand or dirt removal, stockpiling, processing or distribution, and batching plant

(7) Manufacture, processing, assembly, fabrication and/or storage of non-hazardous products and materials

(8) Mortuaries, funeral homes, and funeral chapels

(9) Parking Lot

(10) Office and office buildings for professional and personal services as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(11) Outdoor sales and rental lots for new or used automobiles, boats, motor vehicles, trailers, manufactured homes, farm and construction machinery

(12) Radio and television stations, private clubs and meeting halls

(13) Railway right-of-way, including yards and facilities

(14) Stores and shops that conduct retail business, provided, all activities and display goods are carried on within an enclosed building except that green plants and shrubs may be displayed in the open, as per the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(15) Stores and shops for the conduct of wholesale business, including sale of used merchandise

(16) Truck, bush and tree farming, provided, there is no display or sale at retail of such products on the premises

(17) Truck terminal, tractor, trailer, or truck storage, including maintenance facilities

(18) Utility substations necessary to the functioning of the utility, but not including general business offices, maintenance facilities and other general system facilities, when located according to the yard space rules set forth in this section for dwellings and having a landscaped or masonry barrier on all sides. Buildings shall be of such exterior design as to harmonize with nearby properties

(19) Vocational or trade schools, business colleges, art and music schools and conservatories, and other similar uses

(20) Other uses found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (M-2) Heavy Manufacturing Zoning District as approved by City Council.

(1) Automobile wrecking yard

(2) Acid or acid by-products manufacture

(3) Ammonia bleaching powder, chlorine, perozylin or celluloid manufacture

(4) Explosives manufacture or storage

(5) Garbage, refuse, offal or dead animal reduction or disposal area

(6) Glue manufacture, fat rendering, distillation of bones or by-products

(7) Meat packing plants, including poultry and animal slaughterhouses and abattoirs

(8) Milling or smelting of ores

(9) Petroleum refining

(10) Motels and hotels

(11) Petroleum refining

(12) Stock or feed yards

(13) Salvage yard

(14) Tanning, curing, or storage of hides or skins

(15) Towers

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal uses

(2) A single dwelling unit occupying not more than 50% of the space located within the permitted principal structure on the property and not to exceed 750 square feet. Building shall conform to all building and life safety codes necessary for the mix of uses.

(D) Specifically Excluded Uses:

(1) Residences as a principal use

(2) Manufactured homes, and manufactured home parks

(3) Churches, schools, institutions and other public and semi-public uses except for trade and vocational schools

(E) Space Limitations:

 

 

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
6,000

50

10

01

02

10

65%

-

Conditional Uses
6,000

50

10

01

02

10

65%

-

1 None when bounded by an alley, otherwise 10 feet

2 No required Side Yard Setback, but if provided, not less than 5 feet or unless adjacent to a parcel whose zone requires a side yard setback, then 5 feet.  When adjacent to a public alley, the setback is optional and may range from 0 feet to 5 feet.

 

(F) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein

(2) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9256, effective 4-7-2010

Amended by Ordinance No. 9706, effective 10-2-2018

 

 

§36-74.  (M-3) Mixed Use Manufacturing Zone
          Intent: To provide for a mix of light manufacturing, warehousing, wholesaling, retail, and residential uses. This zoning district is reflective of the mix of uses historically present along the Union Pacific Railroad tracks through the central city.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses:

(1) Churches

(2) Residential dwellings at the same density as the (R-4) High Density Residential Zoning District

(3) Truck terminal, tractor, trailer, or truck storage, including maintenance facilities

(4) Animal hospital and veterinary clinic

(5) Arena or athletic field or track

(6) Automobile body repair

(7) Automobile service station

(8) Bakery

(9) Bottling plant

(10) Blueprinting

(11) Brewery or distillery

(12) Café or restaurant

(13) Cannery

(14) Carpenter or woodworking shop

(15) Carpet cleaning

(16) Casting of lightweight or nonferrous metals

(17) Crating and hauling depot

(18) Dairy products distribution

(19) Dry cleaning and laundry plant

(20) Feed and seed processing and storage

(21) Furniture repair and warehousing

(22) Garage

(23) Laboratories

(24) Lapidary

(25) Parking Lots

(26) Printer

(27) Publisher or lithographer

(28) Sign painting or manufacture

(29) Stone and monument works

(30) Storage yards or buildings for lumber, gas, oil and similar materials; but not explosives, vitreous ware, pottery and porcelain manufacture

(31) Warehouse

(32) Manufacture, processing, assembly, fabrication or storage of products and materials similar to the above

(33) Railway right-of-way, including yards and facilities

(34) Other uses as permitted in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted, if approved by the city council, in accordance with procedures set forth in Article VI of this chapter.

(1) Salvage yards except those dealing primarily with hazardous or regulated waste

(2) Towers

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal uses

(D) Specifically Excluded Uses:

(1) Manufactured home parks

(E) Space Limitations:

 

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
6,000

50

101

02

03

10

65%

-

Conditional Uses
6,000

50

101

02

03

10

65%

-

1 Shall be zero when located in Central Business District and Fourth Street Business District

2 None when bounded by an alley, otherwise 10 feet

3 No required Side Yard Setback, but if provided, not less than 5 feet or unless adjacent to a parcel whose zone requires a side yard setback, then 5 feet.  When adjacent to a public alley, the setback is optional and may range from 0 feet to 5 feet.

 

(F) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein

(2) Only one (1) principal building shall be permitted on each zoning lot except as otherwise provided herein.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

  Amended by Ordinance No. 9151, effective 12-18-2007

 

§36-75.  Reserved

 

§36-76.  (CD) Commercial Development Zone
  (A) Intent: The intent of this zoning district is to permit a more flexible regulation of land use so as to more fully implement comprehensive planning for large parcels of land proposed for commercial use.

  (B) Boundaries: The boundaries of the (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District shall be fixed by amendment of the Official Zoning Map, at such times in the future as such district is applied to properties within the City's zoning jurisdiction.

  (C) Limitations:

(1) In a (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District, there shall be provided a minimum size of 1.5 acres

(2) Any proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an overall plan of development.

(3) Any proposed plan of development shall be designed as a single architectural scheme with appropriate common landscaping

(4) Adequate parking space shall be provided for all employees', visitors', and users' vehicles, and such parking, loading or service areas that shall be used for motor vehicles shall be located within the boundary lines of the (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District and shall be physically separated from any public street right-of-way or property line by a buffer strip of not less than 30 feet

(5) No building or other permanent structure, nor parking lot, shall be located within 30 feet of any public street, right-of-way, or property line

(6) The maximum ground coverage shall not exceed 50% of each site within the (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District.

(7) The minimum off-street parking requirement shall be provided as defined in this chapter of the city code.

(D) Ownership: A (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District shall require a tract of land which is developed as a unit under single ownership or control, or which is under single designated control by a common ownership at the time it is certified as a (CD) Commercial Development Zone.

(E) Permitted Uses:

(1) Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use

(2) Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments

(3) Radio and television stations (no antennae), and meeting halls

(4) Offices and office buildings

(5) Stores and shops for the conduct of retail business, provided, all activities and displays of goods are carried on within an enclosed building except that green plants and shrubs may be displayed in the open.

(6) Retail uses as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(7) Agencies as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(8) Shops as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(9) Motel and hotel uses.

(10) Other uses as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(F) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District as approved by City Council.

(1) Towers

(G) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use.

(H) Procedure:

(1) An application to amend the Official Zoning Map to establish a CD-Commercial Development Zone shall be initiated in the manner prescribed in Article X of this chapter.

(2) Said application shall be filed with the city clerk in such form as shall be required by the city council, and shall be accompanied by the following information:

(a) Site plan showing preliminary location and dimensions of all building areas, recreation, green or landscaped areas, parking and loading facilities, walkways or malls, screen walls, or plantings, waste disposal areas, illumination facilities, signs, curb cuts, utilities and service, private or dedicated drives or streets, etc.

(b) Preliminary drawings or renderings in sufficient detail so that the character of the development may be so determined.

(c) Evidence as to the methods of retaining, maintaining, and protecting the open space, green areas, recreational facilities, etc.

(d) Development schedule as to construction phases of buildings, open space, recreational areas, parking facilities, etc., and estimated completion time.

(e) Evidence of ownership or control of the entire parcel to be used as a planned unit development by a single person, association, firm, etc., as defined herein.

(f) Evidence of economic feasibility: a copy of such application and supplementary information shall then be forwarded by the city clerk to the Planning Commission for review, hearing, and recommendation.

(3) In reviewing the application for amendment, the Planning Commission shall determine the following factors:

(a) That the proposed development will be in the public interest, in harmony with the purpose of this chapter and with comprehensive development plans for the City and will not adversely affect nearby property.

(b) That adequate, safe, and convenient pedestrian and vehicular trafficways and facilities are provided.

(c) That the development to be permitted shall be for the purpose of developing an integrated site plan in conformity with the regulations for a CD-Commercial Development Zone.

(4) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment and shall transmit its recommendation to the city council; a copy of the recommendation shall be sent to the applicant and one copy shall be retained in the permanent files of the Planning Commission.

(5) Procedure and action by the city council shall be the same as considering an amendment to a (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District as in Article X of this chapter.

(I) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) It is intended that plans required for review and approval must be in a form that will satisfy the requirements of the subdivision regulations for both the preliminary and final plat and that approval for plans and plats be considered simultaneously.

(2) The approved and filed final plan and plat shall be the basis for issuance of a building permit in conformity therewith; the initial building permit shall include as a minimum 50% of the main building or structure; free-standing subordinate buildings shall not be included in the initial permit and shall not receive a permit until the initial permit phase is over 50% constructed; plan changes which increase the number of buildings, increase building height or bulk, or change the location of buildings or other features which materially affect the basic design of the development shall require resubmission of the amendment. Minor adjustments in orientation, height or bulk of buildings, or decrease in number of buildings shall be approved by the Planning Director.

(3) Should any successful applicant for an amendment hereunder fail to have completed the construction of the footings and foundations for the initial building permit within eighteen (18) months after the city council shall approve a rezoning to a (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District, the area in its entirety shall be reverted to its former zoning classification by appropriate action of the city council, provided, that the city council shall have the power to extend said period by six (6) months in the event of special and unique hardships and circumstances.

(4) Control of the development following completion:

(a) The chief building official shall issue a certificate certifying the completion of the planned development, and shall note the issuance of the certificate on the final development plan.

(b) After the certificate of completion has been issued, the use of land and the construction, modification, or alteration of any buildings or structures within the (CD) Commercial Development Zoning District will be governed by the approved final development plan exclusively.

(c) After the certificate of completion has been issued, no changes may be made in the approved final development plan except upon application to the appropriate agency under the procedures provided below:

  (i) Any minor extensions, alterations, or modifications of existing buildings or structures shall be authorized by the Planning Commission if they are consistent with the purposes and intent of the final plan; no change authorized by this subsection may increase the density of any building or structure by more than ten percent.

  (ii) A building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final development plan unless an amendment to the final development plan is approved under subsection (iii) hereof.

  (iii) All other changes in the final development plan as approved by the city council must be made by the city council under the procedures authorized under Article X for amendment of the Official Zoning Map; no changes may be made in the final development plan unless they are found by the city council to be required for the continued successful functioning of the commercial development, or unless they are found by the city council to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plan was improved or by changes in the comprehensive planning and development policy of the City.

 

§36-77.  (TD) Travel Development Zone
          Intent: The intent of this zoning district is to provide for only those trade and service uses in connection with federal interstate highway interchanges as are needed and considered appropriate to the location.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses:

(1) Motels and/or hotels

(2) Restaurants and cafes, with or without drive-in facilities

(3) Lounges and/or taverns

(4) Automobile service stations and truck service centers

(5) Automobile and truck wash

(6) Billboards

(7) Other uses as found in the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

(B) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (TD) Travel Development Zone as approved by City Council.

(1) Utility substations

(2) Motor home and travel trailer parks and camping facilities

(3) Recreational uses such as amusement parks, miniature golf courses, exhibition halls and centers

(4) Towers

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use

(D) Specifically Excluded Uses:

(1) Any residential use except quarters for management within the principal building

(E) Space Limitations:

Uses

 

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

A

B

C

D

E

 

 

 

Minimum Parcel Area (feet)

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

Front Yard (feet)

Rear Yard (feet)

Side Yard (feet)

Street Side Yard (feet)

Maximum Ground Coverage

Maximum Building Height (feet)

Permitted Uses
40,000

200

50

20

10

50

60%

50

Conditional Uses
40,000

200

50

20

10

50

60%

50

1with 15 feet adjacent to a street landscaped to satisfaction of the zoning official.

(F) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Landscaping shall be provided in the entire area of all required front yards except for necessary paving of walkways and of driveways to reach parking and loading areas in the side or rear yards, provided, that any driveways in the front yard shall not be wider than 30 feet. Landscaping shall include but is not limited to screen plantings, lawn area, pools, trees, shrubs, fences, and walls. Crushed rock, gravel, bark chips shall not substitute for lawn area. Landscaping shall be provided within two years of issuance of the occupancy permit for the principal structure and thereafter be properly maintained.

(2) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.

(3) Only one principal building shall be permitted on one zoning lot, except as otherwise provided herein.

 

§36-78.  (RD) Residential Development Zone
  (A) Intent: The intent of this zoning district is to permit a more flexible regulation of land use, and so as to more fully implement comprehensive planning for large parcels of land proposed predominantly for residential use.

  (B) Boundaries: The boundaries of RD-Residential Development Zone shall be fixed by amendment of the Official Zoning Map at such times in the future as such zoning district is applied to properties within the City's zoning jurisdiction.

  (C) Limitations:

(1) In a (RD) Residential Development Zone there shall be provided a minimum size of 1.5 acres.

(2) Any proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an overall plan of development.

(3) Any proposed plan of development shall be designed as a single architectural scheme with appropriate common landscaping.

(4) Adequate parking space shall be provided for all residential units and for all employee's, visitor's, and user's vehicles, and such parking, loading, or service areas that shall be used for motor vehicles, and shall be located within the boundary lines of the (RD) Residential Development Zone, and shall be physically separated from any public street, right-of-way, or property line by a buffer strip of not less than 30 feet.

(5) No residential building or other permanent residential structure, nor parking lot, shall be located within 30 feet of any public street, right-of-way, or property line.

(6) The maximum ground coverage shall not exceed 30 percent of the property within the (RD) Residential Development Zone.

(7) The minimum off-street parking requirement shall be two parking spaces for every dwelling unit, plus one for each full-time employee.

(8) In the alternative to complying with the 30 foot buffer strip or setback as identified in subsections (4) and (5) above, a ten (10) foot wide landscaped screen compliant with the installation requirements of Section 36-102 shall be followed.

  (D) Ownership: A (RD) Residential Development Zone shall require a tract of land which is developed as a unit under single designated control by a common ownership at the time it is certified as an (RD) Residential Development Zone.

  (E) Permitted Principal Uses: The following principal uses are permitted in the (RD) Residential Development Zone.

(1) Uses as listed under permitted principal uses of the (TA) Transitional Agricultural Zone, (R-1) Suburban Residential Zone, (R-2) Low Density Residential Zone, (R-3) Medium Density Residential Zone, and (R-4) High Density Residential Zone except as listed under specifically excluded uses.

(2) Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments other than those providing living accommodations.

(3) All other Permitted Principal Uses indicated as permitted within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto].

  (F) Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to any conditions listed in this chapter and are subject to other conditions relating to the placement of said use on a specific tract of ground in the (RD) Residential Development Zone as approved by City Council.

(1)    Towers

(2)    Nursing, convalescent & rest home services

(3)    Residential assisted living, retirement or assisted living

(4)    All other Conditional Uses indicated as permitted within the Zoning Matrix [Attachment A hereto]

  (G) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Buildings and uses accessory to the permitted principal use

  (H) Specifically Excluded Uses:

(1) Railway right-of-way, including railway yards or facilities.

(2) Truck, bush, and tree farming.

(3) Boarding and lodging housing.

(4) Nonprofit community buildings and social welfare establishments providing living

accommodations.

(5) Nonresidential uses.

  (I) Procedure:

(1) An application to establish a (RD) Residential Development Zone shall be initiated in the manner prescribed in Article X of this chapter.

(2) Said application shall be filed with the city clerk in such form as shall be required by the city council and shall be accompanied by the following information:

(a) Site plan showing preliminary location and dimensions of all building areas, recreation, green or landscaped areas, parking and loading facilities, walkways or malls, screen walls, or plantings, waste disposal areas, illumination facilities, signs, curb cuts, utilities and services, private or dedicated drives or streets, etc.

(b) Preliminary drawings or renderings in sufficient detail so that the character of the development may be determined.

(c) Evidence as to the methods of retaining, maintaining, and protecting the open space, green areas, recreational facilities, etc.

(d) Development schedule as to construction phases of buildings, open space, recreational areas, parking facilities, etc., and estimated completion time.

(e) Evidence of ownership or control of the entire parcel to be used as a planned unit development by a single person, association, firm, etc., as defined herein.

(f) Evidence of economic feasibility. A copy of such application and supplementary information shall then be forwarded by the city clerk to the Planning Commission for review, hearing, and recommendation.

(3) In reviewing the application for amendment herein, the Planning Commission shall determine the following factors.

(a) That the proposed development will be in the public interest, in harmony with the purpose of this chapter and with comprehensive plans for the City, and will not adversely affect nearby property.

(b) That adequate, safe, and convenient pedestrian and vehicular trafficways and facilities are provided.

(c) That the development to be permitted shall be for the purpose of developing an integrated site plan in conformity with the regulations for a (RD) Residential Development Zone.

(4) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment and shall transmit its recommendation to the city council. A copy of the recommendation shall be sent to the applicant and one copy shall be retained in the permanent files of the Planning Commission.

(5) Procedure and action by the city council shall be the same in considering an amendment to the (RD) Residential Development Zone as in Article X of this chapter.

  (J) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) It is intended that plans required for review and approval must be in a form that will satisfy the requirements of Chapter 33 of this code for both the preliminary and final plat, and that approval for plans and plats be considered simultaneously.

(2) The approved and filed final plan and plat shall be the basis for issuance of a building permit in conformity therewith. Plan changes which increase the number of buildings, increase building height or bulk, or change the location of buildings or other features which materially affect the basic design of the development shall require resubmission of the amendment. Minor adjustments in orientation, height or bulk of buildings, or decrease in the number of buildings may be approved by the Planning Director.

(3) Should any successful applicant for an amendment hereunder fail to have completed the construction of the footings and foundations for the initial building permit within eighteen (18) months after the city council shall approve a rezoning to a (RD) Residential Development Zone, the area in its entirety shall be reverted to its former zoning classification by appropriate action of the city council, provided, that the city council shall have the power to extend said period by six months in the event of special and unique hardships and circumstances.

(4) Control of the development following completion:

(a) The chief building official shall issue a certificate certifying the completion of the planned development, and shall note the issuance of the certificate on the final development plan.

(b) After the certificate of completion has been issued, the use of land and the construction, modification, or alteration of any buildings or structures within the residential development will be governed by the approved final development plan exclusively.

(c) After the certificate of completion has been issued, no changes may be made in the approved final development plan except upon application to the appropriate agency under the procedures provided below.

  (i) Any minor extensions, alterations, or modifications of existing buildings or structures may be authorized by the Planning Director if they are consistent with the purposes and intent of the final plan. No change authorized by this subsection may increase the density of any building or structure by more than ten percent.

  (ii) A building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final development plan unless an amendment to the final development plan is approved under subsection (iii) hereof.

  (iii) All other changes in the final development plan as approved by the city council must be made by the city council under the procedures authorized under Article X of this chapter. No changes may be made in the final development plan unless they are found by the city council to be required for the continued successful functioning of the residential development, or unless they are found by the city council to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plan was approved or by changes in the comprehensive planning and development policy of the City.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8976, effective 06-08-2005

Amended by Ordinance No. 9294, effective 05-31-2011

 

§36-79.  (A) Airport Zone
          Intent: The intent of the zoning district is to provide an overlay zone to permit landing fields for all types of aircraft. This overlay zone may be applied to any base zone upon final approval. Appropriate airport approach and turning zones must be identified.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses:

(1) Uses as listed under permitted principal uses in the zone or zones underlying the Airport Zone indication.

(2) Landing fields for all types of aircraft, either private or commercial.

(B) Conditional Uses:

(1) Uses as listed under permitted conditional uses in the zone or zones underlying the Airport Zone indication.

(C) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Uses as listed under permitted accessory uses in the zone or zones underlying the Airport Zone indication.

(2) Facilities accessory to the normal and continual operation of an airfield, but not to include general repair depots and other commercial or industrial operations normally found at all such airfields unless permitted in the underlying zone or zones.

(D) Space Limitations:

(1) Same as listed under space limitations in the zone or zones underlying the Airport Zone indication.

(E) Procedure:

(1) An application for an amendment for an Airport Zone to the Official Zoning Map shall follow as procedure requirements for amendment as set forth in Article X of this chapter, and in addition, shall include the following information:

(a) Site plan showing precise location and dimensions of all runways and facilities, buildings, and service areas, ramps and aprons, etc.

(b) Diagram of all approach and clear zones, glide paths, etc.

(c) A report from the Federal Aviation Agency on the proposed airport usage and approval of the intended location.

(F) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Same as listed under miscellaneous provisions in the zone or zones underlying the Airport Zone indication.

 

§36-80.  (GCO) Gateway Corridor Overlay District 
                Intent: The City of Grand Island has established basic site and building development criteria to be implemented within the boundaries of this overlay district. These criteria include, but are not limited to the following: landscaping, building material selection, lighting, and interior street development. The purpose for regulating these issues is to provide for a cohesive and properly developed entrance into the City of Grand Island from the Interstate corridor. Guiding development in this manner promotes the general health, safety and welfare of the residents within the zoning jurisdiction of the City, by providing quality design and construction that will also aid in the protection of past and future investment in the corridor.

                Purpose: The purpose of these criteria is to establish a checklist of those items that affect the physical aspect of Grand Island's environment. Pertinent to appearance is the design of the site, building and structures, planting, signs, street hardware, and miscellaneous other objects that are observed by the public.

                The criteria contained herein are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles that can result in creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual appearance within the city, preserve taxable values, and promote the public health, safety and welfare.

                (A) Geographic Area:

                The Gateway Corridor Overlay District extends generally to Wood River Road or the southern portion of the Grand Island Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. The overlay districts generally are one-half mile wide and centered along U.S. Highway 281 south of Schimmer Drive and South Locust Street south of U.S. Highway 34.

                If a site is partially covered by said overlay district, and then the entire portion of the site facing the Gateway Corridor is to be covered by these regulations. For a graphically defined area, see the Official Zoning Map.

(B) Criteria For Application:

        (1) All commercial developments consisting of more than one principal building, mixed-uses, multiple-pad development and/or similar shall be required to meet the zoning requirements for a Commercial Development Zone or the Travel Development Zone. The Commercial Development Zone or Travel Development Zone process and rezoning shall be in conjunction with preliminary and final plat review and approval. The design criteria of this section shall be met as part of the subdivision approval.

        (2) All industrial developments consisting of more than one principal building, mixed-uses, multiple-pad development and/or similar shall be required to meet the zoning requirements of the Industrial Estates Zone. The design criteria of this section shall be met as part of the subdivision approval.

        (3) All commercial or industrial developments consisting of one principal building with single or mixed uses in an existing zone shall comply with the design criteria of this section. This would include additions and exterior remodeling of existing structures.

        (4) All residential subdivisions shall be required to meet the landscape and site treatment criteria whenever the proposed development is adjacent to an arterial or frontage road. The criteria shall be implemented for the entire frontage, including entrances into the development. Exception: Single-family dwelling units within this overlay on property zoned for Agricultural or Transition Agriculture shall be exempted from these criteria.

(C) Criteria for Appearance:

        (1) Relationship of Buildings to Site: The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the streetscape and to provide for adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement, and parking areas.

        (a) Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess of standard commercial zoning restrictions is encouraged to provide an interesting relationship between buildings.

        (b) Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, building wall extensions, plantings, berms, or other innovative means so as to screen parking areas from view from public ways.

        (c) Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings.

        (d) Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be underground.

                (2) Relationship of Buildings and Site to Adjoining Area (Outside of Subdivision)

        (a) Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made compatible by such means as screens, sight breaks, and materials.

        (b) Attractive landscape transitions shall be designed to be compatible to adjoining properties.

        (c) Harmony in texture, lines and masses is required. Monotony shall be avoided.

(3) Landscape and Site Treatment. Landscape elements included in these criteria consist of all forms of planting and vegetation, ground forms, rock groupings, water patterns, and all visible construction except building and utilitarian structures.

        (a) Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. Modification to topography will be permitted where it contributes to good site design and development.

        (b) Grades of walk, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking and, if seating is provided, for sitting.

        (c) Landscape treatments shall be provided to enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas and important axis, and provide shade. Spectacular effects shall be reserved for special locations only.

        (d) Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials and by correlation with adjacent developments.

        (e) Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, color, and for its ultimate growth. Plants that are indigenous to the area and others that will be hardy, harmonious to the design and of good appearance shall be used.

        (f) Site must be serviced by an underground or approved irrigation system and all plant material shall be kept in good health and maintained. If plant material dies, it shall be replaced.

        (g) Parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with landscaped spaces containing trees or tree groupings.

        (h) Use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of those shall accomplish screening of service yards and other places that tend to be unsightly. Screening shall be equally effective in winter and summer.

        (i) Exterior lighting, when used, shall enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape. Building fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoided. Lighting shall be designed to a standard that does not impact adjoining properties, especially residential areas.

        (j) All fencing within this Overlay District shall be defined including height, type and materials within the development plan.

        (k) Fencing within the Overlay District and as part of an Industrial Development may be required to be a solid fence.

        (l) All signs shall meet the Sign Design Criteria within Chapter 31 of this code.

(4) Building Design

                (a) Architectural design and style are not restricted, however architectural style should be consistent throughout the subdivision. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and relationship to surroundings.

                (b) Buildings shall have good scale and be in harmonious conformance with permanent neighboring development.

                (c) The primary building material for all portions of the structures shall be negotiated with the City. However, sample materials shall include but not be limited to materials of high quality, such as brick (clay), stucco, wood, glass, split faced concrete masonry units (CMU) with integrated color pigmentation, pre-engineered structures provided the exterior skin meets the criteria for appearance for the area as defined in the subdivision agreement or approved by the site design and review committee, and stone material native to Nebraska. The materials shall be similar and compatible throughout the entire development. The City of Grand Island staff and/or design review architect may allow other primary building designs (of good architectural character, i.e. CMU, poured-in-place concrete) for portions of the building not visible from public areas. Other secondary building materials shall have good architectural character and shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings.

                (d) Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of buildings and the design in which they are used. Buildings shall have the same materials, or those that are architecturally harmonious, used for all building walls and other exterior building components wholly or partly visible from public ways.

                (e) Materials shall be of durable quality.

                (f) In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall be compatible within themselves and harmonious with their surroundings.

                (g) Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets, shall have good proportions and relationships to one another.

                (h) Colors shall be harmonious and shall use only compatible accents.

                (i) Colors shall be of low reflectance and shall not be of high-intensity or metallic colors unless the colors are true to the materials being used.

                (j) Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be so located as not to be visible from any public ways.

                (k) Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with building design.

                (l) Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards, and exterior work areas shall be screened from view from public ways, using materials as stated in criteria for equipment screening.

                (m) The style and material of the signs shall be included within the development plan.

                (n) Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting of individual buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous appearance.

                (o) Building orientation shall be toward an arterial street, unless it is demonstrated that this would not be feasible.

                (D) Factors for Evaluation:

                The following factors and characteristics, which affect the appearance of a development, will govern the evaluation of a design submission:

                (1) Conformance with city code regulations and the Building Design Criteria.

                (2) Logic of design

                (3) Exterior space utilization

                (4) Architectural character

                (5) Attractiveness of the material selection

                (6) Harmony and compatibility

                (7) Circulation-vehicular and pedestrian

                (8) Maintenance aspects

                (E) Process

                (1) Commercial Development Zone application. All general commercial developments on property not already zoned for commercial uses within the Gateway Corridor Overlay District shall be required to apply for rezoning under the criteria in §36-76 of this chapter.

                (2) Industrial Development Zone application. All industrial developments within the Gateway Corridor District shall be required to apply for rezoning to ME-Industrial Estates zone.

                (3) Individual commercial or industrial buildings and additions or exterior remodeling of existing buildings shall be subject to site plan and design review by a committee consisting of the Hall County Regional Planning Director, the Grand Island Building Department Director, one (1) planning commission member representing the City of Grand Island, and if appointed, a design review architect representing the City of Grand Island. This committee can request additional input from surrounding property owners and near-by business improvement districts as ex-officio members of the design review committee.

                (4) Subdivision approval. All new commercial buildings or developments within the Gateway Corridor Overlay shall be on properly subdivided lots. As a condition of subdivision approval, all said commercial and/or industrial buildings or developments shall comply with the provisions of the Gateway Corridor Overlay District. The developer shall place maintenance provisions required by this section within all restrictive covenants.

                (5) Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference with city staff to give the applicant an opportunity to discuss plans before a great deal of time or money is expended.

                (6) Application for design review. The applicant needs to fill out the "Application for Certificate Approval" and submit it along with the required submittals. See Administrative Forms for a listing of required submittals.

                (7) Certificate of Approval. Upon a successful review, the City of Grand Island will issue to the applicant a Certificate of Approval. A copy of this will need to be included with the Building Permit documents in order to receive a Building Permit.

                (8) Appeals. In the event, where the Applicant, City staff and/or a design review architect representing the City, or the site plan and design review committee cannot come to an agreement, the Applicant may appeal the decision by requesting an amendment to the subdivision agreement from the Grand Island City Council.

                (9) Certificate of Occupancy Permit. After the building permit is issued, all design requirements must be completed as approved in order for a Certificate of Occupancy to be issued.

                (10) Maintenance of Design Requirements. The applicant needs to maintain the design requirements for the life of the project. In the event that they fail to do so, the City may revoke the Occupancy Permit.

                (11) Fees. Fees may apply to each individual step as established by separate regulation.

 

 

§36-81.  –M and –MD Manufactured Home Overlay Zones
          Purpose: To provide for overlay zones which will permit the placement of single or double wide manufactured homes within either a manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision, whichever the case may be, as approved for the overlay zones. Site built dwelling units and modular homes are also permitted within the overlay zones. A variety of densities is possible depending upon the base zone to which the overlay zones are applied.

(A) Permitted Principal Uses:

(1) Within the -M Zone:

(a) Uses as listed under permitted principal uses in the zone or zones underlying the -M Manufactured Home Zone designation.

(b) Manufactured single wide, double wide, or sectional homes; provided, that skirting shall be required for all units.

(2) Within the -MD Zone:

(a) Uses as listed under permitted principal uses in zone or zones underlying the -MD Manufactured Home designation.

(b) Manufactured double wide or sectional homes only, provided:

(1) minimum width of the main body of the manufactured home as assembled shall not be less than twenty-two (22) feet;

(2) minimum pitch of the main roof shall not be less than 2.5 inches of rise for each twelve inches of horizontal run (2.5/12 pitch);

(3) exterior finish on walls shall appear to be as wood, masonry, or other materials generally acceptable for site built housing and applied in a manner similar in appearance; provided, that reflection from such exterior shall not be greater than from siding coated with clean, white, gloss exterior enamel;

(4) roofing material shall be of any material that is generally acceptable for site-built housing; provided, it is applied in such a manner similar in appearance;

(5) skirting shall be required and shall have a similar appearance of foundation for site-built housing.

(B) Permitted Accessory Uses:

(1) Uses as listed under permitted accessory uses in the zone or zones underlying the Manufactured Home Zone designation.

(C) Permitted Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted, if approved by the city council, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article VIII of this chapter:

(1) Uses as listed under permitted conditional uses in the zone or zones underlying the Manufactured Home designation.

(D) Space Limitations:

(1) Minimum zoning area per manufactured home: Same as underlying zone but in no event less than 3,000 square feet

(2) Minimum zoning lot: Same as underlying zone but in no event less than 6,000 square feet

(3) Minimum lot width: Same as underlying zone

(4) Minimum front yard: Same as underlying zone

(5) Minimum rear yard: Same as underlying zone

(6) Minimum side yard: Same as underlying zone but in no event less than 10 feet for manufactured homes

(7) Maximum ground coverage: Same as underlying zone

(E) Procedure:

(1) An application for an amendment for the Manufactured Home Zone to the zoning map shall follow all procedural requirements for amendments as set forth herein, and, in addition, shall include the following information:

(a) Site plan showing precise number, locations, and dimensions of all manufactured home lots, public or private drive or streets, illumination facilities, recreation or green areas, utilities, etc. Such site plan, if approved, shall form the basis for the issuance of a manufactured home park permit or as a preliminary subdivision study, whichever is the intention of the owner.

(b) Data as may be requested by the chief building official to determine that the proposed manufactured home development will comply with all legal requirements.

(F) Miscellaneous Provisions:

(1) Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.

 

§36-82.  Reserved
§36-83.  Reserved
§36-84.  Reserved
§36-85.  Reserved
§36-86.  Reserved
§36-87.  Reserved

 

 

Article VI.  Conditional Use Permits

 

§36-88.  Conditional Uses; Application
          An application for a conditional use, signed by the property owner or by a purchaser thereof under contract in writing duly executed by both buyer and seller, or by agent of any of the foregoing duly authorized to do so in writing, shall be submitted to the city clerk. The application shall state the location of the proposed conditional use, the specific conditional use requested as permitted by this chapter and shall be accompanied by such other material as necessary to explain the proposal. The city council may request additional information as it deems proper.

 

§36-89.  Authorized Conditional Uses
          The following uses may be granted by the city council as a permitted conditional use in accordance with the procedure as set forth in this article:

                (A) To permit uses as listed under the permitted conditional uses within the respective zoning districts as specified in this chapter;

                (B) To permit the appropriate use of a lot less in area by not more than ten percent of the area required by this chapter;

                (C) To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading facilities required by not more than two parking spaces or one loading berth or twenty percent of the required number, whichever is greater;

                (D) To permit the same off-street parking facilities to qualify as required spaces for two or more uses, provided, the substantial use of such spaces by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours of the same days of the week;

                (E) To permit temporary buildings and uses for periods not to exceed two years in undeveloped areas of the City, and for periods not to exceed six (6) months in developed areas;

                (F) To permit the placement and operation of wind turbines, solar energy collectors, or other energy saving devices that would not be in conformance with the space limitations as specified in this chapter.

                (G) To permit the construction and operation of a private wastewater treatment system for any use within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island, excepting those small systems consisting of a septic tank and drainfield having a design capacity of less than 2,000 gallons per day. The design capacity shall be based on the table of estimated waste/sewerage flow rates in Chapter 30 of this code.

                (H) To permit the keeping of livestock on residential property with less than a half acre of outdoor enclosure area per animal for periods not to exceed three (3) years in accordance with requirements set out in §5-16 of this code.

                (I) To permit operation of a salvage yard where allowed under the permitted conditional uses within the respective districts; provided, that salvage operations conducted entirely within a building as an accessory use to a permitted principal use of land shall not require compliance with this article.

 

§36-90.  Conditional Uses; Procedure
          After receipt of a conditional use application and application fee, the city clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the city council to consider such application. Notice of such application shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least one time ten days prior to such hearing. In addition to the publication, the city clerk shall cause a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property on which action is pending. Such notice shall not be less than eighteen inches in height and twenty-four inches in width with a white or yellow background and black letters not less than one and one-half inches in height. Such posted notice shall be so placed upon the premises that it is easily visible from the street nearest the same and shall be so posted at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove, mutilate, destroy, or change such posted notice prior to such hearing. Any person so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The hearing shall be held at which all interested parties shall be heard.

          The city council may grant, grant with any conditions or safeguards upon the property benefitted by a conditional use, or deny the application. Violation of any such conditions or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a misdemeanor. No conditional use permitting the erection or alteration of a building or other use shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless the building is erected or altered or the use established within that period.

          The city administrator or any department director having a personal knowledge of any violation of a permitted conditional use or a condition or safeguard which is made part of the terms under which a conditional use is granted, may deliver a written request to the building department director asking that the director issue a notice of violation and demand for compliance to the person owning the property subject to the permitted conditional use. Upon receipt of said written request, the building department director shall investigate the alleged violation and if it is determined that a violation exists, the building department director shall send a notice of violation and demand for compliance to the last known address of said person, one copy each, by ordinary first class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, demanding that the premises be brought into compliance with the conditional use by a date certain and advising said person that in the event violations continue after said date, that a request for revocation of the conditional use will be forwarded to the city council for a public hearing and determination. The written notice shall include a description of the violations and the underlying facts supporting such allegations.

          If the violations stated in the foregoing notice and demand are not eliminated and the property brought into compliance with the city code and the permitted conditional use by the date certain, the building department director shall send such person a notice of hearing before the city council to consider revocation of the conditional use permit. The public hearing shall be conducted formally. The building department director, city attorney or their respective designees shall present oral or written statements or reasons supporting revocation of the permitted conditional use. The property owner(s) or designee(s) shall present oral or written statements or reasons opposing the revocation of the permitted conditional use. Statements by each side shall be limited to a total time of one hour or less. Any interested person may be heard following presentations on behalf of the city and the property owner. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council may affirm, revoke, or modify the permitted existing use.

 

§36-91.  Fees
          At the time of filing of an application for a conditional use permit with the city clerk, the applicant shall pay to the city treasurer a processing fee, as provided in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, which shall not be refundable.

 

§36-92.  Reserved
§36-93.  Reserved
§36-94.  Reserved
§36-95.  Reserved

 

 

Article VII.  Supplemental Regulations

 

§36-96.  Off-Street Parking Requirements
  (A) Purposes:

  (1) It is the intent of this section that all buildings and uses shall provide off-street parking and loading facilities in a minimum amount as required herein to meet the needs of such buildings and uses on private property and under the same ownership as such buildings or uses. The accommodations may consist of lots, garages, or other buildings, and accessories; they may be surface facilities or facilities above or under the ground.

  (2) It is the further intent of this section that all off-street parking and loading spaces and facilities shall be sited and built according to the requirements contained in this section, and shall require an application for and issuance of a building permit pursuant to §8-22.

  (B) Application. Each building or use hereafter constructed, and each addition to or altered building or use shall be provided with off-street parking and loading spaces as required herein. Each off-street parking space or loading facility and space hereafter constructed, upon proper application and permit being granted shall be sited and constructed pursuant to the requirements of this section. No application for a building permit for such building, addition, alteration, or use shall be approved unless accompanied by a plot plan showing the location and amount of off-street parking and loading spaces as required herein for the existing or proposed building or use and including all such additions or alterations. No occupancy or use permit shall be issued unless the required parking and loading facilities shall have been provided in accordance with the approved plot plan. Requirements shall be applicable to all zones and districts but not to include the following business districts or tracts of land as identified below:

  (1) Central Business District Beginning at the intersection of Sycamore Street and First Street; thence westerly on First Street to Pine Street; thence southerly on Pine Street to the southerly boundary of Courthouse Addition; thence westerly along the southerly boundary of Courthouse Addition to Locust Street; thence westerly on Division Street to Walnut Street; thence northerly on Walnut Street to the alley between Division Street and First Street; thence westerly on said alley to Cedar Street; thence northerly on Cedar Street to the alley between Second Street and Third Street; thence westerly on said alley to Elm Street; thence northerly on Elm Street to a point 40 feet north of the southerly right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad; thence easterly parallel to and 40 feet from said right-of-way line to Walnut Street; thence northerly on Walnut Street to a point 100 feet north of the northerly right-of-way line of South Front Street; thence easterly parallel to and 100 feet from said right-of-way line to Kimball Avenue extended; thence southerly on Kimball Avenue extended and Kimball Avenue to the alley between Third Street and Second Street; thence southerly on Sycamore Street to the point of beginning.

  (2) Fourth Street Business District. Beginning at the intersection of Eddy Street and the alley in the block between Fourth and Fifth Streets; thence easterly on the alley to the intersection of the alley with Sycamore Street; thence southerly on Sycamore Street to 100 feet south of the south right-of-way line of North Front Street; thence westerly on the aforesaid line to its intersection with Eddy Street; thence northerly on Eddy Street to the point of beginning.

  (3) Tracts of land ten acres or more used for seasonal events (one event every three months) of not more than fourteen consecutive days in duration and a minimum of fourteen days between events.

  (C) Area and Computation: An off-street parking space shall be of appropriate dimensions of not less than 180 square feet exclusive of access or maneuvering area, ramps, columns, etc., and shall have a vertical clearance of not less than seven feet. An off-street loading space shall be of appropriate dimensions of not less than 360 square feet exclusive of access or maneuvering area, ramps, columns, etc., and shall have a vertical clearance of not less than fourteen feet. When determination of the number of off-street parking or loading spaces required by this chapter results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded while a fraction in excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking space.

(D) Location: All off-street parking spaces shall be on the same lot as the building or within 300 feet of the lot. Permanent off-street parking spaces shall not be permitted within the required front yard setback, provided, however, that for a building containing three dwelling units or less, one space per unit may be placed within the front yard setback if such space is not directly in front of the building excluding garages or carports. Residential Garages with overhead doors facing the street shall provide a 25 foot setback between the garage door and the property line.

  (E) Collective Facilities: Off-street parking facilities for separate or mixed buildings or uses may be provided collectively so long as the total number of spaces is not less than the sum of the separate required spaces, and provided further, that the requirement concerning location of such facility with respect to distance from the building or use served shall be complied with. In order to eliminate a multiplicity of entrances and exits and diminish traffic hazards to conserve space where space is at a premium and to promote orderly development generally, the city council is hereby authorized to plan and group parking facilities collectively for a number of businesses in a given area, and especially in the central business district, in such a manner as to obtain a maximum of efficiency and capacity in parking and traffic movement.

  (F) Employee Parking: Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of employees on duty on the premises at any one time.

  (G) Design Standards. All off-street parking and loading facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley and contain adequate and safe maneuvering areas. Detailed plans shall be submitted to the public works director for approval of all curb cuts or driveway openings before a permit may be obtained therefor. No signs shall be displayed except such signs as required for the orderly use of the facilities. All facilities shall be provided with a permanent type, dust-free surface meaning asphaltic cement concrete, Portland cement concrete, or paving brick.

  All parking lots containing five or more parking spaces, which are within 30 feet of property occupied by a residential use in a Large Lot Residential Zoning District or of property within a Suburban Residential Zoning District, Low Density Residential Zoning District, Medium Density Residential Zoning District, High Density Residential Zoning District or Residential Development Zoning District, shall provide a sight-obscuring fence or screen not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height along the boundary of the parking lot adjacent to such districts. No fence or screen shall be required between abutting parking lots or adjacent to an alley. The height of any fence or screen shall be subject to other restrictions provided by the City Code.

  (H) Maintenance: The parking and loading facilities required by this section shall be provided and maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities are designed to serve. Reasonable precautions must be taken by the owners of particular uses to assure the use of the parking facilities only by the employees or the social or business visitors of the premises for which the facilities are provided. The facilities must be so designed and maintained as not to constitute a nuisance at any time and must not be used in such a manner as to constitute a hazard or unreasonable impediment to traffic.

  (I) Reduction of Number of Spaces: Off-street parking or loading facilities shall not be reduced in total extent, after their provision required hereunder, except upon the approval of the Board of Adjustment, and then only after proof that the parking or loading spaces are no longer required by reason of a change in use of the premises of which the facilities are adjunct.

  (J) Requirement for Uses Not Listed: For any use not listed, the Board of Adjustment shall determine the proper requirement by classifying the proposed use among the uses specified herein so as to assure equal treatment.

  (K) Administration and Enforcement: The off-street parking and loading provisions of this section shall be administered by the zoning official and enforced by the chief building official, who shall also serve in advisory capacity to the city council on matters relative to any phase of such provisions.

  (L) Penalty for Violation: The provisions of parking and loading facilities as required by this section shall be a continuing obligation of the owner or sponsor of a given building or use so long as the building or use is in existence and so long as parking and loading facilities are required hereunder in connection therewith, and it shall be unlawful to discontinue, change, or dispense with such facilities without establishing alternate facilities that meet the requirements herein. Penalty provisions applicable to this chapter as a whole shall apply to the violations of these provisions. In addition, at such time as the facilities required hereunder shall fail to continue to be available for the purpose, the building permit for the structures to which the facilities are adjunct and the use or occupancy permits issued for the premises shall be canceled and become null and void.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8976, effective 06-08-2005

                   Amended by Ordinance No. 9151, effective 12-18-2007

Amended by Ordinance No. 9229, effective 09-09-2009

Amended by Ordinance No. 9574, effective 03-15-2016

Amended by Ordinance No. 9689, effective 06-12-2018

Amended by Ordinance No. 9720, effective 02-06-2019

 

 

§36-97.  Schedule of Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements


Uses
Parking Requirements

Loading Requirements

Adult entertainment establishments

One (1) space per 2 persons of capacity

None required

Bowling Alleys

Four (4) spaces per alley

One (1) space per establishment

Churches, Synagogues, and Temples

One (1) space per 4 seats in main worship area

None required

Clubs, including fraternal organizations

One (1) space per 500 s.f. of net floor area

None required

College/University

One (1) spaces per every two (2) students of occupancy plus one (1) per employee.

Two (2) spaces per structure

Commercial Uses

 

 

 

Agricultural Sales / Service

One (1) space per 500 s.f. of net floor area

One (1) per establishment

 

Automotive Rental / Sales

One (1) space per 500 s.f. of net floor area

One (1) per establishment

 

Automotive Servicing

Three (3) spaces per repair stall

None required

 

Bars, Taverns, Nightclubs

Parking equal to 30% of licensed capacity

Two (2) spaces per establishment

 

Body Repair

Four (4) spaces per repair stall

None required

 

Equipment Rental / Sales

One (1) space per 500 s.f. of net floor area

One (1) Space

 

Campground

One (1) space per camping unit

None required

 

Commercial Recreation

One (1) space per 4 persons of licensed capacity

One (1) per establishment

 

Communication Services

One (1) space per 500 s.f. of net floor area

One (1) per establishment

 

Construction Sales / Service

One (1) space per 500 s.f. of net floor area

One (1) per establishment

 

Food Sales (limited)

One (1) space per 300 s.f. of net floor area

One (1) per establishment

 

Food Sales (general)

One (1) space per 200 s.f. of net floor area

Two (2) per establishment

 

Furniture Sales

One (1) space per 500 s.f. of net floor area

Two (2) per establishment

 

General Retail Sales establishments

One (1) space per 200 s.f. of net floor area

One (1) per establishment

 

Laundry Services

One (1) space per 200 s.f. of net floor area

None required

 

Restaurants (General)

Parking equal to 2 of every 5 seats

Two (2) spaces per establishment

Convalescent and Nursing Home Services

One (1) space per 3 beds plus 1 per employee on the largest shift

Two (2) space per structure

Day Care

One (1) space per employee plus 1 space or loading stall per each 10 persons of licensed capacity

None required

Educational Uses, Primary facilities

Two (2) spaces per classroom

Two (2) spaces per structure

Educational Uses, Secondary facilities

Eight (8) spaces per classroom plus 1 space per employee on largest shift

Two (2) spaces per structure

Funeral Homes and Chapels

Eight (8) spaces per reposing room

Two (2) spaces per establishment

Group Care Facility

One (1) space per 4 persons of licensed capacity

Two (2) space per structure

Group Home

One (1) space per 4 persons of licensed capacity

Two (2) space per structure

Guidance Services

One (1) space per 300 s.f. of net floor area

None required

Hospitals

One and one-half  (1 1/2) spaces per 2 licensed beds; plus, .75 times the maximum number of employees during the largest shift.

Three (3) spaces per structure

Hotels and Motels

One (1) space per rental unit

One (1) space per establishment

Housing

 

 

 

Assisted-living facilities

One (1) space per  two dwelling unit plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift

One (1) per structure

 

Duplex

Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit

None required

 

Independent (restricted) facilities

One (1) space per dwelling unit

None required

 

Multi-family / Apartments

Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit

None required

 

Single-family, attached & detached

Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit

None required

Industrial Uses

.75 times the maximum number of employees during the largest shift

Two (2) spaces per establishment

Libraries

One (1) space 500 s.f. of net floor area

One (1) per structure

Boarding Houses / Bed and Breakfasts

One (1) space per rental units

None required

Medical Clinics

Five (5) spaces per staff doctor, dentist, chiropractor

None required

Manufactured Home Park

Two (2) per dwelling unit

None required

Offices and Office Buildings

One (1) space per 200 s.f. of net floor area

None required

Roadside stands

Four (4) spaces per establishment

None required

Service Oriented Establishments

One (1) space per 200 s.f. of net floor area

One (1) per establishment

Theaters, Auditoriums, and Places of Assembly

One (1) space per 4 persons of licensed capacity

One (1) space per establishment

Veterinary Establishments

Three (3) spaces per staff doctor

None required

Wholesaling / Distribution Operations

One (1) space per 2 employees on the largest shift

Two (2) spaces per establishment

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005
Amended by Ordinance No. 8976, effective 6-8-2005

 

§36-98.  Off-Street Parking Design Criteria
(A) Standard parking stall dimensions shall not be less than 9 feet by 20 feet or 10 feet by 18 feet, plus the necessary space for maneuvering into and out of the space. Where the end of the parking space abuts a curbed area at least 5 feet in width (with landscaping and sidewalk), an overhang may be permitted which would reduce the length of the parking space by 2 feet. Such overhang shall be measured from the face of the curb. For standard parking lots, minimum dimensions shall be as follows:

 

Parking Configuration

 

90-degree

60-degree

45-degree

Aisle Width (A)

 

 

 

 

One-way traffic

-----

18 feet

14 feet

 

Two-way traffic

24 feet

20 feet

20 feet

End Parking Bay Width (B)

 

 

 

 

Without overhang

18 feet

20 feet

19 feet

 

With overhang

16 feet

18 feet

17 feet

Center Parking Bay Width (C)

18 feet

18 feet

16 feet

 



(B) Minimum dimensions for a parallel parking space shall be 9 feet by 23 feet

(C) Minimum parking dimensions for other configurations or for parking lots with compact car spaces shall be determined by the Planning Commission and City Council upon recommendation of the City Engineer

 

§36-99.  Home Occupations
The following are the minimum standards required for a Home Occupation:

(A) There shall be no external or externally visible evidence of the home occupation, business or profession whatsoever. There shall be no signage or advertising, linking the residential property with the home occupation.

(B) No more than 25% of the floor area of any one story can be used for the home occupation

(C) There shall be no machinery other than that normally found in a home

(D) There shall be no contact at the premises with customers or clients other than by telephone or mail, except that music lessons may be given to one pupil at a time, and cultural, art, or dance instruction may be given to four pupils at one time

(E) No one other than the resident(s) can work from that site

(F) No retail sales are permitted from the site other than incidental sales related to services provided

(G) No exterior storage (including storage within detached buildings/garage) is permitted

(H) No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, heat or glare shall be noticeable at or beyond the property line

(I) The above listed characteristics of a home occupation shall not be construed to restrict the sale of garden produce grown on the premises, provided, this exception shall not extend to allow the operation of a commercial greenhouse or nursery, or the existence of stands or booths for display of said produce

All businesses related to Child Care Homes and Child Care Centers shall be in accordance with Neb. R.R.S. 1943, Sec. §71-1902.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

 

§36-100.  Fences and Hedges; Corner Visibility
  (A) There shall be no fences, hedges, or other continuous foliage higher than 36 inches above roadway surface except that trees of a greater height may be permitted if all foliage is removed to a height of five feet above the base of such tree within the sight triangle.

  (B)Fences and Hedges; Other Visibility. On portions of a lot not covered by the corner visibility restriction, the height of fences, hedges, and foliage, continuous five feet or more, shall be limited in the following manner:

  (1) Maximum front yard fence height of thirty-six (36) inches for solid fences (including picket, palisade, fabric weave chain link, "good neighbor", solid planking fencing styles).

  (2) Maximum front yard fence height of forty-eight (48) inches for open fences (including chain link, split rail, or wrought iron, where spacing/thickness of fence construction materials allows for an essentially unobstructed view.

  (3) Maximum front yard hedge/foliage height of thirty-six (36) inches.

  (4) On all other portions of lot lines, fences, hedges and other foliage, barriers may not exceed a height of ninety-six (96) inches.

  (C) Fences and Hedges; Height. Fences, hedges, and other continuous foliage erected within the building portions of a zoning lot may conform with the height limits of such buildings but shall be subject to any building code provisions which may be applicable for buildings.

  (D) Fences and Hedges; Measurement. Height of fences, hedges or other continuous foliage shall be measured from the nearest top of roadway surface or the official established grade thereof, whichever is the higher.

  (E) Fences and Hedges; Exceptions. The city council may direct as a condition for granting a conditional use that fences, hedges, or other continuous foliage of a height and location in excess of these regulations be placed; provided, that no such approval shall have the effect of reducing corner visibility as provided for herein.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

 

§36-101.  Performance Standards for Industrial Uses
The following standards shall be met unless there are greater standards required by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality.

          (A) Physical Appearance: All operations shall be carried on within an enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in operable condition may be stored in the open. Normal daily wastes of an inorganic nature may be stored in containers not in a building when such containers are not readily visible from a street. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the display of merchandise or vehicles for sale or the storage of vehicles, boats, farm machinery, trailers, manufactured homes, or similar equipment when in operable condition.

          (B) Fire Hazard: No operation shall involve the use of highly flammable gasses, acid, liquids, grinding processes, or other inherent fire hazards. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of normal heating fuels, motor fuels and welding gasses when handled in accordance with other regulations of the City of Grand Island.

          (C) Noise: No operation shall be carried on which involves noise in excess of the normal traffic noise of the adjacent street at the time of the daily peak hour of traffic volume. Noise shall be measured at the property line and when the level of such noise cannot be determined by observation with the natural senses, a suitable instrument may be used and measurement may include breakdowns into a reasonable number of frequency ranges.

          (D) Sewage and Liquid Wastes: No operation shall be carried on which involves the discharge into a sewer, water course, or the ground, liquid waste of any radioactive or poisonous nature or chemical waste which are detrimental to normal sewage plant operation or corrosive and damaging to sewer pipes and installations.

          (E) Air Contaminants:

  (1) Air Contaminants and smoke shall be less dark than designated Number One on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a density designated as Number One shall be permitted for one four minute period in each one-half hour. Light colored contaminants of such a capacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the aforesaid shall not be permitted.

  (2) Particulate matter of dust as measured at the point of emission by any generally accepted method shall not be emitted in excess of two tenths (0.2) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit, except for a period of four minutes in any one-half hour, at which time it may equal but not exceed six tenths (0.6) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit.

  (3) Due to the fact that the possibilities of air contamination cannot reasonably be comprehensively covered in this section, there shall be applied the general rule that there shall not be discharged from any sources whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other material in such quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of persons or to the public in general; or to endanger the comfort, repose, health, or safety of any such considerable number of persons or to the public in general, or to cause, or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business, vegetation, or property.

  (4) Odor: The emission of odors that are generally agreed to be obnoxious to any considerable numbers of persons, shall be prohibited. Observations of odor shall be made at the property line of the establishment causing the odor. As a guide to classification of odor it shall be deemed that strong odors of putrefaction and fermentation tend to be obnoxious and that such odors as associated with baking or the roasting of nuts and coffee shall not normally be considered obnoxious within the meaning of this regulation.

  (5) Gasses: The gasses sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide shall not exceed five (5) parts per million, carbon monoxide shall not exceed five (5) parts per million. All measurements shall be taken at the zoning lot line.

  (6) Vibration: All machines including punch presses and stamping machines shall be so mounted as to minimize vibration and in no case shall such vibration exceed a displacement of three thousands (0.003) of an inch measured at the zoning lot line. The use of steam or broad hammers shall not be permitted in this zone.

  (7) Glare and heat: All glare, such as welding arcs and open furnaces shall be shielded so that they shall not be visible from the zoning lot line. No heat from furnaces or processing equipment shall be sensed at the zoning lot line to the extent of raising the temperature of air or materials more than five (5) degrees Fahrenheit.

          (F)   Physical Appearance: Salvage yards and other similar operations shall be effectively enclosed or shielded from adjacent properties on all sides by means of a sight-obscuring fence at least eight (8) feet in height, in good repair, and constructed of conventional fence building materials and techniques as approved by the chief building official. No inventory or salvage materials of any nature may be stacked within fifty (50.0) feet of the fence to a height greater than said fence.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9151, effective 12-18-2007

 

§36-102.  Landscaping Requirements
  (A)  Purpose: The landscaping and screening regulations are intended to improve the physical appearance of the community; to improve the environmental performance of new development by contributing to the abatement of heat, noise, glare, wind and dust; to promote natural percolation of storm water and improvement of air quality; to buffer potentially incompatible uses from one another; and, to protect and enhance the value of property and neighborhoods within the city.

  (B)  Applicability:

(1)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the following zones: Medium Density Residential Zone, Medium Density Small Lot Residential Zone, High Density Residential Zone, Residential Office Zone, Light Business Zone, General Business Zone, Arterial Commercial Overlay Zone, Heavy Business Zone, Industrial Estates Zone, Light Manufacturing Zone, Heavy Manufacturing Zone, Commercial Development Zone, Residential Development Zone and Travel Development Zone. Landscaping of lands within districts such as the Central Business District and Fourth Street Business District, as defined in this code, shall be subject to Streetscape Improvement Projects where applicable.  In the absence of such projects, the provisions of this section shall apply.

(2)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the Airport Overlay Zone with the exception that three shrubs may be substituted for each required shade or ornamental tree to conform to standards of wildlife management required near an airport.

  (3) The provisions of this section shall apply to all new development, including surface parking, on each lot or site upon application for a building permit, except as follows:

  (a) Reconstruction or replacement of a lawfully existing use or structure.

  (b) Remodeling, rehabilitation or improvements to existing uses or structures which do not substantially change the location or building footprint of existing structures, or the location and design of parking facilities or other site improvements. However, additions or enlargements of existing uses or structures, which increase floor area or impervious coverage by more than 25% adjacent to the existing street frontage, shall be subject to the provisions of this section, which shall only apply to that portion of the lot or site where the new development or use occurs.

  (c) Residential structures containing three dwelling units on a single lot, or less shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.

  (4) Landscaping which exists on any property shall not be altered or reduced below the minimum requirements of this section, unless suitable substitutions are made which meet the requirements of this section, pursuant to a site plan approved by the city.

  (5) Any conflict between this section and another section of this chapter shall be resolved in favor of the more restrictive provision.

  (C)  Nonconforming Status: Any property or use of property, which as of August 1, 2004 or any amendment hereto is lawfully nonconforming only as to the regulations relating to landscaping, may be continued in the same manner as if the landscaping were conforming.

  (D)  Definitions:  The following definitions shall be used for terms contained within this section:

  Buffer yard: A landscaped area provided to separate and significantly obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another.

  Canopy tree: A deciduous tree having a minimum mature height of 30 feet and a minimum caliper of 1 inch at the time of planting.  One canopy tree equals two understory/ornamental or evergreen trees.

  Evergreen tree: An evergreen or conifer tree having a minimum mature height of 20 feet and a minimum 2 gallon container size or bare root/ball equivalent at the time of planting.

  Landscaped area: That area within the boundaries of a given lot consisting primarily of plant material, including but not limited to grass, trees, shrubs, flowers, vines, groundcover and other organic plant materials (this does not include plant materials typically used as a cash crop).  Tall varieties of native and ornamental grasses may be planted and left in their natural state in selective and limited locations, deemed appropriate by the city.  Inorganic materials such as brick, stones, aggregate, ponds or fountains may be used within landscaped areas, provided that such materials comprise no more than 35 percent of the required landscaped area.  Flat concrete or asphalt, other than walkways five feet or less in width, may not be used within a required landscaped area.

  Minimum equivalent street landscaping: The minimum landscaped area which must be provided in a street yard, expressed as a percent of the total area contained within that street yard.

  Shrub:  A deciduous or evergreen plant having a minimum height of 18 inches at the time of planting, with a maximum mature height of less than 10 feet.

  Street yard:

  (1) The area of a lot or parcel which lies between any street property line and the fronting walls of any building or buildings on the parcel. The street yard shall follow all irregularities or indentations in the front wall of the building, excluding minor projections or indentations such as steps or unenclosed porches. For the purposes of defining the street yard area, the front wall shall be extended from the outermost corners of the building, parallel with the fronting street, until intersecting with the side property line [see Attachment B hereto].  Street yard depth shall not exceed 100 feet for the purposes of calculating the minimum equivalent street landscaping area requirement.

  (2) On lots or parcels with multiple buildings, the street yard area shall be defined by all building front walls having direct, visual frontage onto the street.  Any space between buildings equal to 15 percent of the length of such frontage, but in no case more than 100 feet, shall be considered an extension of the continuous building front wall for the purpose of delineating the street yard.

  Understory/ornamental tree: A flowering or non-flowering deciduous tree having a maximum mature height of 30 feet and a minimum caliper of 2 inch at the time of planting.

  (E)  Street Yard Landscaping Standards:

(1) Street yard landscaping shall be provided adjacent to each street property line and within street yards, as set forth below, in accordance with an approved site landscaping plan.

(2) Minimum equivalent street landscaping area:

 

(Minimum Equivalent Street Landscaping Area

Zoning District

Percent of Street Yard

(%)

Minimum Landscaping Depth

of Street Yard*** (ft.)

R3SL

65

20

R3

65

20

R4

60

10

RO

30

10

B1

25

10

B2

20*

10*

AC

20

20*

B3

0

0

ME

20

20

M1

20

20

M2

20

10

M3

20

10

TD

30

30

CD

**

30

RD

**

10 or 30

*Unless otherwise established in an approved Streetscape Improvement Project.

**As determined by approved plan

 

  (3) When a lot contains more than one street frontage, the area of all street yards and the proposed street yard landscaped areas may be combined for the purposes of determining compliance with this section.

  (4) Any required street yard landscaping shall include the following minimum shrub and tree plantings (or an appropriate equivalent as determined by the city) for every 100 feet (any fraction of .5 or less rounded to the next lowest number; any fraction exceeding .5 rounded to the next highest number) of property line adjacent to a public street right-of-way: 1 canopy tree; 1 understory/ornamental or evergreen tree; 3 shrubs. Existing trees or shrubs approved for preservation shall be counted toward satisfaction of this provision.

  (F)  Buffer Yard and Parking Landscaping Screening Standards:

(1) Buffer yard landscaping shall be installed and maintained adjacent to the affected common side or rear property line(s), when a use is established in a more intensive zoning district located adjacent to a less intensive zoning district, as set forth below:

 

More Intensive Zoning District

Required Buffer Yard Width (ft.)*

Less Intensive Zoning District

RO, B1, B2, AC, CD, TD

10

TA, LLR, R1, R2, R3, R3SL, R4, RD

ME, M1, M2, M3

20

TA, LLR, R1, R2, R3, R3SL, R4, RO, RD, CD, TD, B1, B2, B2, AC, B3

*When an alley, street or railroad R.O.W. separates adjacent districts requiring a buffer yard, the buffer yard width shall be halved.

 

  (2) Buffer yard landscaping is intended to provide screening of loading docks, refuse collection points, truck/equipment parking, sources of noise, glare, light, dust, or other negative impacts. Buffer yard landscaping shall include hedges or screens of evergreen or approved deciduous plant material, capable of providing a substantial opaque barrier, and attaining a minimum height of 6 feet within three years of planting. Opaque fencing may also supplement the vegetative plantings, but shall be installed no closer to the property line than the width of the required buffer yard.

  (3) Buffer yard landscaping and parking landscaping screening strips shall not be placed on an easement.

  (4) A parking landscaping screening strip, having a Minimum Landscaping Depth of Street Yard as identified above, shall be installed along any parking area adjacent to a public street right-of-way. No parking area shall contain more than 100 spaces except as allowed within these regulations. If a greater number of parking spaces is required, separate parking areas shall be provided, and shall be separated from other parking areas by landscaped dividing strips, having a minimum width of 6 feet.  These strips shall include trees, shrubs, grasses and other vegetative coverings for a creative aesthetic appearance. A parking landscaping screening strip shall also count towards meeting any requirements associated with minimum equivalent street or buffer yard landscaping.

Alternate plans for parking lots with more than 500 spaces may submitted for approval by a committee comprised of the Planning Director, Building Department Director and Public Works Director with recommendations from other appropriate city staff.  The Committee shall establish criteria for the review and approval of larger parking lots based on but not limited to the following areas of concern: overall area and types of landscaping provided shall not be less than would be required under the conventional regulations, provision for storm water management and filtering using best available practices, provisions for adequate lighting, fire protection and security throughout the lot, provisions for pedestrian access through and around the lot, and provisions for pedestrian access to the site requiring said parking lot.

  (5) A development may continue to comply with the buffer yard landscaping requirements in effect at the time of issuance of its initial building permit, regardless of whether an adjacent lot or property is rezoned to a less restrictive zoning district which requires additional buffer yard landscaping.

  (G)  Site Plan Requirements:

  (1) A site plan showing the required street yard, buffer yard and/or parking screening landscaping shall be submitted to the city for review and approval as part of the application for a building permit. The plan shall include, but not be limited to the following:

(a)   Location of proposed landscaping drawn to scale.

(b)  Location, size, type and condition of proposed plant and non-plant landscaping materials including fences, walks, ponds, fountains, benches, lighting and irrigation systems.

(c)   Estimated date of completion of the installation of all plantings and finishing materials.

  (H)  Installation and Maintenance Requirements:

  (1) Required landscaping areas shall be installed and maintained in a neat, clean, orderly and healthful condition.  Maintenance shall include proper pruning of trees and shrubs, mowing of lawn and grass areas, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants consistent with this section when necessary, and the regular watering of all plantings.

  (2) The installation of landscaping shall be completed prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for buildings on the property, or commencement of the intended use of the property. 

  (3) If, at the time of commencement of the intended use of the property or application for a certificate of occupancy, any required landscaping has not been installed or completed due to seasonal or climatic conditions or plant material being unavailable,  the developer or owner of the property shall submit the following to the Building Department:

  (a) A request for extension of the proposed completion date for installation of the required landscaping, stating the reason for the request, the property owner's current mailing address, and a commitment to complete the installation of the landscaping by a date certain, not to exceed six months from the building completion date.

  (b) A drawing showing the plan and layout of the landscaping areas.

  (c) A cost estimate for the installation of the landscaping area.

  (d) A bond, certificate of deposit, letter of credit, cash or other financial surety as may be approved by the City Attorney guaranteeing faithful performance of the owner or developer's commitment to complete installation of the required landscaping and payable to the City of Grand Island in the event that the developer fails to carry out the commitments described in sub-paragraph (a) above.

  (4) Upon approval of the foregoing request for extension of time to complete the landscaping installation, the owner or developer shall be issued a conditional certificate of occupancy or a conditional letter authorizing commencement of use of the property by the Building Department. The owner or developer shall complete the installation of the landscaping in accordance with the commitments made pursuant to sub-paragraph (a) above, and, upon inspection and approval by the Building Department, a certificate of occupancy or commencement of use letter shall be issued. All limitations on the use of the property relating to landscaping are deemed to be of no force or effect at that time, and the City shall release the surety or other security submitted by the owner or developer.

  (5) If the owner or developer has not installed the required landscaping with the commitments made pursuant to sub-paragraph (a) above, the owner or developer shall be deemed to have granted the City or its officers, employees, agents or representatives permission to enter upon the property to install the required landscaping in accordance with the plan submitted pursuant to sub-paragraph (c) above using the surety or security filed by the owner or developer as payment for said installation. The Building Department shall send the owner or developer written notice of default and intention to enter onto the property to install required landscaping by certified mail, return receipt requested, and ordinary first class mail sent to the last known address of said owner or developer at least five (5) business days prior to making such entry.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9256, effective 04-07-2010

Amended by Ordinance No. 9419, effective 02-15-2013

Amended by Ordinance No. 9422, effective 04-02-2013

Amended by Ordinance No. 9738, effective 07-10-2019

 

§36-103. Wind Energy Conversion Systems

(1)     Definitions

The following are defined for the specific use of this section.

          (A)    Aggregate Project shall mean projects that are developed and operated in a coordinated fashion, but which have multiple entities separately owning one or more of the individual WECS within the larger project. Associated infrastructure such as power lines and transformers that service the facility may be owned by a separate entity but are also part of the aggregated project.

          (B)    Commercial WECS shall mean a wind energy conversion system of equal to or greater than 100 kW in total name plate generating capacity.

          (C)    Connector Line shall mean any power conductor that carries electrical power from one or more wind turbines to the point of interconnection with the distribution system.

          (D)    Hub Height shall mean the distance from ground level as measured to the centerline of the rotor.

          (E)    Meteorological Tower shall mean, for purposes of this regulation, a tower which is erected primarily to measure wind speed and directions plus other data relevant to siting a Wind Energy Conversion System. Meteorological towers do not include towers and equipment used by airports, the Nebraska Department of Roads, or other applications to monitor weather conditions.

          (F)     Micro Wind Energy Conversion System (MWECS) shall mean a wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than 5 kW and which is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power.  Rotor Diameter shall not exceed 7 feet.

          (G)    Property Line shall mean the boundary line of the area over which the entity applying for a Wind Energy Conversion System permit has legal control for the purpose of installing, maintaining and operating a Wind Energy Conversion System.

          (H)    Public Conservation lands shall mean land owned in fee title by State or Federal agencies and managed specifically for conservation purposes, including but not limited to State Wildlife Management Areas, State Parks, federal Wildlife Refuges and Waterfowl Production Areas. For purposes of this regulation, public conservation lands will also include lands owned in fee title by non-profit conservation organizations, Public conservation lands will also include private lands upon which conservation easements have been sold to public agencies or non-profit conservation organizations.

          (I)     Rotor Diameter shall mean the diameter of the circle described by the moving rotor blades.

          (J)     Small Wind Energy Conversion System (SWECS) shall mean a wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity not less than 5 kW and not more than 100 kW or has a rated capacity of not more than 5 kW and a rotor diameter of greater than 7 feet and which is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power.

          (K)    Substations shall mean any electrical facility to convert electricity produced by wind turbines to a higher or lower voltage for interconnection with transmission lines.

          (L)    Total Height shall mean the highest point, above ground level, reached by a rotor tip or any other part of the Wind Energy Conversion System.

          (M)   Tower shall mean the vertical structures, including the foundation that supports the electrical generator, rotor blades, or meteorological equipment.

          (N)    Tower Height (Ground Mounted) shall mean the total height of the Wind Energy Conversion System, between the ground level at the base of the tower and the top of the tower, exclusive of the rotor blades.

          (O)    Tower Height (Roof Mounted) shall mean the total height of the Wind Energy Conversion System, between the roof level at the base of the tower and the top of the tower, exclusive of the rotor blades.

          (P)     Transmission Line shall mean the electrical power lines that carry voltages of at least 69,000 volts (69 KV) and are primarily used to carry electric energy over medium to long distances rather than directly interconnecting and supplying electric energy to retail customers.

          (Q)    Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS) shall mean an electrical generating facility comprised of one or more wind turbines and accessory facilities, including but not limited to: power lines, transformers, substations and meteorological towers that operate by converting the kinetic energy of wind into electrical energy, which may be used on-site or distributed into the electrical grid.

          (R)    Wind Turbines shall mean any piece of electrical generating equipment that converts the kinetic energy of blowing wind into electrical energy using airfoils or similar devices to capture the wind.   (S)     Vertical Axis Wind Turbine: A wind energy conversion system design where the rotating shaft is perpendicular to the ground and the cups or blades rotate parallel to the ground.

 

 

(2)     Micro Wind Energy Conversion Systems

 

Purpose

It is the purpose of this wind energy regulation to; promote the safe, effective and efficient use of wind energy and to encourage the development of residential scale generation systems as they become affordable as determined by the residents of Grand Island and Hall County.

Requirements

Residential wind energy conversion systems shall be permitted as an Accessory Use within any zoning district. Certain requirements as set forth below shall be met:

          (A)    Tower Height

                   (1)    Shall be limited by the size of the property.  Tower height shall not exceed the fall zone for the property.

          (B)    Minimum Lot Size

                    (1)    Towers shall be permitted on all lots or parcels with a permitted principal use.

          (C)    Fall Zone

                   (1) Fall Zone is the total height and any underlying setbacks for ground mounted MWCES.

                   (2) Fall Zone is the 125% of the tower height and any underlying setbacks for roof mounted MWCES.

          (D)    Setbacks

                   (1)    No part of the wind system structure, including guy-wire anchors, may extend closer than 10 feet to the property lines of the installation site; tower must meet required underlying setbacks.

          (E)    Noise

                   (1)\MWCES shall not exceed 60 dBA, as measured at the closet neighboring inhabited dwelling unit.

                   (2)    The noise level may be exceeded during short term events such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms, wind speeds of greater than 50 miles per hour.

          (F)    Approved Wind Turbines

                   (1)    MWCES must have been approved under the Emerging Technologies program of the California Energy Commission or any other small certification program recognized by the American Wind Energy Association.

          (G)    Compliance with Building and Zoning Codes

                   (1)    Applications for MWCES shall be accomplished by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower base, and footings.

                   (2)    An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with official building code of the governing body and/or the State of Nebraska and certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.

          (H)    Compliance with FAA Regulations

                   (1)    MWCES must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations within the airport approach zone.

                   (2)    No MWCES shall be installed within the regulated airport approach zone until evidence has been given that the Central Nebraska Regional Airport has been informed of the applicant’s intent to install a MWECS. A copy of a certified letter (with mailing receipt) to the Central Nebraska Regional Airport informing them of the owners’ intent to install the MWCES must be submitted with the building permit application.

          (I)     Compliance with National Electrical Code

                   (1)    Permit applications for small wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electrical Code and the National Electric Safety Code.

          (J)     Utility Notification

                   (1)    No small wind energy system shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.

                   (2)    Off- grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.

Setbacks

Minimum setbacks from all property lines shall be equal to the Fall Zone as defining in C above.

 

 

(3)     Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems

 

Purpose

It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of small wind energy systems installed to reduce the on-site consumption of utility supplied electricity.

Requirements

Small wind energy conversion systems shall be permitted as an Accessory Use within any district. Certain requirements as set forth below shall be met:

          (A)    Tower Height

                   (1)    Shall be limited by the size of the property.  Tower height shall not exceed the fall zone for the property.

          (B)    Minimum Lot Size

                    ((1)   Towers shall be permitted on all lots or parcels with a permitted principal use.

          (C)    Fall Zone

                   (1) Fall Zone is the total height and any underlying setbacks for ground mounted SWCES.

                   (2) Fall Zone is the 150% of the tower height and any underlying setbacks for roof mounted SWCES.

          (D)    Setbacks

                   (1)    No part of the wind system structure, including guy-wire anchors, may extend closer than 10 feet to the property lines of the installation site; tower must meet required underlying setbacks.

          (E)    Noise

                   (1)    SWCES shall not exceed 60 dBA, as measured at the closet neighboring inhabited dwelling unit.

                   (2)    The noise level may be exceeded during short term events such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms, wind speeds of greater than 50 miles per hour.

          (F)    Approved Wind Turbines

                   (1)    SWCES must have been approved under the Emerging Technologies program of the California Energy Commission or any other small certification program recognized by the American Wind Energy Association.

          (G)    Compliance with Building and Zoning Codes

                   (1)    Applications for SWCES shall be accomplished by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower base, and footings.

                   (2)    An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with official building code of the governing body and/or the State of Nebraska and certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.

          (H)    Compliance with FAA Regulations

                   (1)    Small wind energy conversion systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations within the airport approach zones.

                   (2)    No SWCES shall be installed within the regulated airport approach zone until evidence has been given that the Central Nebraska Regional Airport has been informed of the applicant’s intent to install a SWECS. A copy of a certified letter (with mailing receipt) to the Central Nebraska Regional Airport informing them of the owners’ intent to install the SWCES must be submitted with the building permit application.

          (I)     Compliance with National Electrical Code

                   (1)    Permit applications for small wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electrical Code and the National Electric Safety Code.

          (J)     Utility Notification

                   (1)    No small wind energy system shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.

                   (2)    Off- grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.

Setbacks

Minimum setbacks from all property lines shall be equal to the Fall Zone as defining in C above.

 

 

(4)     Commercial/Utility Grade Wind Energy Conversion Systems

 

Purpose

It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of commercial/utility grade wind energy conversion systems within the City of Grand Island and its Extraterritorial Zoning Jurisdiction.

Requirements

Commercial/Utility Grade wind energy systems shall be a Conditional Use within the AG-2 Secondary Agricultural District, the TA Transitional Agriculture District, the AG-SI Special Agriculture/Industrial Zone, AG-SE Special Agriculture District/Events Zone, and the AG-SC Special Agriculture District/Conservation Zone. The following requirements and information shall be met and supplied:

          (A)    The name(s) of project applicant.

          (B)    The name of the project owner.

          (C)    The legal description and address of the project.

          (D)    A description of the project including: Number, type, name plate generating capacity, tower height, rotor diameter, and total height of all wind turbines and means of interconnecting with the electrical grid.

          (E)    Site layout, including the location of property lines, wind turbines, feeder lines, and all related accessory structures. This site layout shall include distances and be drawn to scale.

          (F)     Certification by an Engineer competent in disciplines of WEC’s.

          (G)    Documentation of land ownership or legal control of the property.

          (H)    The latitude and longitude of individual wind turbines; included with this shall be an area or zone in close proximity that meets all setbacks; where actual WEC will be considered.

          (I)     A USGS topographical map, or map with similar data, of the property and surrounding area, including any other Wind Energy Conversion System, within 10 rotor distances of the proposed Wind Energy Conversion System not owned by the applicant.

          (J)     Location of migratory waterfowl flyways, wetlands, scenic, and natural areas within 1,320 feet of the proposed Wind Energy Conversion System.

          (K)    An Acoustical Analysis that certifies that the noise requirements within this regulation can be met

          (L)    The applicant shall supply the emergency management agency and/or fire departments with a basic emergency response plan.

          (M)   FAA and FCC permit, if necessary.

(1)        Commercial/Utility Grade wind energy conversion systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations within the airport zone.

(2)        No WEC shall be installed within the regulated airport approach zone until evidence has been given that the Central Nebraska Regional Airport has been informed of the applicant’s intent to install a SWECS. A copy of a certified letter (with mailing receipt) to the Central Nebraska Regional Airport informing them of the owners intent to install the SWCES must be submitted with the building permit application.

          (N)    Evidence that there will be no inference with any commercial and/or public safety communication towers.

          (O)    Decommissioning Plan as required by this regulation.

 

Setbacks

All towers shall adhere to the setbacks established in the following table:

 

Wind Turbine-

Commercial/Utility WECS

Meteorological Towers

Property Lines

150 feet from property lines; however, the setback may be less when two adjoining property owners are within the

aggregate project.

One times the tower height.

Neighboring Dwelling Units

1,000 feet

One times the tower height.

Road Rights-of-Way*

One-half the rotor diameter.

One times the tower height.

Other Rights-of-Way

NA

NA

Wildlife Management Areas and State Recreational Areas

600 feet

600 feet

Wetlands, USFW Types III, IV, and V

600 feet

600 feet

Other structures and cemeteries adjacent to the applicant's sites

One-half the rotor diameter.

One times the tower height.

Other existing WECS not owned by the applicant.

NA

NA

* The setback shall be measured from any future Rights-of-Way if a planned change or expanded Right-of-Way is known.

 

(5)     Special Safety and Design Standards

All towers shall adhere to the following safety and design standards:

          (A)    Clearance of rotor blades or airfoils must maintain a minimum of 12 feet of clearance between their lowest point and the ground.

          (B)    All Commercial/Utility WECS shall have a sign or signs posted on the tower, transformer and substation, warning of high voltage. Other signs shall be posted on the tower base or perimeter fencing with emergency contact information.

          (C)    All wind turbines, which are a part of a commercial/utility WECS, shall be installed with a tubular, monopole type tower.

          (D)    Consideration shall be given to painted aviation warnings on all towers less than 200 feet.

          (E)    Color and finish:

                   All wind turbines and towers that are part of a commercial/utility WECS shall be white, grey, or another non-obtrusive color. Blades may be black in order to facilitate deicing. Finishes shall be matte or non-reflective.

          (F)     Lighting:

                   Lighting, including lighting intensity and frequency of strobe, shall adhere to but not exceed requirements established by the FAA permits and regulations. Red strobe lights shall be used during nighttime illumination to reduce impacts on neighboring uses and migratory birds. Red pulsating incandescent lights should be avoided.

          (G)  Other signage:

                  All other signage shall comply with the sign regulations found in the City Code.

          (H)  Feeder Lines:

                  All communications and connector lines associated with the project distribution system installed as part of a WECS shall be buried. Where obstacles to the buried lines create a need to go above ground, these lines may be placed above ground only to miss the obstacle.

          (I)     Waste Disposal:

                   Solid and Hazardous wastes, including but not limited to crates, packaging materials, damaged or worn parts, as well as used oils and lubricants, shall be removed from the site promptly and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations.

          (J)     Discontinuation and Decommissioning:

                   A WECS shall be considered a discontinued use after one year without energy production, unless a plan is developed and submitted to the Zoning Administrator outlining the steps and schedule for returning the WECS to service. All WECS and accessory facilities shall be completely removed to twelve feet below ground level within 180 days of the discontinuation of use. The 180 days may be extended if proof of weather delays is provided.

                   Each Commercial/Utility WECS shall have a Decommissioning plan outlining the anticipated means and cost of removing WECS at the end of their serviceable life or upon use being discontinued. The cost estimates shall be made by a competent party; such as a Professional Engineer, a contractor capable of decommissioning or a person with suitable expertise or experience with decommissioning. The plan shall also identify the financial resources that will be available to pay for decommissioning and removal of the WECS and accessory facilities. The initial plan shall be submitted with the application. An updated plan shall be filed with the City every 5 years.

          (K)  Noise:

                  No Commercial/Utility WECS shall exceed 50 dBA at the nearest structure or use occupied by humans.

          (L)    Interference:

                   The applicant shall not cause interference with power quality of area utility feeder circuits and shall not introduce noise to the connected electric distribution system.  WECS shall not cause interference with any commercial or public safety electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, microwaves, or television signals. The applicant shall notify all electric utilities and communication tower operators within five miles of the proposed WECS location upon application for permits.

          (M)  Environmental Permits:

                  The developer shall present evidence the project meets the environmental permitting requirements of all applicable state and federal agencies if such permits are required.

          (N)  Drainage System:

                  The applicant shall be responsible for immediate repair of damage to public drainage systems stemming from construction, operation or maintenance of the WECS.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9210, effective 04-08-2009

Amended by Ordinance No. 9261, effective 06-09-2010

 

§36-104.  Vehicle Sales and Rental Businesses in Existence on December 15, 2002; Minimum 

Improvements Requirement
          All businesses engaged in automotive/truck/recreational vehicle sales and/or rentals on or after December 15, 2002 shall have the following minimum improvements and equipment:

          (A) All areas on which vehicles are displayed and offered for sale and/or rental shall be provided with a permanent type, dust-free surface such as asphaltic cement concrete, Portland cement concrete, or paving brick. The Grand Island City Council may, upon application for and approval of a conditional use permit, waive this requirement for businesses that were operating at the same location prior to March 9, 1999.

          (B) Any business engaged in vehicle sales and/or rentals shall have a principal building which complies with the Grand Island City Code and all applicable building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes.

          (C) Any business engaged in vehicle sales and/or rentals shall have space within the principal building or an accessory building for storage of all vehicle parts, new or used. All such parts must be stored within said space.

          (D) All hazardous materials, regulated waste and used vehicle fluids shall be stored and disposed of in accordance with state and federal laws and the rules and regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality. Tank storage of fluids and wastes must be situated within a suitable overflow enclosure.

 

§36-105.  Vehicle Sales and Rental Businesses; New Businesses and Businesses Relocating or 

Expanding; Minimum Improvement Requirements
          Beginning December 15, 2002, all new, relocating or expanding businesses engaged in automotive/truck/recreational vehicle sales and/or rentals shall have the following minimum improvements and equipment:

          (A) All areas on which vehicles are displayed and offered for sale and/or rental shall be provided with a permanent type, dust-free surface such as asphaltic cement concrete, Portland cement concrete, or paving brick.

          (B) Any business engaged in vehicle sales and/or rentals shall have a principal building which complies with the Grand Island City Code and all applicable building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes.

          (C) Any business engaged in vehicle sales and/or rentals shall have space within the principal building or an accessory building for storage of all vehicle parts, new or used. All such parts must be stored within said space.

          (D) All hazardous materials, regulated waste and used vehicle fluids shall be stored and disposed of in accordance with state and federal laws and the rules and regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality. Tank storage of fluids and wastes must be situated within a suitable overflow enclosure.

          (E) Any business engaged in vehicle sales and/or rentals shall comply with the Grand Island City Code landscaping and screening regulations and minimum off-street parking and loading space requirements prior to commencing operations.

 

§36-106.  Conditional Uses; Salvage Yards
          All salvage yards shall be subject to the following conditions as part of their permitted conditional use:

          (A) In addition to the information required pursuant to §36-88, an application for a conditional use for a salvage yard shall include a site plan for the premises showing the layout of the proposed operation, building and infrastructure locations, property dimensions, drainage and landscaping.

          (B) All structures located or constructed on the salvage yard premises shall comply with the Grand Island City Code and all applicable building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes.

          (C) All hazardous materials and regulated waste shall be received, stored, and disposed of in accordance with state and federal laws and the rules and regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality.

          (D) All operations of a salvage yard, including those which are ancillary and indirectly related to the salvage yard such as administration, parking, equipment and/or container storage shall be conducted on the premises subject to the permitted conditional use.

          (E) All premises on a salvage yard shall be kept and maintained in a clean and orderly manner, using the best practices of the industry, with no loose garbage, litter, refuse or waste materials on the premises except those kept in short term storage for processing. The persons operating the salvage yard shall on a regular and routine basis inspect all areas adjacent to the salvage yard and clean up any materials which originated from the salvage yard.

          (F)  Physical Appearance: Salvage yards and other similar operations shall be effectively enclosed or shielded from adjacent properties on all sides by means of a sight-obscuring fence at least eight (8) feet in height, in good repair, and constructed of conventional fence building materials and techniques as approved by the chief building official. No inventory or salvage materials of any nature may be stacked within fifty (50.0) feet of the fence to a height greater than said fence.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9151, effective 12-18-2007

 

§36-107.  Public Facilities:

          Unless specifically prohibited, public facilities (eg. schools, fire stations, police stations, government offices) owned and operated by a government entity are permitted in all zoning districts subject to the setbacks and rules for that district.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9720, effective 02-06-2019

§36-108.  Reserved
§36-109.  Reserved
§36-110.  Reserved
§36-111.  Reserved
§36-112.  Reserved
§36-113.  Reserved
§36-114.  Reserved
§36-115.  Reserved
§36-116.  Reserved

 

Article VIII.  Flood Plain Regulations

 

§36-117.  Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact and Purposes
          (A) Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of Nebraska has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt zoning regulations designed to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.  The Legislature of the State of Nebraska has in Sections 31-1001 to 31-1022, R.R.S. 1943 assigned the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations designed to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.

          (B) Findings of Fact

   (1) Flood Losses Resulting From Periodic Inundation. The flood hazard areas of Grand Island, Nebraska, are subject to inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

                (2) General Causes of the Flood Losses. These flood losses are caused by:  (a) The cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, (b) The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to others, which are inadequately elevated or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.

   (3)Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards. This Article uses a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series of interrelated steps.

      (a) Selection of a regulatory flood which is based upon engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation.  The base flood is selected for this Article.  It is representative of large floods which are reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this Article.  It is in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any one year, as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administration's Flood Insurance Study, and illustrative materials dated March 2, 1983 as amended, and any future revisions thereto.

      (b) Calculation of water surface profiles based on a hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the base flood.

      (c) Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than 1 foot at any point.

      (d) Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no obstruction is permitted which would cause any water surface increase along the floodway profile.

      (e) Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but which still is subject to inundation by the base flood.

          (C) Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this Article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in §36-117(B)(1) herein by applying the provisions of this Article to:

                (1) Restrict or prohibit uses, which are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities.

                (2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities, which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction.

                (3) Protect individuals from buying lands, which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazard.

                (4) Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance in the National Flood Insurance Program.

 

§36-118.  General Provisions
          (A) Lands to which Article applies. This Article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September 26, 2008, and any revisions thereto, as numbered and unnumbered A Zones (including AE, AO and AH Zones) and within the Zoning Districts FW and FF established in §36-120 of this chapter. In all areas covered by this Article, no development shall be permitted except upon the issuance of a floodplain permit to develop, granted by the City Council or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the City Council or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community and where specifically noted in §36-121, 36-122, and 36-123 herein.

          (B) The enforcement officer. The Building Director and/or Planning Director of the community, or their designee is hereby designated as the community's duly designated Enforcement Officer under this Article.

          (C) Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the floodway and flood fringe overlay districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official Zoning Map or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map or Floodway Map.  Where interpretation is needed to the exact location of the boundaries of the districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the Enforcement Officer shall make the necessary interpretation.  In such cases where the interpretation is contested, the Board of Adjustment will resolve the dispute.  The regulatory flood elevation for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating the district boundary on the land.  The person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the Board of Adjustment and to submit his own technical evidence, if he so desires.

          (D) Compliance. Within identified special flood hazard areas of this community, no development shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this Article and other applicable regulations.

          (E) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this Article to repeal, abrogate or impair any existent easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this Article imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this Article shall prevail. All other sections inconsistent with this Article are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.

          (F) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.

          (G) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris.  This Article does not imply that areas outside floodway and flood fringe district boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damage. This Article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.

          (H) Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Article shall not be affected thereby.

          (I) Appeal. Where a request for a permit to develop or a variance is denied by the Building Director and/or Planning Director, the applicant may apply for such permit or variance directly to the Board of Adjustment.

 

§36-119.  Development Permit
          (A) Permit Required. No person, firm or corporation shall initiate any floodplain development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for development.

          (B) Administration

                (1) The Building Director and/or Planning Director or their designee, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Article.

                (2) Duties of the Building Director and/or Planning Director shall include, but not be limited to:

                (a) Review all development permit applications to assure that the permit requirements of this Article have been satisfied.

                (b) Require verification, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures in special flood hazard areas.

                (c) Require verification, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.

                (d) When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure the Building Director and/or Planning Director shall be presented certification from a registered professional engineer as to the floodproof design.

          (C) Application for Permit. To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose.  Every such application shall:

   (1) Identify and describe the development to be covered by the floodplain development permit.

   (2) Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be done by lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or development.

   (3) Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed development is intended.

   (4) Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction.

   (5) Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.

   (6) Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the Building Director and/or Planning Director.

 

§36-120.  Establishment of Zoning Districts
          Along watercourses where a floodway has been established, the mapped floodplain areas are hereby divided into the two following overlay districts:  A floodway overlay district (FW) and a flood fringe overlay district (FF) as identified in the Flood Insurance Study [and accompanying map(s)].  Within these districts all new uses not meeting the standards of this Article and those standards of the underlying zoning district shall be prohibited.

 

§36-121.  Standards for Floodplain Development
          (A) No permit for development shall be granted for new construction, substantial improvements and other development(s) including the placement of manufactured homes within all numbered and unnumbered A zones (including AE, AO, and AH zones) unless the conditions of this Section are satisfied.

          (B) All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the FIRM are subject to inundation of the base flood; however, the water surface elevation was not provided. The unnumbered A zones shall be subject to all development provisions of this chapter. If Flood Insurance Study data is not available, the community shall utilize any base flood elevation or floodplain data currently available from Federal, State or other sources.

          (C) Until a floodway has been designated, no development or substantial improvement may be permitted within special flood hazard areas unless the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed development or substantial improvement, when combined with all other existing and reasonably anticipated developments or substantial improvements, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any location as shown on the Flood Insurance Study.

          (D) New construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvements, prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes and other developments shall require:

   (1) Design or anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

   (2) New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination.

   (3) Construction with materials resistant to flood damage, utilizing methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

   (4) All utility and sanitary facilities be elevated or flood-proofed up to the regulatory flood protection elevation.

                (E) Storage of Material and Equipment

                (1) The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.

                (2) Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.

          (F) Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, be required to assure that (a) all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, (b) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, (c) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and (d) proposals for development (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivision) of five acres or fifty lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals the base flood elevation.

 

§36-122.  Flood Fringe Overlay District – Including AO and AH Zones
          (A) Permitted Uses. Any use permitted in §36-123 shall be permitted in the Flood Fringe Overlay District. No use shall be permitted in the overlay district unless the standards of §36-121 are met.

          (B) Standards for the Flood Fringe Overlay District.

   (1) Require new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures to have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above one foot above the base flood elevation. Uninhabited garage floors shall be at or above the base flood elevation.

   (2) Require new construction or substantial improvements of non-residential structures to have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to be floodproofed so that below that level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer shall certify that the design standards of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Building Director and/or Planning Director as set forth in §36-119.

   (3) Require for all new construction and substantial improvements that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

   (4) Within AH zones, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

   (5) Manufacturing

    (a)  All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in accordance with local building codes or FEMA guidelines. In the event that over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:

    (i)  Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side.

    (ii)  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side.

    (iii)  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds

    (iv) Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.

    (b)  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within special flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM on sites:

    (i)  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision

    (ii)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision

    (iii)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or

    (iv)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, be elevated such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at o above one foot above the base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of this section.

    (c)  Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within special flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this section be elevated so that either:

    (i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above one foot above the base flood elevation, or

    (ii)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with provisions of this section.

   (6) Recreation vehicles placed on sites within the special flood hazard areas on the community's official map shall either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" of this chapter. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.

   (7) Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §36-118 area areas designated as AO zones. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply within AO zones:

    (a)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).

    (b)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall:

    (i)  Have the lowest floor elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet  if no depth number is specified), or

    (ii)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in §36-119.

    (c)  Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

 

§36-123.  Floodway Overlay District
          (A) Permitted Uses. Only uses having a low flood-damage potential and not obstructing flood flows shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other section. The following are recommended uses for the Floodway District:

  (1) Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, nurseries, forestry.

  (2) Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and play areas.

  (3) Non-residential areas such as loading areas, parking and airport landing strips.

  (4) Public and private recreational uses such as golf courses, archery ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves.

          (B) New structures for human habitation are prohibited.  All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development must be prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that the development shall not result in any increase in water surface elevations along the floodway profile during occurrence of the base flood discharge.  These uses are subject to the standards of §36-121 and §36-122.

 

§36-124.  Variance Procedures
          (A) The Board of Adjustment as established by the City of Grand Island shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this Article.

          (B) The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building Director and/or Planning Director in the enforcement or administration of this Article.

          (C) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as provided in state law.

          (D) In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter; and

     (1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

     (2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

     (3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

     (4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

     (5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

     (6) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;

     (7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

     (8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

     (9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

     (10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

     (11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.

(E) Conditions for Variances

     (1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items 8.52-8.56 below) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

     (2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

     (3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels along the floodway profile during the base flood discharge would result.

     (4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

     (5) Variances shall only be issued upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws.

     (6) The applicant shall be given a written notice over the signature of a community official that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage, and such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this Article.

 

§36-125.  Nonconforming Uses
           (A) A structure or the use of a structure or premises as of August 1, 2004 or amendment of the chapter, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Article may be continued subject to the following conditions:

  (1) If such use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this Article.

  (2) Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.

          (B) If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred except that if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this Article. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued designation.

 

§36-126.  Penalties for Violation
          Violation of the provisions of this Article or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.  Any person who violates this Article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $100.00, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.  Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.

          Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action is as necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

 

§36-127.  Amendments
          The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this Article may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.  Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. At least 10 days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the public hearing.  A copy of such amendments will be provided to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  These regulations are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations as published in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations and the 1983 Nebraska Flood Plain Management Act.

 

§36-128.  Definitions
          Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Article its most reasonable application:

          Appeal means a request for a review of the Building Director and/or Planning Director interpretation of any provision of this Article or a request for a variance.

          Area of Shallow Flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident.  Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

          Base Flood means the flood having one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year.

          Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

          Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

          Existing Construction means (for the purposes of determining rates) structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM's effective before that date.  "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."

          Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before August 26, 1974.

          Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

(A) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.

(B) The usual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

          Flood Fringe is that area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway, that on the average is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of flood occurrence in any one year).

          Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the Flood Hazard Boundaries and the zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the community.

          Flood Insurance Study is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

          Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").

          Floodway or Regulatory Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

          Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management.  "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.

          Highest Adjacent Grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

          Historic Structure means any structure that is:  (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:  (1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

          Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).  An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.

          Manufactured Home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.  The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".

          Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

          New Construction. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction commenced on or after August 26, 1974.

          Overlay District is a district in which additional requirements act in conjunction with the underlying zoning district. The underlying zoning district designation does not change.

          Principally Above Ground means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure is above ground.

          Recreational Vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

          Special Flood Hazard Area is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

          Start of Construction  [for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)] includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.  The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.  Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

          Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

          Substantial Damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

          Substantial Improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement.  This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."

          Variances is a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this Article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this Article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.

 

§36-129.  Reserved
§36-130.  Reserved
§36-131.  Reserved
§36-132.  Reserved
§36-133.  Reserved

 

 

 

 

 

Article IX.  Board of Adjustment

 

§36-134.  Establishment
          The mayor with the consent of the city council shall appoint a board of adjustment which shall consist of five regular members, plus one additional member designated as an alternate who shall attend and serve only when one of the regular members is unable to attend for any reason, each to be appointed for a term of three years and removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after a public hearing.

 

§36-135.  Membership
          Any citizen within the zoning jurisdictional area of the City shall be eligible for membership. One regular member only of the board of adjustment shall be appointed from the City membership of the planning commission, and loss of membership on the planning commission by such member shall also result in immediate loss of membership on the board of adjustment and appointment of another planning commissioner to the board of adjustment.

 

§36-136.  Rules
          The board of adjustment shall adopt rules necessary for the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this chapter.

 

§36-137.  Meetings
          Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his or her absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public.

 

§36-138.  Minutes
          The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.

 

§36-139.  Appeal
          Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City affected by any decision of an administrative officer, provided, such appeal shall be taken within ten days after the decision of the administrative officer, by filing with the office from whom the appeal is taken, and with the clerk of the board, written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.

 

§36-140.  Notice
          The board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the City one time at least ten days prior to such hearing, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. The hearing shall be public and any party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney.

 

§36-141.  Fees
          Prior to the filing of the appeal with the clerk of the board and the administrative officer from whose decision the appeal is requested, the appellant shall pay to the city treasurer a processing fee, as provided by a fee schedule approved by the city council, which shall not be refundable.

 

§36-142.  Powers and Limitations
          The board of adjustment shall, subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be established by the city council, have the following powers:

                (A) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures.

                (B) To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any zoning regulation, requests for interpretation of any map, or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the board is authorized by any such regulation to pass.

                (C) Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the zoning regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the strict application of any enacted regulation under this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardships upon the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal relating to the property, a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this code or any ordinance or resolution. No such variance shall be authorized by the board unless it finds that:

  (1) The strict application of the zoning regulations would produce undue hardship;

  (2) Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity;

  (3) The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of variance; and

  (4) The granting of such variance is based upon reason of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of convenience, profit, or caprice.

          No variance shall be authorized unless the board finds that the condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the zoning regulations.

 

§36-143.  Action and Vote Required
          In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such regulation or to effect any variation in such regulation.

 

§36-144.  Appeals to District Court
          Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may appeal as provided by Section 19-912, Reissue Revised Statutes of 1943 (in full).

 

§36-145.  Reserved
§36-146.  Reserved
§36-147.  Reserved
§36-148.  Reserved
§36-149.  Reserved

 

 

Article X.  Amendments, Enforcement, Permits, and Penalties

 

§36-150.  Amendments; Initiation and Application
          Amendments may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, or by application signed by the owner of a parcel sought to be amended, or by a purchaser under contract in writing duly executed by both buyer and seller, or by the agent of any of the foregoing duly authorized to do so in writing. An application shall be filed with the city clerk in such form and accompanied by such information as required by the city council and herein prescribed. A copy of the application and supplementary information shall be forwarded by the city clerk to the planning commission for hearing and recommendation.

          At the time of filing of an application for a rezoning amendment (map or text) with the city clerk, the applicant shall pay to the city treasurer a processing fee, as provided in the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule, which shall not be refundable.

 

 

§36-151.  Amendments; Procedure
          The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on all proposed amendments. Notice of such hearing shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least one time ten days prior to such hearing. Notification of such proposed amendment and hearing shall be sent to the proper school district or districts at least ten days prior to such hearing. The commission may recommend other property for amendment in addition to that sought in an application. Following the hearing, the commission shall take action and shall transmit its recommendation to the city council, a copy of which shall be sent to the applicant and one copy shall be retained in the permanent files of the planning commission. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notice of such hearing shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least one time ten days prior to such hearing. In addition to the publication, the city clerk shall cause a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property on which action is pending. Such notice shall not be less than eighteen inches in height and twenty-four inches in width with a white or yellow background and black letters not less than one and one-half inches in height. Such posted notice shall be so placed upon the premises that it is easily visible from the street nearest the same and shall be so posted at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove, mutilate, destroy, or change such posted notice prior to such hearing. Any person so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. If the record title owners of any lots included in such proposed change be nonresidents of the municipality, then a written notice of such hearing shall be mailed by certified mail to them addressed to their last known addresses at least ten days prior to such hearing. The provisions requiring that notice be posted on the premises to be rezoned shall not apply in the event of a proposed change in such regulations, restrictions, or boundaries throughout the entire area of an existing zoning district or of such municipality, or in the event additional or different types of zoning districts are proposed, whether or not such additional or different districts are made applicable to areas, or parts of areas, already within a zoning district of the municipality; but the only requirement then shall be the publication of the notice in the newspaper as provided in this section. The city council shall approve or disapprove the proposed amendment. A majority vote of all the members of the city council shall be required to adopt any zoning amendment. Notice of the final action shall be sent to the applicant and one copy shall be sent to the planning commission.

 

§36-152.  Amendment; Protest; Limitation
          In case of a protest against such zoning district change, signed by owners of twenty percent or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change or of those immediately adjacent on the sides and in the rear thereof extending three hundred feet therefrom, and of those directly opposite thereto extending three hundred feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the city council. Whenever a change of land use has been finally disapproved by the city council, neither the planning commission nor the city council shall consider the same or similar application for change of land use affecting the same property for a period of six months from the date of such disapproval by the city council.

 

§36-153.  Hall County Regional Planning Director and Building Department
          The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Hall County Regional Planning Director and Building Department, who shall have the power to make inspection of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his or her duties in the enforcement of this chapter.

 

§36-154.  Reserved

Deleted by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

 

§36-155.  Certificate of Occupancy; General
          No vacant land shall be occupied and used hereafter until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the chief building official.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

 

§36-156.  Reserved

Deleted by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

 

§36-157.  Certificate of Occupancy; Land
          Certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land or the change in the use of land shall be applied for before any such land shall be occupied or used and a certificate of occupancy shall be issued after the application has been made, provided, such use is in conformity with the provisions of this Code.

Amended by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

 

§36-158.  Reserved

Deleted by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

 

§36-159.  Certificate of Occupancy; Record
          A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the chief building official and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.

 

§36-160.  Reserved

Deleted by Ordinance No. 8947, effective 1-5-2005

 

§36-161.  Penalties
          Pursuant to Section 19-913, Reissue Revised Statutes of 1943 (in full), the owner or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a violation of any provisions of this chapter has been committed or shall exist or lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises in or upon which violation has been committed or shall exist, or the agent, architect, building contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any violation or who maintains any building or premises in or upon which such violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100) for any one (1) offense.  Each day of non-compliance with the terms of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.

          Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.  However, nothing shall deprive the citizen of his or her rights under the U.S. Constitution of a jury trial.

 

§36-162.  Remedies
          In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of Sections 19-901 to 19-914, Reissue Revised Statutes of 1943 (in full), or this code, or any regulation made pursuant to said sections, the appropriate authorities of the City may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.

 

§36-163.  Reserved
§36-164.  Reserved
§36-165.  Reserved
§36-166.  Reserved
§36-167.  Reserved

 

 

Article XI.  Wireless Communication Towers

 

§36-168.  Purpose
          The Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (the Act) grants the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) jurisdiction over certain aspects of telecommunications services.  This Article is intended to regulate macro cell towers, telecommunications facilities and antennas in the City in conformance with the Act without prohibiting or intending to prohibit any person from providing wireless communications services.  Telecommunications facilities, towers and antennas in the City shall be constructed in a way to protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact through careful design, siting, and camouflaging, to promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers and other antenna support structures rather than the construction of additional single use towers, to avoid potential damage to property caused by towers, telecommunications facilities and antennas by ensuring  such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, repaired and removed when no longer used or are determined to be structurally unsound and to ensure that towers and antennas are compatible with surrounding land uses.

 

§36-169.  Definitions
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

  Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in providing wireless services.

  Antenna Support Structure means any building or structure other than a tower which can be used for the location of telecommunications facilities. 

  Applicant means any person that applies for a Tower Development Permit.

Application means a process by which the owner of a tract of land within the zoning jurisdiction of the City submits a request to develop, construct, modify, or operate a tower upon such tract of land.  The term application includes all written documentation, verbal statements, and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the City concerning such request.

  Engineer means any engineer qualified and licensed by the State of Nebraska. 

  Owner means any person owning personal property, or real property with fee simple title or a leasehold exceeding (ten) 10 years in duration to any tract of land within the zoning jurisdiction of the City who desires to develop, construct, modify, or operate a tower upon such tract of land.

Person means an individual, a corporation, a limited liability company, a partnership, an association, a trust, or any other entity or organization.

  Stealth means any telecommunications facility, tower, or antenna which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including, but not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than like a tower such as light poles, power poles and trees.

  Telecommunications Facilities means any cables, wires, lines, antennas, or any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications signals which a person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure.  However, telecommunications facilities shall not include:  

(1) Any satellite dish two (2) meters in diameter or less which is located on real estate zoned AG, TA, RO, B1, B2, B3, M1, M2, M3 and ME.

(2) Any satellite dish of one (1) meter or less in diameter, regardless of the zoning applicable to the location of the satellite dish.

  Tower means a self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure which supports Telecommunications Facilities.  The term Tower shall not include non-commercial amateur radio operators equipment as licensed by the FCC or a structure supporting an antenna serving residential premises or dwelling units exclusively. 

  Tower Development Permit means a permit issued by the City upon approval by the Mayor and City Council of an application to develop a tower within the zoning jurisdiction of the City; which permit shall continue in full force and effect for so long as the tower to which it applies conforms to this Article. Upon issuance, a Tower Development Permit shall be deemed to run with the land during the permit’s duration and may be transferred, conveyed and assigned by the applicant to assignees and successors-in-interest.

  Tower Owner means any person with an ownership interest of any nature in a proposed or existing tower following the issuance of a Tower Development Permit.

All terms in this Article which are not specifically defined herein shall be construed in accordance with the Communications Act of 1934, the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the Orders, Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).

 

§36-170.  Location Of Towers, Construction Standards and Collocation

  (A) Towers shall be permitted conditional uses of land in only those zoning districts where specifically listed and authorized in this code.

  (B) No person shall develop, construct, modify or operate a tower upon any tract of land within the zoning jurisdiction of the City prior to approval of its application for a Tower Development Permit by the Mayor and City Council and issuance of the permit by the City. Applicants shall submit their application for a Tower Development Permit to the Building Department in triplicate and shall pay a filing fee in accordance with the City of Grand Island Fee Schedule.

  (C) All towers, telecommunications facilities and antennas on which construction is commenced within the zoning jurisdiction of the City after February 12, 2020, shall conform to the Building Code and all other construction standards set forth in the City Code, federal and state law, and applicable Industry standards.  Upon completion of construction of a tower and prior to the commencement of use, an engineer's certification that the tower is structurally sound and in conformance with all of the aforementioned applicable regulatory standards shall be filed with the Building Department.

  (D) It is the policy of the City to minimize the number of towers and to encourage the collocation of antennas of more than one wireless services provider on a single tower.

 

§36-171.  Application To Develop A Tower
Prior to commencement of development or construction of a tower, an application shall be submitted in triplicate to the Building Department for a Tower Development Permit and shall include the following:  

  (A) The name, address and telephone number of the owner and if applicable, the lessee of the tract of land upon which the tower is to be located.  Applicants shall include the owner of the tract of land and all persons having an ownership interest in the proposed tower.  The application shall be executed by all applicants.

  (B) The legal description and address of the tract of land on which the tower is to be located.

  (C) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers or useable antenna support structures within a one (1) mile radius of the location of the proposed tower, including publicly and privately owned towers or structures.

  (D) An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant has made diligent but unsuccessful efforts to obtain permission to install or collocate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on a tower or useable antenna support structure within a one (1) mile radius of the proposed tower location or written technical evidence from an engineer that the applicant's telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another tower or useable antenna support structure within a one (1) mile radius of the proposed tower location.

  (E) Written evidence from an engineer that the proposed tower will meet the Building Code, all other construction standards set forth by the City Code and federal and state law and applicable Industry standards.

  (F) Color photo simulations showing the proposed location of the tower with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would appear viewed from the nearest residential zoned property and nearest roadway, street or highway.

  (G) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type, height and width of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning district, adjacent land uses and zoning districts (including when adjacent to other municipalities or the County), adjacent roadways, a depiction of all proposed transmission equipment, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings or renderings of the proposed tower and any other structures, topography, landscaping, fencing, and finished color, method of camouflage and illumination, parking, utility runs and other information deemed necessary to assess compliance with this Article.

  (H) A clear and complete written statement of purpose which shall minimally include: (a) a description of the objective to be achieved; (b) a to-scale map that identifies the proposed site location and the targeted service area to be benefited by the proposed project; and (c) full-color signal propagation maps with objective units of signal strength measurement that show the applicant’s current service coverage levels from all adjacent sites without the proposed site, predicted service coverage levels from all adjacent sites with the proposed site, and predicted service coverage levels from the proposed site without all adjacent sites. These materials shall be reviewed and signed by a Nebraska-licensed professional engineer.

  (I) Descriptions and diagrams of the proposed tower, telecommunications facilities and antennas, manufacturer's literature, appurtenances such as buildings, driveway, parking area and fences or other security enclosures with sufficient detail to allow persons reviewing the application to understand the kind and nature of the proposed facility.

  (J) An application for a building permit pursuant to Chapter 8 of the City Code.

 

§36-172.  Tower Development Permit, Procedure and Factors

After receipt of an application for a Tower Development Permit, the City Clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the City Council to consider such application.  Notice of such application shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least one (1) time ten (10) days prior to such hearing.  In addition to the publication, the City Clerk shall cause a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property on which action is pending.  Such notice shall be not less than eighteen (18) inches in height and twenty four (24) inches in width with a white or yellow background and black letters not less than one and one-half (1½) inches in height.  Such posted notice shall be so placed upon the premises so that it is easily visible from the street nearest the same and shall be so posted at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing.  It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove, mutilate, destroy, or change such posted notice prior to such hearing.  Any person so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.  The public hearing shall be held at which all interested parties shall be heard.  The City Council may approve a Tower Development Permit as requested in the pending application with any conditions or safeguards it deems reasonable and appropriate based upon the application and input received at the public hearing or deny the application.  In all zoning districts in which towers are a permitted conditional use of land, the Tower Development Permit shall be deemed a conditional use permit for said tract of land.

 

§36-173.  Preferred Tower Locations

  (A) All new towers are permitted only after application of the following siting priorities, ordered from most-preferred (1) to least-preferred (5):

(1) manufacturing zones;

(2) commercial zones;

(3) other non-residential zoning districts;

(4) parcels of land in residential zoning districts;

(5) designated historic districts.

  (B) The applicant for a tower shall address these preferences in an alternative sites analysis prepared pursuant to §36-174 below.

 

§36-174.  Alternative Sites Analysis

  (A) For a tower, the applicant must address the City’s preferred tower locations with a detailed explanation justifying why a site of higher priority was not selected.  The City’s tower location preferences must be addressed in a clear and complete written alternative sites analysis that shows at least three (3) higher ranked, alternative sites considered that are in the geographic range of the service coverage objectives of the applicant, together with a factually detailed and meaningful comparative analysis between each alternative candidate and the proposed site that explains the substantive reasons why the applicant rejected the alternative candidate.

  (B) A complete alternative sites analysis provided under this subsection may include less than three (3) alternative sites so long as the applicant provides a factually detailed written rationale for why it could not identify at least three (3) potentially available, higher ranked, alternative sites.

  (C) For purposes of disqualifying potential collocations or alternative sites for the failure to meet the applicant’s service coverage or capacity objectives the applicant will provide (a) a description of its objective, whether it be to address a deficiency in coverage or capacity; (b) detailed  maps or other exhibits with clear and concise Radio Frequency (“RF”) data to illustrate that the objective is not met using the alternative (whether it be collocation or a more preferred location); and (c) a description of why the alternative (collocation or a more preferred location) does not meet the objective.

 

§36-175.  Setbacks and Separation or Buffer Requirements
  (A) All towers up to fifty (50) feet in height shall be set back on all sides a distance equal to the underlying setback requirement in the applicable zoning district.  Towers in excess of fifty (50) feet in height shall be set back one additional foot for each foot of tower height in excess of fifty (50) feet, except where such setback is from property owned, controlled and/or maintained by the City of Grand Island and the City Council finds in granting the permit that reducing such additional setback will not cause harm to the intended use of the public property. The height of a tower shall be measured from the grade at the foot of the base pad to the top of any telecommunications facilities or antennas attached thereto.  Setback requirements shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property line of the tract of land on which it is located.

  (B) Towers exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height may not be located in any residential zoned district and must be separated from all residential zoned land and occupied structures other than those utilized by the tower owner, by a minimum of two hundred (200) feet or one hundred percent (100%) of the height of the proposed tower, whichever is greater.

  (C) Towers of one hundred (100) feet or less in height may be located in residential zoned districts provided said tower is separated from any residential structure, school, church, and/or occupied structures other than those utilized by the tower owner, by a minimum of one hundred percent (100%) of the height of the proposed tower.

  (D) Towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from other towers:

(1) Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other towers, whether monopole, self-supporting lattice, or guyed, by a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) feet.

(2) Self-supporting lattice or guyed towers shall be separated from all other self-supporting or guyed towers by a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet.

 

§36-176.  Illumination and Security Fences
  (A) Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). In cases where there are residential zoned properties located within a distance of 300% of the height of the tower, any tower subject to this Article shall be equipped with lighting that minimizes its effect on residential zoned properties.

  (B) All self-supporting lattice or guyed towers shall be enclosed within a security fence or other structure designed to preclude unauthorized access.  Monopole towers shall be designed and constructed in a manner which will preclude to the extent practical, unauthorized climbing of said structure.

 

§36-177.  Exterior Finish, Notice, Signs and Visual Impact

  (A) Exterior Finish. Towers shall have an exterior finish which enhances compatibility with adjacent land uses, subject to review and approval by the City Council as part of the application approval process. 

  (B) Notice. For purposes of this Article, any Tower Development Permit shall require notice to surrounding property owners located within two hundred (200) feet of the legal boundary of the real property where the tower is to be located. An applicant or its designee shall provide this list to the City.

  (C) Signs. No tower may bear any signage or advertisement(s) other than signage required by law or expressly permitted or required by the City.

  (D) Visual Impact. All towers are encouraged to be sited and designed to minimize adverse visual impacts on surrounding properties and the traveling public to the greatest extent reasonably possible, consistent with the proper functioning of the tower.

 

§36-178.  Landscaping
          All tracts of land on which towers, antenna support structures, telecommunications facilities and/or antennas are located shall be subject to the landscaping requirements of the City Code.

 

§36-179.  Maintenance, Repair or Modification of Existing Towers
          All towers constructed or under construction on February 1, 1998 may continue in existence as a non-conforming structure and may be maintained or repaired without complying with any of the requirements of this Article. Nonconforming structures or uses may not be enlarged or the degree of nonconformance increased without complying with this Article, including applying for and obtaining a Tower Development Permit.  Any modification or reconstruction of a tower constructed or under construction after February 1, 1998, shall require compliance with the requirements of this Article including applying for and obtaining a Tower Development Permit.  Said application shall describe and specify all items which do not comply with this Article and may request, subject to approval by the Mayor and City Council, an exemption from compliance as a condition of the Tower Development Permit.

 

§36-180.  Inspections
  (A) The City reserves the right to conduct an inspection of towers, antenna support structures, telecommunications facilities and antennas upon reasonable notice to the tower owner or operator to determine compliance with this Article and to prevent structural and equipment failures and accidents which may cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public.  Inspections may be made to determine compliance with the Building Code and any other construction standards set forth in the City Code, federal and state law or applicable Industry standards.

  (B) If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a tower, antenna support structure, telecommunications facilities or antennas fail to comply with codes or standards and constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon written notice being provided to the owner, the owner shall have sixty (60) days to bring such into compliance with the codes and standards.  Failure to bring such into compliance within said sixty (60) days shall constitute grounds for removal at the owner’s expense.

 

§36-181.  Maintenance
          The towers, antenna support structures, telecommunications facilities and antennas shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair so that the same do not constitute a nuisance to or a danger to the life or property of any person or the public.

 

§36-182.  Abandonment
          If any tower shall cease to be used for a period of three hundred sixty-five (365) days, the Building Department shall notify the tower owner that the site will be subject to a determination by the Building Department Director that the site has been abandoned.  Upon issuance of a Notice to Show Cause by the Building Department Director, the tower owner shall have thirty (30) days to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period of apparent abandonment.  In the event the tower owner fails to show that the tower has been in use or under repair during the relevant period, the Building Department Director shall issue a final determination of abandonment of the site and the tower owner shall have seventy five (75) days thereafter to dismantle and move the tower.  In the event the tower is not dismantled and removed, the tower shall be declared a public nuisance by the Building Department Director, or his/her designee and a written request shall be directed to the City Attorney to proceed to abate said public nuisance pursuant to §20-15 of the Grand Island City Code, and charge the costs thereof against the real estate on which the tower is located or the owner of record of the said real estate.

 

§36-183.  Certificate of Completion, Compliance and Appearance

  (A) A certificate of completion will only be granted upon satisfactory evidence that the tower was installed in substantial compliance with the approved plans and photo simulations.

  (B) If it is found that the tower does not substantially comply with the approved plans and photo simulations, the applicant shall make any and all such changes required to bring the tower into compliance promptly.

  (C) The site and tower, including all landscaping, fencing and related transmission equipment must be maintained at all times in a neat and clean manner and in accordance with all approved plans.

  (D) All graffiti at a tower site must be removed at the sole expense of the permittee after notification by the City to the owner or operator of the tower.

  (E) If any FCC, State or other governmental license or any other governmental approval to provide communication services is ever revoked as to any tower site permitted or authorized by the City, the permittee must inform the City of the revocation within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of such revocation.

 

§36-184.  Satellite Dish Regulations
          After February 1, 1998, installation of satellite dish antennas shall be permitted within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Grand Island only upon compliance with the following criteria:

  

  (A) Single family residences may not have more than one (1) satellite dish.

  (B) Multiple family residences with ten or less dwelling units may have no more than one (1) satellite dish.   Multiple family residences with more than ten (10) dwelling units may have no more than two (2) satellite dishes.

  (C) In residential zoning districts, a satellite dish shall not be installed in the required front yard setback area or side yard setback area.

  (D) All satellite dishes installed within the zoning jurisdiction of the City after February 1, 1998, shall be of a neutral color such as black, gray, brown, or such other color as will blend with the surrounding dominant color in order to camouflage the dish.

 

§36-185.  Severability
          If any clause, section, or any other part of this Article shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Article shall not be affected thereby, but shall remain in full force and effect.

 

§36-186.  Conflicts

These Macro Cell Towers regulations are in addition to other regulations in the City Code.  In case of a conflict between regulations, the more restrictive shall apply.

§36-187.  Reserved

 

Article XII.  Comprehensive Plan Relationship

 

§36-188.  Comprehensive Plan Relationship
          This chapter is designed to implement various elements of the comprehensive plan as required by state statutes. Any amendments to the zoning regulations or Official Zoning Map shall conform to the comprehensive plan adopted by the governing body.

 

 

CHAPTER 37

PLANNING and COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT

 

Article I.  Planning Commission
 

§37-1.  Planning Commission; Created; Duties
               Authority is hereby conferred upon the city council to enter into an interlocal cooperation agreement to create a regional planning commission in joint agreement with the County of Hall and any villages within the County of Hall which may wish to participate; said regional planning commission to have the full authority and responsibility of a city planning commission for the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, as provided for and authorized by state statutes.

 

§37-2.  Composition; Appointment of Member
               The joint planning commission shall include four members who reside in the City of Grand Island and who shall represent, insofar as possible, different professions or occupations in the City, and who shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the approval of a three-fourths vote of the city council.

 

§37-3.  Term of Members
               The term of each appointed city member of the regional planning commission shall be three years, except that one city member of the first regional commission appointed shall serve for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, and two for a term of three years. No member shall be appointed for more than two successive terms.

 

§37-4.  Members; Compensation; Other Office
               All city members of the regional planning commission shall serve as such without compensation and shall hold no other municipal office.

 

§37-5.  Removal of Members; Vacancies
               Any city member of the regional commission may, after a public hearing before the city council, be removed by the mayor by and with the consent of a three-fourths vote of the Council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance in office, or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor, by and with the approval of a majority vote of all the members elected to the council.

 

§37-6.  Powers and Duties Generally
               It shall be the function and duty of the regional planning commission to perform those duties as required by state law of city planning commissions or as customary for planning commissions generally in the same manner as if a city planning commission were appointed and acting pursuant to law.

 

 

§37-7.  Reserved
§37-8.  Reserved
§37-9.  Reserved
§37-10.  Reserved

 

 

Article II.  Inter-Jurisdictional Planning Commission
 

§37-11.  Interjurisdictional Planning Commission; Created; Duties
               An Interjurisdictional Planning Commission is hereby created with Merrick County, Nebraska, pursuant to the requirement of Neb. R.R.S. §19-930, et seq. Said Interjurisdictional Planning Commission shall have the powers, duties, responsibilities and functions of the regional planning commission for the City of Grand Island in the unincorporated area of Merrick County that is within two miles of the corporate boundaries of the City of Grand Island.

 

§37-12.  Composition; Appointment of Members
               The Interjurisdictional Planning Commission shall consist of six members. Three members shall be chosen by the Mayor with the approval of the council from the City's members on the Hall County Regional Planning Commission which acts as the City's planning commission. The remaining three members shall be chosen by the Merrick County Board from members currently serving on the Merrick County Planning Commission.

 

§37-13.  Term of Members
               The term of each appointed member shall be for one year and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The City of Grand Island members of the Interjurisdictional Planning Commission may be reappointed to successive one-year terms during their tenure on the Hall County Regional Planning Commission.

 

§37-14.  Interjursidicational Planning Commission; Meetings
               The Interjurisdictional Planning Commission shall hold regular meetings, at least annually and on other occasions as necessary, to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the commission. A majority of the members must be present to constitute a quorum.

 

§37-15.  Members; Compensation
               All members of the Interjurisdictional Planning Commission shall serve without compensation and without reimbursement for expenses incurred pursuant to fulfilling the requirements of Neb. R.R.S. §19-930 through §19-933.

 

§37-16.  Removal of Members; Vacancies
               Any city member of the Interjurisdictional Planning Commission may, after a public hearing before the city council, be removed by the mayor by and with the consent of a three-fourths vote of the council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance in office, or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of a member's term shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the mayor, by and with the approval of a majority vote of all the members elected to the council.

 

§37-17.  Termination
               The Interjurisdictional Planning Commission shall continue until such time as the City of Grand Island and Merrick County agree by a majority vote of each governing body to eliminate the Interjurisdictional Planning Commission. Upon termination, jurisdiction shall transfer to the Hall County Regional Planning Commission which is the planning commission for the city.

 

§37-18.  Reserved
§37-18.  Reserved
§37-20.  Reserved
§37-21.  Reserved

 

Article III.  Community Development Division
 

§37-22.  Community Development; Purpose
               The purpose of this article is to set forth the manner in which the City shall exercise all the power and authority to engage in community development activities granted to the City under the statutes of this state, including but not limited to, the Community Development Law set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-2101, et. seq. Pursuant to §18-2101.01 of that Act, the City hereby assumes all the power and authority granted to an urban renewal authority under said Act.

 

§37-23.  Community Development Division
               There is hereby created a division of the Regional Planning Department to be known as the Community Development Division, which shall be responsible for the performance of all administrative tasks involved in the implementation of the City's community development projects, programs, policies, and procedures adopted under the provisions of this article.

 

§37-24.  Director; Appointment
               The director of the Regional Planning Department shall act as director of the Community Development Division. The director shall be managed by and be subject to the personnel rules for the City of Grand Island.

 

§37-25.  Director; Duties
               The director of the Regional Planning Department shall be responsible for performing the professional work involved in carrying out the purposes of this article, for directing the work of the Community Development Division, and for coordinating all the City's community development programs and projects.

 

§37-26.  Entitlement Stakeholders Committee

               There is hereby created an Entitlement Stakeholders group consisting of entities which have funded and/or are related to the data and studies providing insight into funding programs for the Consolidated Plan and Annual Action Plan for Community Development Block Grants. Six of the members shall be representatives of the following organizations/groups: Economic Development Corporation, Grow Grand Island, Grand Island Area Chamber of Commerce, Community Redevelopment Authority, City Administration and Hall County Housing Authority. The seventh member shall be a member of the Grand Island City Council, as appointed by Mayor. All members shall serve without compensation. New members/entities may be added by the quorum vote of the Entitlement Stakeholders Committee. The entities themselves shall appoint a representative from their organization to serve on the Entitlement Stakeholders Committee.

Members may be removed without cause by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. The Entitlement Stakeholders Committee shall establish such rules and procedures as are necessary to carry out its duties. Entitlement Stakeholders Committee shall have the following duties:

(1) Investigate and discuss all existing and potential Community Development Block Grant programs and projects.

(2) Make recommendations on all existing and potential Community Development Block Grant programs and projects, procedures, and all other aspects of the Entitlement program.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9525, effective 04-01-2015

Amended by Ordinance No. 9595, effective 08-16-2016

 

§37-27.  Reserved
§37-28.  Reserved
§37-29.  Reserved
§37-30.  Reserved

 

 

Article IV.  Community Redevelopment Authority
 

§37-31.  Community Redevelopment Authority; Creation
               There is hereby created the Community Redevelopment Authority of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska, pursuant to the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-2102.01 (Reissue of 1991).

 

§37-32.  Officer
               Five persons, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Grand Island, shall constitute the Authority. The five members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council. The Mayor shall designate the term of office for each member as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-2102.01 (Reissue of 1991). The Authority shall select one of its members as chairperson and another as vice-chairperson. A total of four members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Authority shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and recommendations, which records shall be made available for public inspection during regular business hours.

 

§37-33.  Director
               The City Administrator shall designate a person to serve as the Director and Ex Officio Secretary of the Community Redevelopment Authority, and that person shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the Authority, including the necessary administrative functions described in Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-2102.01 (Reissue of 1991).

 

§37-34.  Funds
               All income, revenue, profits, and other funds received by the Authority shall be deposited with the Treasurer of the City of Grand Island, as Ex Officio Treasurer of such Authority without commingling such money with any other money under the Treasurer's control. The money of the Authority shall be disbursed by the Treasurer by check or draft only upon warrants, orders, or requisitions, specifying the purpose thereof, duly executed by the Chairperson of the Authority, or such other person as may be duly authorized and designated by the Authority of any such activity.

 

§37-35.  City Council Liaison
               The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint one member of the city council to act as a liaison between the City Council and the Community Redevelopment Authority.

 

Article V. Grand Island PACE District

 

§37-36.  Grand Island PACE (GI-PACE) District; Creation

               The City of Grand Island desires to create a clean energy assessment district to enable property assessed clean energy financing for its property owners while; to authorize the clean energy assessment district to enable third-party lenders to accept applications and enter into financing agreements with property owners within the boundaries of the district; and to create a clean energy assessment district, which shall be known as the Grand Island PACE District (“GI-PACE”), as authorized by Nebraska Revised Statute Sections 13-3203 and 13-3204(3), which boundaries shall be the corporate boundaries of the City of Grand Island and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.

 

§37-37.  Findings and Determinations   

               That the City Council of the City of Grand Island, Nebraska (the “City”), hereby finds and determines as follows:                                  

               Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§13-3201 to 13-3211, inclusive, the Property Assessment Clean Energy Act (the “Act”), energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy are important for preserving the health and economic well-being of Nebraska’s citizens.  Using less energy decreases the cost of living and keeps the cost of public power low by delaying the need for additional power plants.  To further these goals, it is necessary for the City to promote energy efficiency improvements and renewable energy systems.  Upfront costs for energy efficiency improvements and renewable energy systems may prohibit or deter many property owners from making improvements.  It is necessary for the City to implement an alternative financing method through the creation of a clean energy assessment district.                                

               Financing energy projects to further these goals is a valid purpose and can be accomplished through Property Assessed Clean Energy (“PACE”) financing, which is used to overcome the upfront costs for energy efficiency improvements and renewable energy systems by using private capital and equity, rather than public debt.

               Pursuant to the Act and Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-3204, the City of Grand Island is authorized to establish a clean energy assessment district so that owners of qualifying property can access PACE financing for energy efficiency improvements or renewable energy improvements to their properties located in the City.  The City also may enter into an agreement with one or more other municipalities pursuant to the Interlocal Cooperation Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. §§13-801, et seq., for the joint creation, administration, or creation and administration of clean energy assessment districts, pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-3210.  The City declares its intent that the provisions of this Chapter shall be in conformity with federal and state laws.  The City enacts this Chapter pursuant to the Act, as amended.

 

§37-38.  Title and Definitions

               Except the words and phrases specifically defined below or in Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-3203, as amended, words and phrases used in this Article shall have their customary meanings.  As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

 

               District.  The City of Grand Island PACE District, created pursuant to this Chapter, as authorized by Neb. Rev. Stat. §§13-3203 and 13-3204(3), which boundaries shall be the corporate boundaries of the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.

 

               District Administrator.  The GI-PACE committee consisting of the Planning Director, Building Department Director, Public Works Director, Utilities Director and City Attorney, or the designee of each, or a third-party administrator selected by the City.  The committee shall appoint a designee for signatures.

 

               Energy Project.  The installation or modification of an energy efficiency improvement or the acquisition, installation, or improvement of a renewable energy system.  Energy Projects shall be limited to projects having an estimated cost of $250,000 or more.

 

               PACE Financing.  Funds provided to the owner(s) of qualified property by a third-party lender, pursuant to the Act and this Chapter, for an energy efficiency improvement or renewable energy system(s).

 

               Qualifying Property.  Commercial property, including multifamily residential property having more than four (4) dwelling units, and industrial property located in the District.

 

§37-39.  District Boundaries and requirements Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-3204(3).

               The City finds that the financing of energy efficiency improvements and renewable energy systems is a valid public purpose. Such public purposes include, but are not limited to, reduced energy and water costs, reduced greenhouse gas emissions, economic stimulation and development, improved property valuation, and increased employment.

               a)            The boundaries of the District shall be the corporate boundaries of the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, as allowed pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-3204(1).

               b)           The District Administrator shall use a form contract, as contained in the GI-PACE Manual, for assessment contracts among the City, the owner of the qualifying property, and a third-party lender, governing the terms and conditions of financing and annual assessments in accordance with the Act, including Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-3205(1), which provides for repayment of the costs financed through annual assessments upon the qualifying property benefited by the energy project.

               c)            The District Administrator is authorized to enter into assessment contracts on behalf of the City.

               d)           The District Administrator will use a financing application process and eligibility requirements, which shall be more specifically defined in a program manual created by the District Administrator for financing energy projects in accordance with the requirements of the Act and accepted by the third-party lender. 

§37-40.  Minimum Program Eligibility Requirements

               Submission of an application, contained in the GI-PACE Manual, to the District Administrator, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

               a)            Applicant name and contact information, including property owner and developer;

               b)           Project location and legal description;

               c)            Identification of contractor or supplier, including anticipated PACE contractor and a copy of the approved bid for the energy efficiency project;

               d)           Project description;

               e)            Total project cost; in an amount of not less than Two-Hundred Fifty Thousand ($250,000.00) Dollars;

               f)            Description of proposed improvements;

               g)            Description of energy efficiency project to be financed;

               h)           Amount of requested assessment;

               i)            Interest rate on the PACE assessment and any required fees;

               j)            Term of assessment;

               k)           Energy savings report indicating estimated energy savings and estimated cost savings for the energy project issued by a duly licensed Nebraska Professional Engineer;

               l)            Whether the applicant is requesting a waiver of the estimated economic benefit requirement;

               m)          Title report showing any mortgage or lien holders;

               n)           Lender consent;

               o)           Projected jobs created by PACE project;

               p)           Project environmental benefits;

               q)           Funding source; and

               r)            All other such information as needed to demonstrate the project complies with all the requirements of the Act.

 

§37-41.  Estimated Economic Benefit; Waiver; Denial; Appeal

               The District Administrator may grant an applicant’s request to waive the estimated economic benefit requirement. If the District Administrator denies the applicant’s waiver request, the applicant may appeal the denial by submitting a request in writing to the City Administrator for the City.  The appeal shall be mailed by certified mail or hand delivered to the City Administrator within fourteen (14) days after the denial.  The City Administrator will review the matter on the record made by the District Administrator and, after providing the applicant an informal opportunity to be heard, the City Administrator will make the final decision.

§37-42.  Project Eligibility

               The District Administrator shall review the application to determine whether the energy project meets the eligibility requirements of the Act and this Ordinance. An energy project shall not be eligible for PACE financing if the qualifying property is subject to any of the following:

               a)            Delinquent ad valorem taxes;

               b)           Delinquent personal property taxes;

               c)            Delinquent special assessments;

               d)           Overdue or delinquent electric, water or sewer charges;

               e)            Involuntary liens, including but not limited to construction liens;

               f)            Notice of default pursuant to any mortgage or deed of trust related to the qualifying property, or

               g)            If the property owner or property developer is delinquent in the payment of any assessment required to be paid for any energy efficiency improvement financed pursuant to the Act.         

§37-43.  Application Approval

               If the energy project is determined to be eligible under the terms of the Act and as required in this Chapter, the District Administrator shall review the application and approve, request additional information, or deny the application at their discretion.

§37-44.  Assessment Contract

               Upon approval of an application, the District Administrator is authorized to proceed with and execute an assessment contract.  The form Contract is attached as “Exhibit A.”

§37-45.  Assessment Levy

               Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-3205(7), annual assessments agreed to under an assessment contract shall be levied against the qualifying property and collected in accordance with the Act.

§37-46.  Debt Servicing

               The District shall establish procedures to determine the following in the future: 

               a)            Subject to prior approval of the City Council, the District Administrator or third party administrator shall establish provisions for an adequate debt service reserve fund created under Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-3209, if applicable;

               b)           Subject to prior approval of the City Council, the District Administrator or third party administrator shall establish provisions for an adequate loss reserve fund created under Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-3208, if applicable; and

               c)            Any application, administration, or other program fees to be charged to owners participating in the program that will be used to finance costs incurred by the City as a result of the program.

§37-47.  Assessment Term.

               The assessment term shall not exceed the weighted average useful life of the energy project paid for by the annual assessments.

 

§37-48.  Transfer Upon Sale; Movable Property

               Any energy efficiency improvement that is not permanently affixed to the qualifying property upon which an annual assessment is imposed to repay the cost of such energy efficiency improvement must be conveyed with the qualifying property if a transfer of ownership of the qualifying property occurs during the assessment term.

§37-49.  Transfer Upon Sale; Purchaser Assumes Responsibility

               Prior to the effective date of any contract that binds the purchaser to purchase qualifying property upon which an annual assessment is imposed, the owner shall provide notice to the purchaser that the purchaser assumes responsibility for payment of the annual assessment as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-3205(3)(d), and that the obligations set forth in the assessment contract, including the obligation to pay annual assessments, are a covenant that shall run with the land and be assessed upon future owners of the qualifying property.

§37-50.  Marketing and Participant Education 

               In connection with providing PACE financing, the City will provide for marketing and participant education.

 

§37-51.  Verification of Operation

               The City shall obtain, or applicable third-party lenders shall obtain and provide to the City, written verification by a duly licensed Nebraska Professional Engineer that the renewable energy system or energy efficiency improvement was properly installed and is operating as intended.

 

§37-52.  Authorization for PACE Program.

               Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-3204(1), the District shall be governed by the Grand Island City Council.

a)            The District Administrator shall comply with the Act and the provisions of this Chapter and follow any applicable City procurement policy and procedures for selecting a third-party administrator, should a third-party administrator be selected for the administration of the PACE program. Any such third-party administrator must ensure that there is no financial requirement, liability, or exposure to the District or City. The District Administrator as defined in Section 2 of this ordinance may serve as the administrator of the PACE program for the District and City.

b)           The District or City may also engage the services of a state or local financing agency for the purposes of providing conduit bond financing for the District or City as part of its third-party administration. 

c)            Upon selection of a third-party administrator, that third-party administrator may, on behalf of the City, accept applications for financing energy efficient improvements within the District boundaries, facilitate the financing application process, and review eligibility requirements for financing energy projects in accordance with the requirements of the Act and as accepted by the third-party lender.

d)           The District may be expanded via the Interlocal Cooperation Act in order to create a program of sufficient size and scale to attract qualified third-party administrators and/or to promote energy efficiency across multiple political subdivisions, as authorized under the Act.

               §37-53.  Liability of City Officials; Liability of City 

               That notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, officers, officials, employees, or agents of the City, the District, or Hall County shall not be personally liable to any person or entity for any claims, liabilities, costs, or expenses, of whatever kind or nature, under, arising out of, or related to the City's or District’s participation in the District's PACE Program or any PACE Financing, including, without limitation, claims for or related to uncollected PACE Assessments. Not in limitation of the foregoing, the City has no liability to a property owner or lender for or related to energy savings improvements or funding under a PACE Financing or Program, other than to remit PACE Assessments received in accordance with the Act.

Added Ordinance No. 9752, effective 11-6-2019

 

 

CHAPTER 38

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

 

§38-1.  Economic Development Program Adopted
                The mayor and city council have by ordinance adopted an economic development program for the City of Grand Island as authorized by the Local Option Municipal Economic Development Act, R.R.S. 1943, §18-2701, et seq. The Economic Development Program of the City of Grand Island is marked as Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.

 

§38-2.  Citizen Advisory Review Committee; Creation and Composition
                There is hereby created in and for the city, a Citizen Advisory Review Committee as authorized by the Municipal Economic Development Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-2715. This Committee shall be composed of seven (7) members who shall be registered voters of the city of Grand Island. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council. Three (3) at-large members will be recommended by the Economic Development Corporation to the Mayor. At least one member of the committee shall have expertise or experience in the field of business, finance or accounting.

 

§38-3.  Terms of Citizen Advisory Review Committee Members
                The term of office for the members shall be as follows:

                (a) Four members will have terms ending in even numbered years; and

                (b) The remaining three members will have terms ending in odd numbered years; and

                (c) Eligibility to continue service beyond the initial term is based on City Council approval.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9455, effective 10-15-2013

 

§38-4.  Individuals Ineligible for Membership on the Citizen Advisory Review Committee
                No member of the citizen advisory review committee shall be an elected or appointed city official, an employee of the city, a participant in a decision-making position regarding expenditures of program funds, or an official or employee of any qualifying business receiving financial assistance under the economic development program or of any financial institution participating directly in the economic development program.

 

§38-5.  Citizen Advisory Review Committee Meetings
                The citizen advisory review committee shall hold regular meetings quarterly and on other occasions as necessary to review the functioning and progress of the economic development program and to advise the governing body of the city with regard to the program. Special meetings of the citizen advisory review committee shall be held whenever called by the mayor or chairperson of the committee. At least once in every six-month period after the effective date of the ordinance, the committee shall report to the governing body on its findings and suggestions at a public hearing called for that purpose.

Amended by Ordinance No. 9039, effective 04-12-2006

Amended by Ordinance No. 9455, effective 10-15-2013

 

§38-6.  Citizen Advisory Review Committee Officers
                The citizen advisory review committee shall elect its chairperson from its members and shall create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The term of the chairperson shall be two (2) years, with eligibility for reelection.

 

§38-7.  Citizen Advisory Review Committee Vacancies; Removal
                Vacancies occurring in the membership of the Citizen Advisory Review Committee, shall be filled by the mayor, by and with the approval of the council for the remainder of the term. Any member of the citizen advisory review committee may be removed from office by the mayor, by and with the approval of the council.

 

§38-8.  Citizen Advisory Review Committee Administration
                The City Administrator or his/her designated representative shall be the Program Administrator and shall be responsible for the administration of the Economic Development Program of the City, shall be an ex-officio member of the committee, and shall be responsible for assisting the committee and providing it with necessary information and advice on the economic development program. The City Finance Director will be responsible for providing financial information to the committee and to the auditing firm that does the annual audit.

 

§38-9.  Citizen Advisory Review Committee Audit
                The city shall provide for an annual, outside, independent audit of its economic development program by a qualified private auditing business. The auditing business shall not, at the time of the audit or for any period during the term subject to the audit, have any contractual or business relationship with any qualifying business receiving funds or assistance under the economic development program or any financial institution directly involved with a qualifying business receiving funds or assistance under the economic development program. The results of such audit shall be filed with the city clerk and made available for public review during normal business hours.

 

§38-10.  Disclosure of Confidential Information
                All trade secrets, academic and scientific research work which is in progress and unpublished or other proprietary or commercial information of a qualifying business participating in the Economic Development Program of the city which if released would give advantage to business competitors and serve no public purpose shall be confidential. Members of the citizen advisory review committee, in their capacity as members and consistent with their responsibilities as members, may be permitted access to business information received by the city in the course of its administration of the economic development program, which information would otherwise be confidential under Section 84-712.05 or by agreement with a qualifying business participating in the economic development program. The mayor and city council shall designate by resolution other persons who are authorized to have access to such confidential business information.

                The unauthorized disclosure of any business information which is confidential under Neb. Rev. Stat. 84-712.05 by any person who knowingly releases such confidential information other than to persons who are authorized to have access to such information in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor and upon conviction or being found guilty, shall be subject to a maximum imprisonment of three months in the county jail or a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both.

Chapter 38 moved from Chapter 2 by Ordinance No. 9039, effective 04-12-2006

 

 

§38-11.  Conflict with Plan

                Conflicts between the language of the Grand Island City Code and the Economic Development Program Plan will be resolved in favor of the language contained in the Plan.

Added by Ordinance No. 9455, effective 10-15-2013

 
CHAPTER 39

 

GRAND ISLAND SMOKING REGULATION ACT

 

 

 

§39-1.  Title

      This section shall be known as the Grand Island Smoking Regulation Act.

 

§39-2.  Purpose

      The City Council does hereby declare it to be the public policy of this City to encourage places of employment and public places to reduce the health and safety risks posed by smoking and vaping in places of employment and public places. The City Council authorizes the Health Director of the Central District Health Department and law enforcement to administer and enforce this Section within the City of Grand Island.

 

§39-3.  Definitions; General Provisions

       For the purposes of this Section, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this Section.

      Employed.  Employed shall mean hired, contracted, subcontracted, or otherwise engaged to furnish goods or services.

      Employee.  Employee shall mean a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wage(s), profit, or other remuneration.

      Employer,  Employer shall mean a person, nonprofit entity, sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited partnership, limited liability company, co-op, firm, trust, association, organization, or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments, where goods or services are sold, who employs one or more employees.

      Guestroom or Suite.  Guestroom or suite shall mean sleeping rooms and directly associated private areas, such as bathrooms, living rooms, and kitchen areas, if any, rented to the public for their exclusive transient occupancy including, but not limited to, guestrooms or suites in hotels, motels, inns, lodges, or other such establishments.

      Health Director.  Health Director shall mean the Director of the Central District Health Department or authorized representative(s).

      Indoor Area.  Indoor area means an area enclosed by a floor, a ceiling, and walls on all sides that are continuous and solid except for closeable entry and exit doors and windows and in which less than twenty percent of the total wall area is permanently open to the outdoors. For walls in excess of eight feet in height, only the first eight feet shall be used in determining such percentage.

      International No-Smoking Symbol.  International no-smoking symbol shall mean a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it.

      Place of Employment.  Place of employment means an indoor area under the control of a proprietor that an employee accesses as part of his or her employment without regard to whether the employee is present or work is occurring at any given time. The indoor area includes, but is not limited to, any work area, employee breakroom, restroom, conference room, meeting room, classroom, employee cafeteria, and hallway. A private residence is a place of employment when such residence is being used as a licensed child care program and one or more children who are not occupants of such residence are present.

      Proprietor.  Proprietor shall mean any employer, owner, operator, supervisor, manager or any other person who controls, governs, or directs the activities in a place of employment or public place.

      Public Place.  Public place shall mean an indoor area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, whether or not the public is always invited or permitted. A private residence shall not be considered a “public place.”

      Smoke or Smoking.  Smoke or smoking shall mean the lighting of any cigarette, cigar, or pipe; or the possession of any lighted cigarette, cigar, or pipe, regardless of its composition.

      Vape(ing).  Vape(ing) shall mean the inhaling and exhaling of the aerosol produced by any vaping device.

      Vaping Device.  Vaping device shall mean a device that consists of a mouthpiece, battery, a cartridge for containing the e-liquid or e-juice and a heating component for the device that is powered by a battery.  Vaping devices may include but not be limited to, e-cigarettes, vape pens, advanced personal vaporizers (MODS), JUUL’s or any other device whether professionally made or homemade that are designed and used to inhale vapor products.

 

§39-4.  Smoking Prohibited; Exceptions

      It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or vape in a place of employment or a public place, except as designated by a proprietor pursuant to this Section.

 

§39-5.  Proprietor to Prohibit Smoking; Exceptions

      (a)   It shall be unlawful for any proprietor of any place of employment or public place to allow smoking or vaping except as follows:

           (1)  Guestrooms or suites, provided the following requirements are met:

                   (i)  The number of rooms or suites designated for smoking shall be no greater than 20% of the total number of guestrooms or suites.

                   (ii)  Each guestroom or suite where smoking or vaping is allowed shall have a permanent sign posted containing the words “smoking allowed” on each entrance.

           (2)  As part of a study conducting research into the health effects of smoking or vaping in a scientific or analytical laboratory either governed by state or federal law or at a college or university approved by the Nebraska Coordinating Commission for Post Secondary Education. The proprietor shall post a temporary sign on all entrances to the laboratory indicating that smoking or vaping is being allowed for the purposes of research.

      (b)   Proprietors shall conspicuously post or display required signs so that the signs are readily viewable by employees and the public.

      (c)   This section shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking or vaping where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.

 

§39-6.  Enforcement

      The Health Director and law enforcement agencies are hereby authorized to inspect a place of employment or public place at any reasonable time to determine compliance with this Section.

 

§39-7.  Violations and Penalties

      (a)  A person who smokes or vapes in a place of employment or a public place in violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a minimum fine of:

(1)  One hundred dollars ($100) and costs for the first offense;

(2)  Two hundred dollars ($200) and costs for the second offense;

(3)  Five hundred dollars (500) and costs for the third and subsequent offenses.

      (b)  A proprietor of a place of employment or public place upon whom a duty is placed by the provisions of this section, who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to perform such duty, or who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions hereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a minimum fine of:

(1)  One hundred dollars ($100) and costs for the first offense;

(2)  Two hundred dollars ($200) and costs for the second offense;

 (3)  Five hundred dollars (500) and costs for the third and subsequent offenses.

      (c)  Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such.

      (d)   Every act or omission of whatever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this section by an officer, manager, supervisor, agent or employee of any proprietor, if said act or omission is made with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the proprietor, shall be deemed and held to be the act or omission of such proprietor, and said proprietor shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been committed by such proprietor personally.

 

§39-8.  Severability

      Each section and subsection is hereby declared to be independent of every other section or subsection herein and invalidity of any section or subsection herein shall not invalidate any other section or subsection there.

Adopted by Ordinance No. 9158, effective 6-1-2008

Amended by Ordinance No. 9746, effective 9-11-2019

 

 

CHAPTER 40

STORM WATER MANAGEMENT

 

§40-1.  Purpose/Intent

The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Grand Island, Nebraska through the regulation of stormwater and non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law.  In addition, the purpose is to control land disturbances, or to reduce or eliminate soil erosion and sedimentation within the City of Grand Island, NE. This ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this ordinance are:

(1)          To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by discharges by any person.

(2)          To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system.

(3)          To prevent non-storm water discharges generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping, or disposal to the City of Grand Island separate storm drainage system.

(4)          To reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges from construction activity by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land.

(5)          To require the construction of locally-approved, permanent stormwater runoff controls to protect water quality and maintain non-erosive hydrologic conditions downstream of construction activity and development.

(6)          To require responsibility for and long-term maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management.

(7)          To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and         monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.

(8)          To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by geothermal water source heating and cooling system discharges by any user.

(9)          To limit the connection and discharges of spent groundwater from geothermal heat pump systems to the MS4.

§40-2.  Definitions

For the purposes of this ordinance, the following shall mean:

Authorized Enforcement Agency:  The City of Grand Island, its employees, or third parties designated by the Public Works Director which enforce this ordinance.

Best Management Practices(BMPs):  Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. Best Management Practices also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage, leaks, sludge disposal, water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

Clean Water Act:  The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.

Common Plan of Development or Sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing activities may be taking place at different times, on different schedules, but under one proposed plan which may include, but is not limited to, an announcement or piece of documentation (including a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, computer design, etc.) or physical demarcation (including boundary signs, lot stakes, surveyor markings, etc.) indicating construction activities may occur on a specific plot.

Construction Activity:  Activities subject to National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Construction Permits. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, demolition and other land disturbing actions.

Construction Site: Any location where construction activity occurs.

Contractor:  Any person performing or managing construction work at a construction site, including, but not limited to, any construction manager, general contractor or subcontractor, and any person engaged in any one or more of the following: earthwork, pipework, paving, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, landscaping or material supply.

Clearing: Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.

Director: The City Engineer or the Public Works Director

Disturbed Area:  Area of the land’s surface disturbed by any work or activity upon the property by means including but not limited to grading, excavating, stockpiling soil, fill, or other materials, clearing, vegetation removal, removal or deposit of any rock, soil, or other materials, or other activities which expose soil. Disturbed area does not include the tillage of land that is zoned for agricultural use.

Drainage Plan:  A schematic of the proposed area and how it connects to city’s storm sewer system. Include proposed location, grade, direction of flow, elevations, drainage structures and drainage areas.

Earthwork: The disturbance of soil on a site associated with construction activities.

Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.

Erosion Control:  Measures that prevent soil erosion to the maximum extent practicable.

Erosion and Sediment Control Plan:  A plan that indicates the specific measures and sequencing to be used for controlling sediment and erosion on a development site during construction activity according to locally approved standards, specification, and guidance.

Final Stabilization: When all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and vegetative cover has been established with a uniform density of at least 70 percent of predisturbance levels, or equivalent permanent, physical erosion reduction methods have been employed. For purposes of this Ordinance, establishment of a vegetative cover capable of providing erosion control equivalent to pre-existing conditions at the site is considered final stabilization.

Financial Security: A surety bond, performance bond, maintenance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees provided to the City of Grand Island to assure that a construction Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan is carried out in compliance with requirements of this Ordinance.

Geothermal Water Source Heat Pump System – A geothermal system uses the Earth’s thermal properties in conjunction with electricity to provide greater efficiency in the heating and cooling of buildings.

Geothermal System (Closed Loop) – A mechanism for heat exchange, which consists of the following basic elements: Underground loops of piping; heat transfer fluid; a heat pump; an air distribution system. An opening is made in the Earth. A series of pipes are installed into the opening and connected to a heat exchange system in the building. The pipes form a “closed loop” and are filled with a heat transfer fluid. The fluid is circulated through the piping from the opening into the heat exchanger and back. The system functions in the same manner as the open loop system except there is no pumping of well or surface water.

Geothermal System (Open Loop) – Water is pumped from a well or surface water into a heat exchanger located in a surface building. The water drawn from the Earth is then pumped back into the aquifer through a different well or in some cases the same well, otherwise known as re-injection. Alternatively, the ground water could be discharged the Earth’s surface or a surface water body, also known as pump & dump. In the heating mode, cooler water is returned to the Earth’s surface or surface water body, while in the cooling mode warmer water is returned to the Earth’s surface or surface water body.

Hazardous Materials: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.

Illicit Discharge: Any unauthorized direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drainage system.

Illicit Connections:

(a)          Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows any illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system including, but not limited to, any conveyance which allows any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, or wash water to enter the storm drainage system.

(b)          Any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks regardless of whether said drain or connection has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency.

(c)          Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drainage system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.

(d)          An Illicit Connection does not include connections that are allowed under section 40-8 of this code.

Industrial Activity: Activities subject to National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Industrial Permits.

Low Impact Development (LID): means de-centralized management of precipitation that would otherwise be stormwater runoff, utilizing design techniques that infiltrate, filter, store, evaporate, or temporarily detain stormwater.

Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4): Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, catch basins, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage ditches/channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit: Means a permit issued by Environmental Protection Agency (or by the State of Nebraska under authority delegated to it) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.

NDEQ:  Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality.

N.O.I (Notice of Intent): is a formal announcement of intent to disturb the earth surface and is used to request a City, State, or Federal permit to discharge stormwater for a variety of activities primarily for construction and development.

N.O.T. (Notice of Termination): is a formal announcement that all construction and ground disturbance activities are no longer authorized to discharge stormwater associated with any City, State, or Federal permitted activity under the NPDES program.

Outfall:  The point of discharge to any watercourse from a public or private stormwater drainage system.

Non-Storm Water Discharge: Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not composed entirely of storm water.

Operator: The individual who has day-to-day supervision and control of activities occurring at the construction site. This can be the owner, the developer, the general contractor or the agent of one of these parties. It is anticipated that at different phases of a construction project, different types of parties will satisfy the definition of ‘operator’ and the pertinent portions of any applicable permit authorization from the State of Nebraska will be transferred as the roles change.

Owner: The person who owns a facility, development, part of a facility, or land.

Permittee: The applicant in whose name a valid permit is issued.

Person: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law.

Phasing: Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase before the clearing of the next.

Pollutant: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes; yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.

Post-Construction: The general time period referenced in perpetuity from the approval for final acceptance of the construction phase of any construction activity.

Post-Construction Stormwater Management: The management of stormwater for a period of time in perpetuity from approval for final acceptance of the construction phase of any construction activity.  The management of stormwater includes the use of STFs that meet minimum site performance standards in accordance with a community’s MS4 permit. STFs are intended to provide stormwater treatment during this time period and are considered functional after vegetation has been established.

Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan (PCSWMP): Documentation supporting analysis, design, maintenance and inspection of STFs installed on a site in order to meet minimum site performance standards in accordance with a community’s MS4 permit.

Receiving Water: Is any water of the State of Nebraska, including any and all surface waters that are contained in or flow in or through the State of Nebraska. These include all watercourses, even if they are usually dry, irrigation ditches that receive municipal stormwater, and storm sewer systems owned by other entities.

Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

Redevelopment: Any land-disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition or replacement of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to the following activities that meet the minimum standards set forth in this definition:

(1)      The expansion of a building footprint;

(2)      Addition or replacement of a structure;

(3)      Replacement of impervious surface that that is not part of a routine maintenance activity;

(4)      Land disturbing activities related to structural or impervious surfaces.

Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety

Sediment: Soil (or mud) that has been disturbed or eroded and transported naturally by water, wind or gravity, or mechanically by any person.

Sediment control: Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site.

Site: The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity.

Site plan:  A plan or set of plans showing the details of any land disturbance activity of a site including but not limited to the construction of structures, open and enclosed drainage facilities, stormwater management facilities, parking lots, driveways, curbs, pavements, sidewalks, bike paths, recreational facilities, ground covers, plantings and landscaping.

Spill: A release of solid or liquid material, which may cause pollution of the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or waters of the State.

Stabilization: The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.

Storm Drainage System: Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to; any roads with drainage systems; municipal streets; gutters; curbs; inlets; piped storm drains; pumping facilities; retention and detention basins; natural and human- made or altered drainage channels; reservoirs; and other drainage structures.  The storm drainage system in Grand Island is a municipal separate storm sewer system as defined by applicable federal regulations.

Storm Water: Any water that occurs in surface flow, runoff, or drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.

Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan: A document which describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.

Stormwater Treatment Facilities (STFs): Permanent best management practices put in place to provide control and treatment of stormwater runoff after construction activity for land development is complete. These facilities are physical in nature and sometimes referred to as “structural” BMPs and can include Low Impact Development Techniques.

Subdivision Development: Includes activities associated with the platting of any parcel of land into two or more lots and all construction activity taking place thereon.

Utility Agency/Contractor: Private utility companies, public utility departments, or other utility providers, contractors working for such private utility companies, or public entity utility departments, or other utility providers engaged in the construction or maintenance of utility lines and services, including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas, telephone, television and communication services.

Wastewater: Means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from any premises or facility. Wastewater includes sewage that is treated at the City’s Waste Water Treatment Plant.

Waters of the State: Any and all surface and subsurface waters that are contained in or flow in or through the State of Nebraska. The definition includes all watercourses, even if they are usually dry.

§40-3.  Applicability

This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.

§40-4.  Responsibility for  Administration

The City of Grand Island shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the City of Grand Island may be delegated by the Public Works Director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of, or in the employ of the City.

§40-5.  Severability

The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this ordinance.

§40-6.  Ultimate Responsibility

The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are minimum standards. Compliance with this ordinance does not act as a waiver or defense to any person for contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. Ultimate responsibility for prohibited acts rests with persons who own or are in possession or control of premises from which the discharge of contaminates or pollutants emanates.

§40-7.  Illicit Discharge

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses any materials including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge to the storm drainage system is prohibited except as allowed under section 40-8 of this code.

§40-8.  Discharges to the Municipal Storm Sewer System MS4

1. Permitted Discharges

(a)          The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this ordinance: water line flushing or other potable water sources; landscape irrigation or lawn watering; diverted stream flows; rising ground water; ground water infiltration to storm drains; uncontaminated pumped ground water; foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems); crawl space pumps; air conditioning condensation; springs; non-commercial washing of vehicles; natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows; swimming pools (if dechlorinated – typically less than one PPM chlorine); firefighting activities; and any other water source not containing Pollutants.

(b)          Discharges determined by the City to be necessary to protect public health and safety.

(c)          Dye testing if the City is notified in writing prior to the time of the test.

(d)          Any non-storm water discharge permitted under an National Pollutant Discharge Elimination system permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drainage system.

2. Prohibited Discharges

(a)          The following discharges are strictly prohibited from entering the City Storm Sewer Conveyance System established by this ordinance: wastewater from the washout of concrete, wastewater from the washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, other construction materials, fuels, oils, other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance, soaps, and solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing.

(b)          Any other discharge that is not permitted by this ordinance.

§40-9.  Illicit Connection

The Construction, Use, Maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system are prohibited.

(a)          This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.

(b)          A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage or pollutants to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or allows such a connection to continue.

§40-10.  Suspension of Storm  Drainage System Access

Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations

The City of Grand Island may, without prior notice, suspend storm drainage system discharge access to a person when the City deems it necessary to prevent an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to: the environment; to the health or welfare of persons or to the storm drainage system; or to waters of the United States of America. If the person fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the City of Grand Island may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to persons, the storm drainage system, waters of the United States of America.

Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge

Any person discharging to the storm drainage system in violation of this ordinance may have their storm drainage system access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The City will notify a person of the proposed termination of storm drainage system access by personal delivery or by United States Mail. The person may request a hearing before the City Director of Public Works by delivering such request in writing to the City Clerk. The person is not entitled to a stay of the termination pending any such hearing.

A person commits an offense if the person accesses or attempts to access the storm drainage system from premises terminated pursuant to this Section, without the prior approval of the City.

§40-11. Construction.

(A)          GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.

(1)  Except for construction activity relating to the Building Phase of Development, the City of Grand Island shall require proof of coverage by a NDEQ general permit authorization for Storm Water Discharges from Construction Sites before providing approval for construction activity and land developments requiring –including but not limited to: site plan applications, subdivision applications, building applications, and right-of-way applications from the City of Grand Island, unless exempt pursuant to Subsection (a) below. These provisions apply to all portions of any plan for land disturbing activity which would cause the disturbance of at least one acre of soil even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities within the overall development may take place at different times on different schedules.

(a) The following activities are exempt from this Ordinance:

(i)    Any emergency activity that is necessary for the immediate protection of life, property, or natural resources; and

(ii)   Construction activity that provides maintenance and repairs performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of a facility.

(2) The city shall be invited to the pre-construction meeting to review the installation of all temporary erosion and sediment control BMPs included on the approved erosion and sediment control plan at least two (2) business days before any construction activities are scheduled to start.

(3) Solid waste, industrial waste, yard waste and any other pollutants or waste on any construction site shall be controlled through the use of BMPs. Waste or recycling containers shall be provided and maintained by the owner or contractor on construction sites where there is the potential for release of waste. Uncontained waste that may blow, wash or otherwise be released from the site is prohibited. Sanitary waste facilities shall be provided and maintained in a secured manner.

(4)  Ready- mixed concrete, or any materials resulting from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing such materials or used in transporting or applying ready-mixed concrete, shall not be allowed to discharge from any construction site. Concrete wasted on site must be disposed in a manner consistent with locally approved standards and generally require establishment of a designated wash-out area.

(5) Cover or perimeter control shall be applied within seven (7) days to any soil stockpiles, which will remain undisturbed for longer than 14 calendar days.

(6) Disturbed soil shall be managed with BMPs that are adequately designed, installed, and maintained according to locally-approved technical standards, specifications and guidance for the duration of the construction activity to minimize erosion and contain sediment within the construction limits.

(7) Sediment tracked or discharged onto public right-of-way shall be removed immediately.

(8) Bulk storage structures for petroleum products and other chemicals shall have adequate protection to contain all spills and prevent any spilled material from entering the MS4 or waters of the State.

(9)  Temporary BMPs shall be removed and disturbed areas shall be stabilized with permanent BMPs at the conclusion of construction activity.

 

(B)         REQUIREMENTS FOR THE BUILDING PHASE OF DEVELOPMENT.

(1) Any person who engages in construction activity is responsible for compliance with this Ordinance and all applicable terms and conditions of the approved construction activity and SWPPP as it relates to the building phase of development. The following information shall be included with the application for a building permit and be submitted to the Public Works Department:

(2) Either the legal description and NPDES permit number for the Larger Common Plan of Development; OR

(3) The location of the property where the building phase of development is to occur; AND

(4)  Contractor acknowledgement that the building phase of development for the property described on the application for a building permit will be conducted in conformance with Chapter 40 of the Municipal Code and the Construction Activity SWPPP.

(5) Site plans shall be submitted to the Public Works Director for the purpose of review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit and the beginning of the construction phase of development. This is to ensure compliance with EPA directives and with section 40-12 of this ordinance as it pertains to the Post-Construction Management of Stormwater run-off.

(C)         CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.

(1) A SWPPP shall be prepared and updated in accordance with locally-approved technical standards, specification, and guidance for construction activity within the City of Grand Island and shall include an erosion and sediment control plan for land disturbance.

(2) The SWPPP shall include a description of all potential pollution sources, temporary and permanent BMPs that will be implemented at the site. BMPs used will be approved by the Public Works Director.

(3) The erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the Public Works Director for review with any application covered in 40-11 (a) (1) of this Ordinance.

(4) Land disturbing activities may not proceed until approval of the erosion and sediment control plan is provided by the Public Works Director.

(5) The owner or operator is required to have a copy of the SWPPP readily available or on site for review with content that reflects the current condition of the construction activity and all records that demonstrate compliance and are required by this Ordinance.

(6) The SWPPP shall include a description of routine site inspections.

(a)          The owner or their representative shall inspect all BMPs at intervals of no greater than 14 calendar days and within 24-hours after any precipitation event of at least one half inch.

(b)          Inspections of BMPs shall be conducted by an individual knowledgeable in the principles and practice of erosion and sediment controls who possesses the skills to assess conditions at the construction site that could impact stormwater quality and to assess the effectiveness of any erosion and sediment control measures selected to control the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction activity.

(c)          Inspection reports shall provide the name and qualification of the inspector, date of the evaluation, risks to stormwater quality identified, and all corrective actions necessary to prevent stormwater pollution.

(d)          The owner or operator of a construction activity may be requested to submit copies of inspection reports for review on a periodic basis by the Public Works Director.

(7) Based on inspections performed by the owner, operator, authorized City of Grand Island personnel, State or Federal regulators, modifications to the SWPPP will be necessary if at any time the specified BMPs do not meet the objectives of this Ordinance. In this case, the owner shall meet with an appointed official of the City of Grand Island to determine the appropriate modifications. All required modifications shall be completed within seven (7) calendar days of receiving notice of inspection findings, and shall be recorded in the SWPPP.

(8) The owner or operator of a construction site shall be responsible for amending the SWPPP whenever there is a significant change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the potential for discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or receiving waters, or if the SWPPP proves to be ineffective in achieving the general objectives of controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with land disturbance.

(9) Records of inspection are to be maintained with the SWPPP for the life of the project. Inspection records are to be available to City of Grand Island inspectors upon request. Delay in providing a copy of the SWPPP or any requested records shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.

(D)         REQUIREMENTS FOR UTILITY CONSTRUCTION.

(1)  Utility agencies or their representatives shall develop and implement BMPs to prevent the discharge of pollutants on any site of utility construction within the City of Grand Island. The City of Grand Island may require additional BMPs on utility construction activity. If the utility construction disturbs greater than one (1) acre, the utility agency must comply with the requirements of Section 40-11 (a) & (b) of this Ordinance.

(2) Utility agencies or their representative shall implement BMPs to prevent the release of sediment from utility construction sites. Disturbed areas shall be minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed and construction site exits shall be managed to prevent sediment tracking. Sediment tracked onto public right-of-way shall be removed immediately.

(3) Prior to entering a construction site or subdivision development, utility agencies or their representatives shall obtain and comply with any approved erosion and sediment control plans for the project. Any impact to construction and post-construction BMP’s resulting from utility construction shall be evaluated prior to disturbance by the developer and utility company. Repairs to the disturbed BMPs must be completed within forty eight (48) hours, by individuals agreed upon during the design phase or at a preconstruction meeting.

§40-12.  Post-Construction.

The purpose of this section is to provide requirements and criteria to prevent and manage stormwater pollution and to diminish adverse impacts to health, safety, property, and the general welfare of the citizens of the City of Grand Island through regulating stormwater runoff from areas of development and redevelopment to the maximum extent practicable as required by the Federal Clean Water Act, 33.U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (as amended to date), the Nebraska Environmental Protection Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 81-1501 et seq. (as amended to date) and the rules and regulations promulgated under such Acts. This chapter will also promote the public welfare by guiding and regulating the design, construction, and maintenance of areas of development and redevelopment. Additional criteria can be found in the City of Grand Island Post-Construction Stormwater Guidance Manual.

(A)         POST–CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENT OF PERMANENT BMPs/STFs.

(1)          Land development that meets the requirements of Section 40-11 (a) (1) must address stormwater runoff quality through the use of permanent BMPs/STFs. Permanent BMPs/STFs shall be provided for in the drainage plan for any subdivision plat, annexation plat, development agreement, subdivision agreement or other local development plan.

(2)          Structural BMPs/STFs located on private property shall be owned and operated by the owner(s) of the property on which the BMP is located; unless the City of Grand Island agrees in writing that a person or entity other than the owner shall own or operate such BMP/STF. As a condition of approval of the BMP/STFs, the owner shall also agree to maintain the BMP/STF in perpetuity to its design capacity unless or until the City of Grand Island shall relieve the property owner of that responsibility in writing. The obligation to maintain the BMP/STF shall be memorialized on the subdivision plat, annexation plat, development agreement, subdivision agreement or other form acceptable to the City of Grand Island and shall be recorded with the City of Grand Island Public Works Department.

(3)          The preferred Structural BMPs/STFs that are acceptable in the City of Grand Island and its 2 mile jurisdictional boundary without additional review by the Public Works Director are: Bioswales, Rain Gardens, Permeable Pavement, Green Roofs, Retention Ponds, and Detention Ponds (Provided the detention Ponds include treatment areas to improve water quality; i.e. a treatment forebay and filtration strip). If there are other stormwater treatment measures a developer would like to use, plans for those measures will need to be submitted to and approved in writing by the Director of Public Works, prior to construction and development.

(4)          A Post Construction Stormwater Management Plan (PCSWMP) shall be submitted to the planning department for transmittal to the Public Works Director on a form or format specified by the director, as part of any preliminary plat application required under Sec.33-7; if not already submitted as part of a preliminary plat process. For any significant redevelopment, a post-construction stormwater management plan shall be submitted along with the permit application for any activity requiring a building permit under Sec.33-6.

a.            For all developments that have not had a preliminary plat approved prior to January 1, 2019, the post-construction stormwater management plan, at a minimum, shall include Low Impact Development (LID) STFs to provide for water quality control of the first one-half inch of runoff from the site. The director may also require this minimum control level for replats that significantly increase the amount of impervious area in a preliminarily platted subdivision, which was approved prior to July 1, 2018.

b.            For all developments with plats preliminarily approved after July 1, 2018 and for significant redevelopment projects, the post-construction stormwater management plan, at a minimum shall include the STF or STFs selected, the STF design, schedules and procedures for inspection and maintenance of the STFs, and where it is reasonably practicable, include STFs for water quality control of the first one-half inch of runoff from the site. Provisions for STFs are set forth in the Grand Island Post-Construction Stormwater Management Guide. For significant redevelopment projects that involve replacement of building structures without significant disturbance of existing parking or other pervious areas, BMPs for water quality control of the first one-half inch of runoff from the site shall not be required. For significant redevelopment projects involving an outlot parcel that is part of a greater existing development, the calculation of the area requiring control of the first one-half inch of runoff shall be based only on the impervious area of the project site that is being added or disturbed within the out lot parcel.

(B)  Exemptions from the Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan

Systems designed to accommodate only one single family dwelling unit, duplex, triplex, or quadraplex, provided the single unit is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, are exempt from the requirements in this Ordinance to submit a Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan.

Additional policies and procedures for the development and implementation requirements for BMPs/STFs can be found in the City of Grand Island Post-Construction Stormwater Management Guide.

 

(C)         COMPLETION OF PERMANENT BMPs/STFs.

Upon completion of a project, the City of Grand Island shall be provided a written certification stating that the completed project is in compliance with the approved Final Drainage Plan. All applicants are required to submit “as built” plans for any permanent BMPs once final construction is completed and must be signed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Nebraska.

(D)         ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF PERMANENT BMPs/STFs.

(1)          The owner of site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Grand Island, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the permanent BMPs/STFs.

(2)          Permanent BMPs/STFs included in a Drainage Plan which is subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and to ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this Ordinance.

a.            All BMPs/STFs must be inspected by the owner, using an approved inspection form,(Appendix B of the Grand Island Post-Construction Guidance Manual), for maintenance and repair requirements at a minimum, once per quarter.

b.            All BMPs/STFs shall be inspected, by a qualified employee of the City of Grand Island, twice per year to ensure owner compliance with the design of the BMP/STF and to ensure maintenance and repair actions are adequately monitored.

(3)          The maintenance agreement shall also provide that if, after notice by the City to correct a violation requiring maintenance work, satisfactory corrections are not made by the owner(s) or occupant within a reasonable period of time (30 days maximum), and the City may perform all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. The owner(s) or occupant of the facility shall be assessed the cost of the work and any lawful penalties.

§40-13.  Technical Standards,  Specifications, And Guidance.

All BMPs/STFs designed to meet the requirements of this Ordinance shall reference the appropriate technical standards, specifications and guidance as follows:

(1)                 City of Grand Island Standards and Specifications for Construction.

(2)                 Nebraska Department of Roads Drainage Design and Erosion Control Standards, Specifications and Guidance.

(3)          Any other alternative methodology approved by the City of Grand Island, which is demonstrated to be effective.

§40-14.  Monitoring of Discharges

(A)            Applicability.

               This section applies to all premises that have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity.

(B)         Access to premises.

(1)          The City of Grand Island’s designees shall be permitted to enter and inspect premises and facilities subject to regulation under this ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the City.

(2)          The City’s designees shall be given access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of: inspection; sampling; examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit to discharge storm water; and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.

(3)          The City may place upon the premises such devices as deemed necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of discharges from the premises.

(4)          The City of Grand Island may require a person to install monitoring equipment as necessary. Sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at no expense to the City. All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure accuracy.

(5)          Any obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed at the request of the City and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall not be paid by the City.

(6)          Unreasonable delays in allowing Grand Island City designees access to premises is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this ordinance. A person who is the operator of a facility or premises with a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the City reasonable access for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this ordinance.

 (7)         If a City of Grand Island designee has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, the City of Grand Island may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.

§40-15.  Best Management Practices


The City of Grand Island may adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drainage system, or waters of the United States of America. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at the owner or operator’s expense, reasonable protection from discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural Best Management Practices. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural and non-structural Best Management Practices to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. These Best Management Practices shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan as necessary for compliance with requirements of any National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit.

 

§40-16.  Watercourse Protection


Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, and such person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.

 

§40-17.  Notification of Discharges and Spills


Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, premises, or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which result or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drainage system, or waters of the United States of America, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies and the City of Grand Island of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non- hazardous materials, said person shall notify the City of Grand Island in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person, by phone, or by facsimile shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City of Grand Island within three business days of the prior notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.

 

§40-18.  Geothermal Water  Source Heat Pump Systems


Geothermal Water Source Heat Pump Systems may be installed and operated within the City of Grand Island, and its two mile extraterritorial jurisdiction, subject to permitting and other applicable requirements of the Grand Island City Code provided that any discharge of the spent water from any such system shall be dedicated to a beneficial use (ie. Maintaining the water level of a private pond), and shall not include chemical additives for cleaning or descaling, nor shall it create a threat to public health or safety, a nuisance, or unlawful pollution of waters of the state. In no event shall the spent water from any Geothermal Water Source Heat Pump System be directed toward or allowed to enter into or onto any publicly maintained street right of way, road right of way, ditch, storm sewer system, or sanitary sewer system.

Closed Loop Systems are permitted to be installed and must follow Federal, State, and Local guidelines (whichever are most restrictive). New Open Loop Systems are prohibited in the City of Grand Island and its 2 mile jurisdictional boundary. Any Open Loop System that was previously installed, prior to the implementation of this ordinance, are exempt from these restrictions until the system requires overhaul and/or replacement. It is at that time the new guidelines must be met.

A. Material Requirements.

(1)          Geothermal piping shall have a 50-year warranty.

(2)          All piping shall be installed with tracer wire from the structure over all pipes to alert future owners and excavators to the presence and location of the system.

(3)          Heat transfer fluid used in exchanger lines must be a USP or food grade propylene glycol or calcium chloride solution. Ethylene Glycol will not be accepted.

(4)          The system shall include a pressure-based leak detector that will stop the system circulating pumps, should a leak occur.

B. Prohibited Acts.

(1)          It shall be unlawful for any person to install a well to be used for geothermal heat transfer purposes within the City of Grand Island or its two mile extraterritorial jurisdiction without obtaining a permit for said well.

(2)          It shall be unlawful to fail to register any well as required by this Article.

(3)          It shall be unlawful to connect or discharge any water from said well, provided it maintains a beneficial use to the city and/or community, to the city stormwater conveyance system without first obtaining a permit for the connection.

(4)          It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or maintain a Geothermal Water Source Heat Pump System in any manner contrary to the provisions of Grand Island City Code.

§40-19 thru 40-29 Reserved

§40-30.  Notice of Violation


Whenever the City of Grand Island finds that a person has violated or failed to meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the City’s designee may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:

(a)          The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;

(b)          The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;

(c)          That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;

(d)          The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;

(e)          Payment of costs to cover administrative and remediation expenses;

(f)           The implementation of source control, treatment, and prevention practices. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator and may be assessed against the real estate or collected by civil action.

§40-31.  Appeal of a Notice of Violation


Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination. The notice of appeal must be received within 10 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Director shall be final.

 

§40-32.  Enforcement Measures


If the violation has not been corrected as set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 25 days of the original deadline if the Director upholds the notice of violation, then representatives of the City of Grand Island may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the City’s designees or agents to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.

 

§40-33.  Cost Of Abatement  Of The Violation


After abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days, the City of Grand Island may sue to recover the costs through a civil action or levy and assess the costs against the real estate in the manner of special assessments.

 

§40-34.  Injunctive Relief


It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Ordinance. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this ordinance, the City of Grand Island may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. Injunctive relief shall be in addition to any other remedy available under this ordinance or any other federal or state law.

 

§40-35.  Violations Deemed  A Public Nuisance


In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated or restored at the violator's expense, in the same man’er as other nuisances under the Grand Island Municipal Code.

 

§40-36.  Criminal Prosecution


Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an infraction. Each day shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable by a fine of $100.00. Criminal fines shall be in addition to any civil remedies available under Grand Island Municipal Code.

 

§40-37.  Remedies Not Exclusive


The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.

Ordinance No. 9636 effective 7-12-2017

 

§40-38.  Storm Water Fee Schedule  Established

 

There is hereby assessed against all property within the City that is connected to water of the City a monthly storm water utility fee as set forth in the Grand Island Fee Schedule. Such fee is based upon a determination of the use for each property. The owner, occupant and any person who is responsible for the payment of water service to the property, shall all be jointly and severally responsible for the payment of said fee. Persons responsible for the payment of water service to the property shall include the person responsible for payment for water provided to a master meter that is then distributed to multiple users, whether or not said users are located on the same property as the master meter. The fees shall be set based upon the following property use categories:

All property devoted to a residential use. The term “residential” shall include single family homes, mobile homes, and mobile home parks, duplexes and apartment units. The term “residential” shall not include rooming or boarding houses, dormitories, and similar facilities; and
Property devoted to any use other than residential.
Ordinance No. 9648 effective 10-1-2017

 

