
Gothenburg, NE Code of Ordinances


CITY OF GOTHENBURG, NEBRASKA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2017 S-6 Supplement Contains:
Local Legislation current through Ordinance No. 959, passed 12-5-17
State Legislation through 2016



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY




CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Section histories; statutory references



   10.17   Supplementation of code of ordinances



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances shall be designated as the "Gothenburg
Code of Ordinances" and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary, and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY.  Gothenburg,
Nebraska.



      CITY COUNCIL or GOVERNING BODY.  The Gothenburg City Council.



      CODE,THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This city code, as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



      COUNTY.  Dawson County, Nebraska.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MAYOR.  The Chief Administrative Official of the city whenever
it appears in this code of ordinances.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission, or department of the city unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON.  Includes bodies politic and corporate, societies,
communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships, limited
liability companies, joint-stock companies, and associations.



(Neb. RS 49-801(16))



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Nebraska.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      WHOLESALE DEALER.  The words WHOLESALE DEALER or SELLERS OF
PRODUCT AT WHOLESALE shall embrace and include manufacturers of any product
who sell the product to other persons for the purpose of future resale to
consumers.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



(Ord. 636, passed 12-19-1995)



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the Mayor and City Council or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   ANDorOR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written "and/or", if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, the requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever a section refers to another section hereof, that reference
shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended,
revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is materially
altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the
misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to
express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the
spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.



   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time, or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   (1)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.



      (2)   If the last day is a Saturday or Sunday, it shall be
excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code contains all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining
to the subjects enumerated and embraced in this code. All prior ordinances
pertaining to the subjects treated by this code are repealed, except that
nothing shall affect any rights acquired under, actions involving, or fines,
penalties, forfeitures or liabilities incurred pursuant to those ordinances
prior to repeal.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code, including
ordinances specified in this section, shall remain in full force and effect
unless repealed expressly or by necessary implication:



   (A)   Vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, alleys, or
other public places;



   (B)   Annexing or detaching territory;



   (C)   Granting or accepting easements, plats, or dedication of land
to public use;



   (D)   Providing for the acquisition or conveyance of real or
personal property;



   (E)   Authorizing or directing public improvements to be made;



   (F)   Levying taxes or special assessments;



   (G)   Appropriating money;



   (H)   Granting franchises or special licenses; or



   (I)   Providing for the issuance of bonds or other instruments of
indebtedness.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance is repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance
thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of
the ordinance repealing or modifying it to give effect thereto.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, liability, fine, forfeiture, or
penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance
previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged,
but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance
had continued in force, unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision is itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.



Statutory reference:



   Requirements for amendments and revisions, see Neb. RS 16-247



§ 10.16  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the
text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example:
(Neb. RS 18-132)



   (B)   A statutory cite set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to
that statute for further information. Example:



      § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



         This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



      Statutory reference:



         Inspection of public records, see Neb. RS 84-712 et seq.



§ 10.17  SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Discretion. When preparing a supplement to this city code, the
codifier (that is, the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare
the supplement) may make formal non-substantive changes in ordinances and
parts of ordinances included in the supplement as necessary to embody them
into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:



      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
sections and divisions;



      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for
sections and other subdivisions of the ordinance printed in the supplement
and make changes in the catchlines, headings and titles;



      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other
divisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new
material, change existing section, or other division numbers;



      (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same
meaning to "this chapter," "this subchapter," "this section," and the like,
as may be appropriate, or to "§§     through     " (inserting section
numbers to indicate the sections of the code which embody the substantive
sections of the ordinance incorporated into the code);



      (5)   Insert appropriate section numbers in references to code
sections such as "§     " or "§§     through     " which are not
filled in prior to adoption of an ordinance;



      (6)   Correct the spelling of words, correct obvious
typographical errors, correct erroneous division and hyphenation of words,
capitalize or decapitalize words, and make other similar changes in
accordance with accepted usage or for consistency with other provisions of
the code;



      (7)   Change terminology for consistency with terminology used
in other provisions of the code; and



      (8)   Make other non-substantive changes necessary to
incorporate ordinance material into the code while preserving the original
meaning of the ordinance sections.



   (B)   Prohibition. In no case shall the codifier make any change in
the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or
already embodied in the code and not repealed by any ordinance.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this city
code, unless otherwise specifically provided herein, shall be deemed guilty
of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not
exceeding $500.  A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this code.



   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in Title IX of
this code, the city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the
same, in the manner provided by law.



      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720 and 18-1722



   Authority to impose fines, see Neb. RS 17-505



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   BODY OF GOVERNMENT





         31.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS





         32.   FINANCES





         33.   TAXATION




CHAPTER 30:  BODY OF GOVERNMENT



Section



General Provisions



   30.001   Performance bond or security



   30.002   Oath of office



   30.003   Official seal



Elected Officials



   30.015   Mayor; powers and duties



   30.016   City Council



   30.017   Vacancies



Appointed Officials



   30.030   General authority; merger of offices



   30.031   Clerk, Treasurer offices combined



   30.032   Clerk, Deputy Clerk



   30.033   Treasurer



   30.034   City Administrator



   30.035   City Physician



   30.036   Police Chief



   30.037   City police officer



   30.038   Fire Chief



   30.039   City Engineer; special engineer



   30.040   City Attorney; City Prosecutor



   30.041   Street Superintendent



   30.042   Building Inspector



   30.043   Electrical Inspector



   30.044   Zoning Administrator



Meetings



   30.055   Definitions



   30.056   Public meetings



   30.057   Closed session meetings



   30.058   Emergency meetings



   30.059   Minutes



   30.060   Votes



   30.061   News media notice



   30.062   Public participation



   30.063   Change in office



   30.064   Organizational meeting



   30.065   Order of business



   30.066   Time and place of regular meetings



   30.067   Special meetings



   30.068   Agenda



   30.069   Presiding officer



   30.070   Call to order; reading of minutes



   30.071   Robert's Rules; rules of debate



   30.072   Meeting conduct



Ordinances



   30.085   Authority



   30.086   Resolutions; motions; contracts



   30.087   Introduction and passage



   30.088   Style



   30.089   Publication or posting; certificate



   30.090   Emergency ordinance; amendment, revision



Elections



   30.105   General provisions



   30.106   Officers; certification of information



   30.107   Terms and qualifications of officers



   30.108   Wards



   30.109   Partisan ballot



   30.110   Number of candidates in primary election



   30.111   Certificate of nomination



   30.112   Joint general election; notice



   30.113   Special election timing; responsibility



   30.114   Filing fee



   30.115   Petition, write-in and other candidates for general
election ballot; procedures



   30.116   Registered voter qualifications



   30.117   Certificate of election



   30.118   Inability to assume office



   30.119   Recall procedure



   30.120   Candidate filing forms; deadlines; filing officer



City Property



   30.130   Defined



   30.131   Maintenance and control



   30.132   Sale and conveyance



   30.133   Obstructions



   30.134   Signs and canopies



   30.135   Acquisition of property



Compensation



   30.150   Compensation of officials



   30.151   Conflict of interest involving contract



 



   30.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.001  PERFORMANCE BOND OR SECURITY.



   (A)   The city may enact ordinances or bylaws to require from all
officers and servants, elected or appointed, bonds and security or evidence
of equivalent insurance for the faithful performance of their duties. The
city may pay the premium for the bonds or insurance coverage.



(Neb. RS 17-604)



   (B)   (1)   All official bonds of officers of the city shall be
in form joint and several and made payable to the city in the penalty as the
City Council may fix.



      (2)   In place of the individual bonds required to be
furnished by municipal officers, a schedule, position, blanket bond or
undertaking, or evidence of equivalent insurance may be given by city
officers, or a single corporate surety fidelity, schedule, position, or
blanket bond or undertaking, or evidence of insurance coverage covering all
the officers, including officers required by law to furnish an individual
bond or undertaking, may be furnished. The city may pay the premium for the
bond or insurance coverage. The bond or insurance coverage shall be, at a
minimum, an aggregate of the amounts fixed by law or by the City Council, and
with terms and conditions as may be required.



(Neb. RS 11-104)



      (3)   The penalty amount on any bond shall not fall below the
legal minimum, when one has been set by the state, for each particular
official.



   (C)   Official bonds, with the oath endorsed thereon, shall be filed
in the City Clerk's office within the following time:



      (1)   Of all appointed officers, within 30 days after their
appointment; and



      (2)   Of elected city officers, within 30 days after the
canvass of the votes of the election at which they were chosen.



(Neb. RS 11-105)



   (D)   All official bonds of city officers shall be executed by the
principal named in the bonds and by at least two sufficient sureties who
shall be freeholders of the county in which the bonds are given, or any
official bond of a city officer may be executed by the officer as principal
and by a guaranty, surety, fidelity, or bonding company as surety, or by two
or more companies. Only companies as are legally authorized to transact
business in this state shall be eligible to suretyship on the bond of a city
officer.



(Neb. RS 11-109)



   (E)   The City Clerk shall carefully record and preserve the bonds
in his or her office and shall give certified copies thereof, when required,
under the seal of his or her office, and shall be entitled to receive for the
same the usual fee allowed by law for certified copies of records in other
cases.



(Neb. RS 11-110)



   (F)   (1)   The approval of each official bond shall be endorsed
upon the bond by the officer approving the same, and no bond shall be filed
and recorded until so approved.



(Neb. RS 11-111)



      (2)   No bond shall be deemed to be given or complete until
the approval of the City Council and all sureties are endorsed in writing on
the instrument by the Mayor and City Clerk pursuant to the approval of the
City Council.



   (G)   All official bonds shall obligate the principal and sureties
for the faithful discharge of all duties required by law of the principal and
shall inure to the benefit of any persons injured by a breach of the
conditions of the bonds.



(Neb. RS 11-112)



   (H)   No official bond shall be rendered void by reason of any
informality of irregularity in its execution or approval.



(Neb. RS 11-113)



   (I)   No city official shall be taken as security on the bond of any
administrator, executor, or other officer from whom by law bond is or may be
required.



(Neb. RS 11-114)



   (J)   If any person elected or appointed to any office neglects to
have his or her official bond executed and approved as provided by law and
filed for record within the time limited by this section, the City Clerk
shall immediately issue an order to the person to show cause why he or she
has failed to properly file the bond and why his or her office should not be
declared vacant. If the person properly files the official bond within ten
days of the issuance of the show cause order for appointed officials or
before the date for taking office for elected officials, the filing shall be
deemed to be in compliance with this section. If the person does not file the
bond within the required time and sufficient cause is not shown within that
time, his or her office shall thereupon ipso facto become vacant and the
vacancy shall thereupon immediately be filled by election or appointment as
the law may direct in other cases of vacancy in the same office.



(Neb. RS 11-115)



   (K)   Any person appointed to fill a vacancy, before entering upon
the duties of the office, must give a bond corresponding in substance and
form with the bond required of the officer originally elected or appointed,
as herein provided.



(Neb. RS 11-116)



   (L)   When the incumbent of an office is reelected or reappointed,
he or she shall qualify by taking the oath and giving the bond as above
directed, but when the officer has had public funds or property in his or her
control, his or her bond shall not be approved until he or she has produced
and fully accounted for the funds and property. When it is ascertained that
the incumbent of an office holds over by reason of the nonelection or
nonappointment of a successor or of the neglect or refusal of the successor
to qualify, he or she shall qualify anew within ten days from the time at
which his or her successor, if elected, should have qualified.



(Neb. RS 11-117)



   (M)   No person shall be surety for the same officer for more than
two successive terms of the same office, but this provision shall not apply
to incorporated surety companies.



(Neb. RS 11-118)



   (N)   If the sureties on the official bond of any appointed officer
of the city, in the opinion of the City Council, become insufficient, the
Council may, by resolution, fix a reasonable time within which the officer
may give a new bond or additional sureties as directed. If the officer fails,
refuses, or neglects to give a new bond or additional sureties to the
satisfaction and approval of the Council, the office shall, by the failure,
refusal, or neglect, become vacant and it shall be the duty of the Council to
appoint a competent and qualified person to fill the office.



(Prior Code, § 1-301)



§ 30.002  OATH OF OFFICE.



   All officials of the city, whether elected or appointed, except when a
different oath is specifically provided herein, shall, before entering upon
their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath which shall be
endorsed upon their respective bonds:



      I _____________________________ do solemnly swear that I will
support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the
State of Nebraska, against all enemies foreign and domestic; that I will bear
true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely,
and without mental reservation, or for the purpose of evasion; and that I
will faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the office of
_______________, according to law, and to the best of my ability. And I do
further swear that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any political
party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the
United States or of this State by force, or violence; and that during such
time as I am in this position I will not advocate, nor become a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of this State by force or violence. So
help me God.



(Neb. RS 11-101)  (Prior Code, § 1-302)



§ 30.003  OFFICIAL SEAL.



   The official corporate seal of the city shall be kept in the office of
the City Clerk, and shall bear the following inscription, “Corporate Seal,
City of Gothenburg, Nebraska.” The City Clerk shall affix an impression of
the official seal to all warrants, licenses, permits, ordinances, and all
other official papers issued by order of the City Council and countersigned
by the City Clerk.



(Neb. RS 17-502)  (Prior Code, § 1-401)



ELECTED OFFICIALS



§ 30.015  MAYOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council.
The Mayor may vote when his or her vote would provide the additional vote
required to attain the number of votes equal to a majority of the number of
members elected to the City Council on any pending matter, legislation, or
transaction, and the Mayor shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to
be a member of the Council. He or she shall have superintendence and control
of all the officers and affairs of the city, and shall take care that the
ordinances of the city and all laws governing cities of the second class are
complied with.



(Neb. RS 17-110)



   (B)   The Mayor shall have the power to veto or sign any ordinance
passed by the City Council and to approve or veto any order, bylaw,
resolution, award of or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of
any claim. If the Mayor approves the ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution,
contract, or claim, he or she shall sign it, and it shall become effective.
If the Mayor vetoes the ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, contract, or any
item or items of appropriations or claims, he or she shall return it to the
City Council stating that the measure is vetoed. The Mayor may issue the veto
at the meeting at which the measure passed or within seven calendar days
after the meeting. If the Mayor issues the veto after the meeting, the Mayor
shall notify the City Clerk of the veto in writing. The Clerk shall notify
the City Council in writing of the Mayor's veto. Any order, bylaw,
resolution, award of or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of
any claim vetoed by the Mayor may be passed over his or her veto by a vote of
two-thirds of the members of the Council. If the Mayor neglects or refuses to
sign any ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, award of or vote to enter into
any contract, or the allowance of any claim, but fails to veto the measure
within the time required by this section, the measure shall become effective
without his or her signature. The Mayor may veto any item or items of any
appropriation bill or any claims bill, and approve the remainder thereof, and
the item or items vetoed may be passed by the Council over the veto as in
other cases.



(Neb. RS 17-111)



   (C)   The Mayor shall, from time to time, communicate to the City
Council such information and recommend such measures as, in his or her
opinion, may tend to the improvement of the finances, the police, health,
security, ornament, comfort, and general prosperity of the city.



(Neb. RS 17-112)



   (D)   The Mayor shall have the power, when he or she deems it
necessary, to require any officer of the city to exhibit his or her accounts
or other papers, and to make reports to the Council, in writing, touching any
subject or matter pertaining to his or her office.



(Neb. RS 17-113)



   (E)   The Mayor shall have such jurisdiction as may be vested in him
or her by ordinance, over all places within five miles of the corporate
limits of the city, for the enforcement of any health or quarantine ordinance
and regulation thereof, and shall have jurisdiction in all matters vested in
him or her by ordinance, excepting taxation, within one-half mile of the
corporate limits of the city.



(Neb. RS 17-114)



   (F)   The Mayor shall have the power to remit fines and forfeitures,
and to grant reprieves and pardons for all offenses arising under the
ordinances of the city.



(Neb. RS 17-117)



   (G)   The Mayor shall hold no other elective or appointive office or
employment with the city.



   (H)   The Mayor shall sign the City Clerk's minutes of all meetings
of the City Council, and he or she shall sign all resolutions that have been
passed and warrants for the payment of money when ordered by the Council.



   (I)   The Mayor shall have such other duties as are reposed in the
Mayor by the laws of the State of Nebraska or as the Council may by
resolution confer upon the Mayor.



(Prior Code, § 1-101)  (Am. Ord. 911, passed 3-17-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Restrictions on holding other office or employment, see Neb. RS
17-108.02, 32-109, 32-603, and 32-604



§ 30.016  CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   The City Council shall elect one of its own body each year who
shall be styled the President of the Council, and who shall preside at all
meetings of the City Council in the absence of the Mayor. In the absence of
the Mayor, and the President of the Council, the City Council shall elect one
of its own body to occupy his place temporarily, who shall be styled Acting
President of the Council. Both the President of the Council and the Acting
President of the Council, when occupying the position of the Mayor, shall
have the same privileges as the other members of the City Council, and all
acts of the President of the Council, or Acting President of the Council,
while so acting, shall be as binding upon the City Council, and upon the
city, as if done by the elected Mayor.



(Neb. RS 17-148)  (Prior Code, § 1-102)



   (B)   The members of the City Council shall be elected and serve for
a four-year term. The City Council shall be the legislative division of the
city government, and shall perform the duties, and have the powers as may be
authorized by law. The City Council shall maintain the peace, regulate
business, protect the public health and safety, and assess the taxes and fees
as are necessary and appropriate in the exercise of these functions.



(Neb. RS 17-104, 17-505)  (Prior Code, § 1-103)



   (C)   City Council members of this city shall take office, and
commence their duties on the first regular meeting in December following
their election. The newly elected Council members who have qualified as
prescribed by law, together with the members of the City Council holding
over, shall assemble in a regular meeting at the hour and place hereinafter
prescribed and perfect the reorganization of the City Council as herein
provided, and all appointive offices in which the terms of incumbents are
expired shall be filled by appointment. After the meeting has been called to
order, the City Clerk shall report to the City Council the names of all City
Council members-elect who have qualified for their respective offices, and
this report shall be spread upon the minutes of the meeting preceding the
roll call. Each ward of the city shall be represented by at least two Council
members. No person shall be eligible who is not at the time of his or her
election an actual resident of the ward for which he or she is qualified and
should any City Council member move from the ward from which he or she was
elected, his or her office shall thereby become vacant.



(Neb. RS 17-104)  (Prior Code, § 1-104)



§ 30.017  VACANCIES.



   (A)   Every elective office shall be vacant upon the happening of
any of the events specified in Neb. RS 32-560 except as provided in Neb. RS
32-561.



(Neb. RS 32-560)



   (B)   Any vacancy in the City Council shall be filled as provided in
division (C)(3) below.



(Neb. RS 32-568)



   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions
(C)(2) or (3) below, vacancies in city elected offices shall be filled by the
Mayor and City Council for the balance of the unexpired term. Notice of a
vacancy, except a vacancy resulting from the death of the incumbent, shall be
in writing and presented to the Council at a regular or special meeting and
shall appear as a part of the minutes of the meeting. The Council shall at
once give public notice of the vacancy by causing to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city or by posting in three
public places in the city the office vacated and the length of the unexpired
term.



         (b)   The Mayor shall call a special meeting of the
Council or place the issue of filling the vacancy on the agenda at the next
regular meeting at which time the Mayor shall submit the name of a qualified
registered voter to fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term.
The regular or special meeting shall occur upon the death of the incumbent or
within four weeks after the meeting at which the notice of vacancy has been
presented. The Council shall vote upon the nominee, and if a majority votes
in favor of the nominee, the vacancy shall be declared filled. If the nominee
fails to receive a majority of the votes, the nomination shall be rejected
and the Mayor shall, at the next regular or special meeting, submit the name
of another qualified registered voter to fill the vacancy. If the subsequent
nominee fails to receive a majority of the votes, the Mayor shall continue at
the meeting to submit the names of qualified registered voters in nomination
and the Council shall continue to vote upon the nominations until the vacancy
is filled. The Mayor shall cast his or her vote for or against the nominee in
the case of a tie vote of the Council. All Council members present shall cast
a ballot for or against the nominee. Any member of the Council who has been
appointed to fill a vacancy on the Council shall have the same rights,
including voting, as if the person were elected.



      (2)   The Mayor and Council may, in lieu of filling a vacancy
in a city elected office as provided in division (C)(1)(a) and (b) above,
call a special city election to fill the vacancy.



      (3)   If vacancies exist in the offices of a majority of the
members of the City Council, the Secretary of State shall conduct a special
city election to fill the vacancies.



(Neb. RS 32-568, 32-569)  (Prior Code, § 1-105)



   (D)   (1)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, or
in case of his or her disability or absence, the President of the Council
shall exercise the office of Mayor for the unexpired term until the vacancy
is filled or the disability is removed, or in case of temporary absence,
until the Mayor returns.



      (2)   When the successful candidate for Mayor shall be
prevented from assuming office, the incumbent Mayor shall not be entitled to
hold over the term, but the office shall automatically become vacant and the
President of the Council shall exercise the office of Mayor until the vacancy
is filled.



      (3)   If the President of the Council shall for any cause
assume the office of Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term, there
shall be a vacancy on the Council which shall be filled as provided in
division (C) above.



(Prior Code, § 1-106)



APPOINTED OFFICIALS



§ 30.030  GENERAL AUTHORITY; MERGER OF OFFICES.



   (A)   (1)   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, may
appoint such officers as shall be required by ordinance or otherwise required
by law. Such officers may be removed from office by the Mayor.



      (2)   The terms of office for all officers, except regular
police officers, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council shall be
established by the City Council by ordinance.  The ordinance shall provide
that either:



         (a)   The officers hold the office to which they have
been appointed until the end of the Mayor's term of office and until their
successors are appointed and qualified unless sooner removed; or



         (b)   The officers hold office for one year unless
sooner removed.



(Neb. RS 17-107)  (Prior Code, § 1-201)



   (B)   (1)   The city may enact ordinances or bylaws to regulate
and prescribe the powers and duties of officers not provided for in state law.



(Neb. RS 17-604)



      (2)   If the Mayor and City Council appoint any of the
officials specified in this chapter or any other officials, the officials
shall have the powers and duties, if any, provided in this chapter or as
otherwise provided by city ordinances and state law.



   (C)   The City Council may, at its discretion, by ordinance combine
and merge any elective or appointive office or employment or any combination
of duties of any offices or employments, except Mayor and Council member,
with any other elective or appointive office or employment so that one or
more of the offices or employments or any combination of duties of any
offices or employments may be held by the same officer or employee at the
same time. The offices or employments so merged and combined shall always be
construed to be separate and the effect of the combination or merger shall be
limited to a consolidation of official duties only. The salary or
compensation of the officer or employee holding the merged or combined
offices or employments or offices and employments shall not be in excess of
the maximum amount provided by law for the salary or compensation of the
office, offices, employment or employments so merged and combined. For
purposes of this section, volunteer firefighters and ambulance drivers shall
not be considered officers.



(Neb. RS 17-108.02)  (Prior Code, § 1-202)



§ 30.031  CLERK, TREASURER OFFICES COMBINED.



   The appointive offices of City Clerk and City Treasurer are hereby
combined and merged in accordance with the authority granted to the City
Council by § 30.030(B).



(Prior Code, § 1-203)



§ 30.032  CLERK, DEPUTY CLERK.



   (A)   (1)   The City Clerk shall attend the meetings of the City
Council, and keep a correct journal of the proceedings of that body. He or
she shall keep a record of all outstanding bonds against the city and when
any bonds are sold, purchased, paid, or canceled, the record shall show the
fact. He or she shall make, at the end of the fiscal year, a report of the
business of the city transacted through his or her office for the year. The
record shall describe particularly the bonds issued and sold during the year,
and the terms of the sale with each and every item, and expense thereof. He
or she shall file all official bonds after the same shall have been properly
executed and approved. He or she shall make the proper certificate of passage
which shall be attached to original copies of all bond ordinances hereafter
enacted by the City Council.



      (2)   The City Clerk shall issue and sign all licenses,
permits, and occupation tax receipts authorized by law, and required by the
city ordinances. He or she shall collect all occupation taxes and license
money except where some other city officer is specifically charged with that
duty. He or she shall keep a register of all licenses granted in the city,
and the purpose for which they have been issued.



      (3)   The City Clerk shall permit no records, public papers,
or other documents of the city kept and preserved in his or her office, to be
taken therefrom, except by the officers of the city as may be entitled to the
use of the same, but only upon their leaving a receipt therefor. He or she
shall keep all the records of his or her office, including a record of all
licenses issued by him or her, in a blank book with a proper index. He or she
shall include as part of his or her records all petitions under which the
City Council shall order public work to be done at the expense of the
property fronting thereon, together with references to all resolutions, and
ordinances relating to the same. He or she shall endorse the date and hour of
filing upon every paper or document filed in his or her office. All filings
made by him or her shall be properly docketed. Included in his or her records
shall be all standard codes, amendments thereto, and other documents
incorporated by reference, and arranged in triplicate in a manner convenient
for reference. He or she shall keep an accurate and complete account of the
appropriation of the several funds, draw, sign, and attest all warrants
ordered for the payment of money on the particular fund from which the same
is payable. At the end of each month, he or she shall then make a report of
the amounts appropriated to the various funds, and the amount of the warrants
drawn thereon. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any citizen,
official, or other person from examining any public records at all reasonable
times.



      (4)   The City Clerk shall deliver all warrants, ordinances,
and resolutions under his or her charge to the Mayor for his or her
signature. He or she shall also deliver to officers, employees, and
committees all resolutions, and communications which are directed at the
officers, employees, or committees. With the seal of the city, he or she
shall duly attest the Mayor's signature to all ordinances, deeds, and papers
required to be attested to when ordered to do so by the City Council. Within
30 days after any meeting of the City Council, the City Clerk shall prepare
and publish the official proceedings of the City Council in a legal newspaper
of general circulation in the city, and which was duly designated as such by
the City Council. The publication shall set forth a statement of the
proceedings thereof and shall also include the amount of each claim allowed,
the purpose of the claim, and the name of the claimant, except that the
aggregate amount of all payroll claims may be included as one item. Between
July 15 and August 15 of each year, the employee job titles and the current
annual, monthly, or hourly salaries corresponding to the job titles shall be
published. Each job title published shall be descriptive and indicative of
the duties and functions of the position. The charge for the publication
shall not exceed the rates provided by the statutes of the state. The
publication shall be charged against the General Fund. He or she shall then
keep in a book with a proper index, copies of all notices required to be
published or posted by the City Clerk by order of the City Council, or under
the ordinances of the city. To each of the file copies of the notices shall
be attached the printer's affidavit of publication, if the notices are
required to be published, or the City Clerk's certificate under seal where
the same are required to be posted only.



      (5)   The City Clerk shall receive all objections to creation
of paving districts, and other street improvements. He or she shall receive
the claims of any person against the city, and in the event that the claim is
disallowed in part, or in whole, the City Clerk shall notify the claimant,
his or her agent, or attorney, by letter within five days after the
disallowance, and the City Clerk shall then prepare transcripts on appeals of
any disallowance of a claim in all proper cases.



      (6)   The City Clerk may charge a reasonable fee for certified
copies of any record in his or her office as set by resolution of the City
Council. He or she shall destroy city records under the direction of the
State Records Board, pursuant to Neb. RS 84-1201 through 84-1220; provided,
the City Council shall not have the authority to destroy the minutes of the
City Clerk, the permanent ordinances, and resolution books, or any other
records classified as permanent by the State Records Board.



(Neb. RS 17-605, 19-1102, 19-1104, 84-1201 through 84-1220, 84-712)  (Prior
Code, § 1-204)



   (B)   At the reorganizational meeting each year, the Mayor, with the
consent of the Council, may appoint a Deputy City Clerk, who shall hold
office for one year unless sooner removed by the Mayor. The Deputy City Clerk
shall have the same duties and powers as the City Clerk, and is empowered to
perform the functions of the office of the City Clerk, subject to the
authority and control of the City Clerk.



(Neb. RS 17-107, 17-604)  (Prior Code, § 1-205)



§ 30.033  TREASURER.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall be the custodian of all money
belonging to the city. He or she shall keep a separate account of each fund
or appropriation and the debts and credits belonging thereto. He or she shall
give every person paying money into the treasury a receipt therefor,
specifying the date of payment and on what account paid. He or she shall also
file copies of the receipts with his or her monthly reports. The City
Treasurer shall, at the end of every month, and as often as may be required,
render an account to the City Council, under oath, showing the state of the
treasury at the date of the account and the balance of money in the treasury.
He or she shall also accompany the accounts with a statement of all receipts
and disbursements, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him or
her, which warrants, with any and all vouchers held by him or her, shall be
filed with his or her account in the City Clerk's office. If the City
Treasurer fails to render his or her account within 20 days after the end of
the month, or by a later date established by the City Council, the Mayor may
use this failure as cause to remove the Treasurer from office.



(Neb. RS 17-606)



   (B)   (1)   All warrants upon the City Treasury shall be paid in
the order of their presentation therefor.



(Neb. RS 77-2201)



      (2)   The City Treasurer shall keep a warrant register in the
form required by Neb. RS 77-2202.



      (3)   The City Treasurer shall make duplicate receipts for all
sums which shall be paid into his or her office, which receipts shall show
the source from which the funds are derived, and shall, by distinct lines and
columns, show the amount received to the credit of each separate fund, and
whether the same was paid in cash, in warrants, or otherwise. The Treasurer
shall deliver one of the duplicates to the person making the payment and
retain the other in his or her office.



(Neb. RS 77-2209)



      (4)   The City Treasurer shall daily, as money is received,
foot the several columns of the cash book and of the register, and carry the
amounts forward, and at the close of each year, in case the amount of money
received by the Treasurer is insufficient to pay the warrants registered, he
or she shall close the account for that year in the register and shall carry
forward the excess.



(Neb. RS 77-2210)



   (C)   (1)   The City Treasurer shall prepare and publish annually
within 60 days following the close of the municipal fiscal year a statement
of the receipts and expenditures by funds of the city for the preceding
fiscal year.



(Neb. RS 19-1101)



      (2)   Publication shall be made in one legal newspaper of
general circulation in the city. If no legal newspaper is published in the
city, then the publication shall be made in one legal newspaper published or
of general circulation within the county in which the city is located.



(Neb. RS 19-1103)



   (D)   The City Treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the city
separate and distinct from his or her own money. He or she shall invest and
collect all money owned by or owed to the city as directed by the City
Council. He or she shall maintain depository evidence that all municipal
money is, in the name of the city, in a solvent and going financial
institution of a type authorized by state law for deposit of municipal funds.
He or she shall cancel all bonds, coupons, warrants, and other evidences of
debt against the city, whenever paid by him or her, by writing or stamping on
the face thereof, "Paid by the City Treasurer," with the date of payment
written or stamped thereon. He or she shall collect all special taxes,
allocate special assessments to the several owners, and obtain from the
County Treasurer a monthly report as to the collection of delinquent taxes.



(Prior Code, § 1-206)



§ 30.034  CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The City Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor by and
with the consent of a majority of the City Council. He or she shall be the
administrative head of the city government under the direction and control of
the Mayor and City Council and shall be responsible to the Mayor and City
Council for the efficient conduct of his or her office. The responsibilities
of the City Administrator shall be as follows:



      (1)   To see that a current inventory of all property, real
and personal, owned by the city is kept on file;



      (2)   To act as purchasing agent for the purchase of all
supplies, goods, wares and merchandise, equipment, and material which may be
required for the various departments, divisions, or services of the city;



      (3)   To keep the Mayor and Council fully advised as to the
financial condition and needs of the city and be responsible for the
preparation of the annual estimate of expenditures for presentation to the
Mayor and Council prior to the passage of the annual appropriation ordinance;



      (4)   To serve as public relations officer of the city
government, and in the capacity to endeavor to investigate all complaints
filed against any employee, department, division, or service thereof and
cooperate and work with all community organizations whose aim and purpose is
to advance the best interests and development of the city and its people and
to attend meetings of the organizations within and outside the city if the
attendance is necessary and desirable;



      (5)   To attend all meetings of the Council with the duty of
reporting any matter concerning city affairs under his or her supervision or
direction and to attend other meetings of the city departments and officials
as may be required to fulfill his or her responsibilities;



      (6)   To analyze the functions, duties, and activities of the
various departments, divisions, and services of the city government and of
all employees thereof, and to make his or her recommendations regarding the
same to the Mayor and Council;



      (7)   To carry out the Mayor and/or Council's recommendations
in coordinating the administrative functions and operations of the various
departments;



      (8)   To procure facts and submit long range improvement
recommendations to the Mayor and Council;



      (9)   To recommend to the Mayor and Council the appointment
and dismissal of all department heads and other employees over which he or
she exercises supervisory responsibility. Appointment or dismissal of
department heads will be made upon the recommendations of the Mayor and
confirmation by the Council. In the absence of the Mayor, the City
Administrator may suspend any employee with or without pay, should the City
Administrator determine that any city employee is guilty of gross misconduct,
or wanton dereliction of duty, until the time as the Mayor returns, or
otherwise exercises jurisdiction over the employee;



      (10)   To investigate and make recommendations to the Mayor
and City Council regarding duties and activities of any employee of the city
and recommend to the Mayor and Council the promotion, demotion, suspension,
transfer, or discharge of the employees;



      (11)   To administer and be responsible for all departments
and divisions of the city government, which are under the Mayor's and
Council's direction, including the Board of Public Works and any public
utilities hereafter acquired by the city and including Fire and Police
Departments, except insofar as the jurisdiction and administration conflicts
with the civil service law pertaining to the Fire and Police Departments. The
office of the City Attorney and City Physician shall not come under the
administration and responsibility of the City Administrator, the
Administrator, however, shall be available to assist these offices in any
administrative matter that may arise and those officers in turn shall be
available to assist the City Administrator in the discharge of his or her
duties;



      (12)    To recommend to the Mayor and Council for adoption
measures and ordinances as are deemed necessary or expedient;



      (13)   To recommend to the Mayor and Council any changes he or
she deems appropriate in the employee manual;



      (14)   To make investigations into the affairs of the city and
any department or division thereof, and any contract, or the proper
performance of any obligation pertaining to the city;



      (15)   To exercise general supervision over all public
buildings, streets, and other public property which are under the control and
jurisdiction of the Mayor and Council;



      (16)   To oversee the preparation and submission to the Mayor
and Council as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the
finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year;



      (17)    To make recommendations regarding appropriate
insurance coverage for the city;



      (18)   To keep open his or her office for public affairs
during days and hours set by the Mayor and Council; and



      (19)   (a)   To perform other duties and exercise other
powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinances or
resolutions of the Council, and where action of the Council is not required
duties and powers as may be prescribed by the Mayor; and



         (b)   The City Administrator in the discharge of his or
her duties shall have the right to expend an amount not to exceed the limits
set forth in the city's purchasing procedure.



   (B)   The city may contract in writing with the City Administrator
to occupy the position and to assume the duties in writing, upon the terms
and conditions as the Council may approve.



   (C)   In the event the City Administrator serves pursuant to a
written contract, his or her renewal shall be governed by the writing. In the
event the City Administrator is serving by appointment and without a written
contract, he or she may be removed at any time by the Mayor.



   (D)   The City Administrator shall act as the City Fiscal Officer,
and be responsible for preparing all budgets for departments and presenting
the same to the Mayor and Council.



(Prior Code, § 1-220)  (Ord. 837, passed 8-5-2008)



§ 30.035  CITY PHYSICIAN.



   The City Physician shall be a member of the Board of Health of the
city, and perform the duties devolving upon him or her as the medical advisor
of the Board. In all injuries where a liability may be asserted against the
city, the City Physician shall immediately investigate the injuries, the
extent thereof, and the circumstances. He or she shall then report the
results of his or her investigation with the name of the party injured, and
all other persons who may have personal knowledge of the matter. He or she
shall make all physical examinations, and necessary laboratory tests incident
thereto, and issue health certificates as are required by ordinance. For the
purpose of making examinations of the sanitary conditions of the property,
and the state of health of the inhabitants therein, he or she shall have the
right at all reasonable hours to go upon, and enter all premises, buildings,
or other structures in the city. He or she shall perform other duties as may
be required of him or her by the laws of the state, and the ordinances of the
city. When ordered to do so by the City Council, he or she shall disinfect or
fumigate the premises, or persons in or about the premises, when the premises
are quarantined, and to call upon indigent sick persons, and perform other
professional services at the direction of the City Council. The City
Physician shall receive as compensation for his or her services the sum as
the City Council may from time to time set. He or she shall receive no
compensation for his or her services as a member of the City Board of Health.



(Prior Code, § 1-209)



§ 30.036  POLICE CHIEF.



   The City Police Chief shall direct the police work of the city and
shall be responsible for the maintenance of law and order. He or she shall
act as Health Inspector, except in the event the city appoints another
person. He or she shall file the necessary complaints in cases arising out of
violations of city ordinances, and shall make all necessary reports required
by the city ordinances, or the laws of the state.



(Neb. RS 17-107, 17-121)  (Prior Code, § 1-210)



§ 30.037  CITY POLICE OFFICER.



   The police officers of the municipality shall have the power to arrest
all offenders against the laws of the state or of the city, by day or by
night, in the same manner as the County Sheriff and to keep such offenders in
the municipal prison or other place to prevent their escape until trial can
be had before the proper officer. They shall have full power, and authority
to call on any person whenever necessary to assist them in performing public
duties, and failure, neglect, or refusal to render assistance shall be deemed
an offense punishable upon conviction by a fine. Every city police officer
shall be expected to be conversant and knowledgeable with the city and state
laws, and no law enforcement official shall have any interest in any
establishment having a liquor license. City police officers shall have the
duty to file complaints and reports as may be required by the city ordinances
and the laws of the state. Any city police officer who shall willfully fail,
neglect, or refuse to make an arrest, or who purposely and willfully fails to
make a complaint after an arrest is made shall be deemed guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction shall be fined. It shall be unlawful for the
City Council to retain any city police officer in that position after he or
she shall have been duly convicted of the willful violation of any law of the
United States of America, the state, or any ordinance of the city, except
minor traffic violations. It shall be the duty of every city police officer
making a lawful arrest to search all persons in the presence of some other
person, whenever possible, and shall carefully keep, and produce to the
proper judicial official upon the trial, everything found upon the person of
the prisoners. All personal effects so taken from prisoners aforesaid shall
be restored to them upon their release. Suitable uniforms and badges shall be
furnished to the city police by the city. Any member who shall lose or
destroy the same shall be required to pay the replacement costs, and in the
event that any member shall leave the force, he or she shall immediately
deliver his or her badge to the Police Chief. The City Council may from time
to time provide the city police with uniforms, equipment, and transportation
as may be essential in the performance of their official duties.



(Neb. RS 17-118, 17-124)  (Prior Code, § 1-211)  Penalty, see § 30.999



§ 30.038  FIRE CHIEF.



   The City Fire Chief shall be elected by the members of the Fire
Department. He or she shall enforce all laws and ordinances covering the
prevention of fires, the storage and use of explosives and flammable
substances, the installation of fire alarm systems, the maintenance of fire
extinguishing equipment, the regulation of fire escapes, and the inspection
of all premises requiring adequate fire escapes. He shall, within two days,
investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires arising within his
or her jurisdiction. He or she shall, on or before the April 1 and October 1
of each year, cause the Secretary to file with the City Clerk, and the Clerk
of the District Court, a certified copy of the rolls of all members in good
standing in their respective companies in order to obtain the exemptions
provided by law. He or she shall have the power during the time of a fire,
and for a period of 36 hours thereafter, to arrest any suspected arsonist, or
any person for hindering the department's efforts, conducting himself or
herself in a noisy and disorderly manner, or who shall refuse to obey any
lawful order by the Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief. The Fire Chief, or
his or her assistant in charge of operations at a fire, may command the
services of any person present at any fire in extinguishing the same or in
the removal and protection of property. Failure to obey an order shall be an
offense punishable by a fine. The Fire Chief shall have the right to enter at
all reasonable hours into buildings and upon all premises within his or her
jurisdiction for the purpose of examining the same for fire hazards and
related dangers.



(Neb. RS 17-147, 17-505, 35-102, 35-108, 81-506, 81-512)  (Prior Code, §
1-212)



§ 30.039  CITY ENGINEER; SPECIAL ENGINEER.



   (A)   The City Engineer shall make all surveys, estimates, and
calculations necessary to be made for the establishment of any public
utilities, and the costs of labor and materials therefor. He or she shall
accurately make all plats, sections, and maps as may be necessary under the
direction of the City Council. Upon request, he or she shall make estimates
of the cost of labor and material which may be done or furnished by contract
with the city, and make all surveys, estimates, and calculations necessary to
be made for the establishment of grades, building of culverts, sewers,
electric light system, waterworks, power plant, public heating system,
bridges, curbing, and gutters, and the improvement of streets and erection
and repair of buildings, and shall perform other duties as the City Council
may require.



(Neb. RS 17-150, 17-405, 17-568.01, 17-919)  (Prior Code, § 1-213)



   (B)   The City Council may employ a special engineer to make or
assist the City Engineer in making any particular estimate, survey, or other
work. The special engineer shall make a record of the minutes of his or her
surveys and all other work done for the city. He or she shall, when directed
by the City Council, accurately make all plats, sections, profiles, and maps
as may be necessary in the judgment of the City Council. He or she shall,
upon request of the City Council, make estimates of the costs of labor and
material which may be done or furnished by contract with the city, and make
all surveys, estimates, and calculations necessary for the establishment of
grades, bridges, building of culverts, sewers, electric light system,
waterworks, power plant, public heating system, curbing and gutters, and the
improvement of streets and erection and repair of buildings, and shall
perform other duties as the City Council may require. All records of the
special engineer shall be public records which shall belong to the city, and
shall be turned over to his or her successor.



(Neb. RS 17-405, 17-568, 17-568.01, 17-919)  (Prior Code, § 1-214)



§ 30.040  CITY ATTORNEY; CITY PROSECUTOR.



   (A)   The City Attorney is the city's legal advisor, and as such, he
or she shall commence, prosecute, and defend all suits on behalf of the city.
When requested by the City Council, he or she shall attend meetings of the
City Council, and shall advise any city official in all matters of law in
which the interests of the city may be involved. He or she shall draft
ordinances, bonds, contracts, and other writings as may be required in the
administration of the affairs of the city. He or she shall examine all bonds,
contracts, and documents on which the City Council will be required to act,
and attach thereto a brief statement in writing to all instruments and
documents as to whether or not the document is in legal and proper form. He
or she shall also examine, when requested to do so by the City Council, the
ordinance records, and advise and assist the City Clerk as much as may be
necessary to the end that each procedural step will be taken in the passage
of each ordinance to insure that they will be valid and subsisting local laws
in so far as their passage and approval are concerned. The City Attorney
shall not act as police advisor, or prosecute violation of the city
ordinances.



   (B)   The City Prosecutor shall prosecute complaints, attend and
prosecute violations of the city ordinances when directed to do so by the
City Council and shall in all events act as legal counsel for the City Police
Department.



   (C)   The office of City Attorney and City Prosecutor may be held by
the same individual.



   (D)   The City Council shall have the right to compensate the City
Attorney and City Prosecutor for legal services on terms as the City Council
and the City Attorney and City Prosecutor may agree, and to employ any
additional legal assistance as may be necessary out of the funds of the city.



(Neb. RS 17-610)  (Prior Code, § 1-215)



§ 30.041  STREET SUPERINTENDENT.



   The City Street Superintendent shall, subject to the orders and
directives of the City Council, have general charge, direction, and control
of all work on the streets, sidewalks, culverts, and bridges of the city, and
shall perform other duties as the City Council may require. It shall be his
or her responsibility to see that gutters and drains therein function
properly, and that the same are kept in good repair. He or she shall, at the
request of the City Council, make a detailed report to the City Council on
the condition of the streets, sidewalks, culverts, alleys, and bridges of the
city, and shall direct their attention to the improvements, repairs,
extensions, additions, and additional employees as he or she may believe are
needed to maintain a satisfactory street system in the city along with an
estimate of the cost thereof. He or she shall issue the permits, and assume
the other duties as the City Council may direct.



(Neb. RS 17-107, 17-119)  (Prior Code, § 1-216)



§ 30.042  BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The City Building Inspector shall conduct surveys and make inspections
in any area of the city to determine whether all buildings and structures are
in compliance with the city ordinances. He or she shall investigate all
complaints, whether they are verbal, written, or in the form of a petition,
alleging and charging that a violation of the city ordinances exists, and
that a building or structure is unfit or unsafe for human habitation. The
Building Inspector is authorized, upon properly identifying himself or
herself, to enter, inspect, survey, and investigate between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m., or at any time if an emergency exists, or if requested by
the owner, or occupant thereof. He or she shall keep records of all
complaints received, inspection reports, orders, and complaints issued. The
records shall be available for public inspection, and he or she shall prepare
an annual report including statistics based on the records kept. The Building
Inspector shall have no financial interest in the furnishing of labor,
materials, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of
a building, except where he or she is the owner of a building, and he or she
shall not act as an agent for any dealer, or as an agent for the sale, lease,
or rental of any real estate. The Building Inspector shall report to the City
Council as often as it may deem necessary, and shall have other duties and
issue permits as they may direct. The Building Inspector may be removed at
any time, without cause, by the Mayor.



(Neb. RS 17-107, 17-604)  (Prior Code, § 1-217)



§ 30.043  ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.



   The City Electrical Inspector shall enforce all laws relating to the
installation of electrical wiring and connections thereto in residential
premises only. When acting in good faith and without malice in the scope of
his or her official duties, he or she shall not himself or herself be held
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as
the result of any act required by him or her, or by reason of any act or
omission in the discharge of his or her duties. He or she shall, in the
discharge of his or her official duties, and upon proper identification, have
authority to enter into any residential building, structure, or premise at
any reasonable hour. He or she shall perform such other duties and issue any
permits that the City Council may direct. The Electrical Inspector may be
removed at any time, without cause, by the Mayor.



(Neb. RS 17-107, 17-604)  (Prior Code, § 1-218)



§ 30.044  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Mayor may appoint a Zoning Administrator by and with the consent of
the City Council. In the absence of a specific appointment by the Mayor, the
Building Inspector is hereby designated as the Zoning Administrator.



(Neb. RS 17-107, 17-604)  (Prior Code, § 1-219)



MEETINGS



§ 30.055  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MEETINGS.  All regular, special, or called meetings, formal or
informal, of a public body for the purposes of briefing, discussion of public
business, formation of tentative policy, or the taking of any action.



(Neb. RS 84-1409(2))  (Prior Code, § 1-501)



   PUBLIC BODY.



      (1)   The City Council;



      (2)   All independent boards, commissions, bureaus,
committees, councils, subunits, or any other bodies, now or hereafter created
by constitution, statute, ordinance or otherwise pursuant to law; and



      (3)   Advisory committees of the bodies listed above.



   (B)   This definition shall not apply to subcommittees of bodies
unless a quorum of the public body attends a subcommittee meeting, or unless
subcommittees are holding hearings, making policy, or taking formal action on
behalf of their parent body.



(Neb. RS 84-1409(1))  (Prior Code, § 1-502)



§ 30.056  PUBLIC MEETINGS.



   (A)   All public meetings as defined by law shall be held in a city
public building which shall be open to attendance by the public. All meetings
shall be held in the public building in which the City Council usually holds
meetings unless the publicized notice hereinafter required shall designate
some other public building or other specified place. The advance publicized
notice of all public convened meetings shall be simultaneously transmitted to
all members of the City Council and to the public by a method designated by
the City Council or by the Mayor if the City Council has not designated a
method. The notice shall contain the time and specific place for each
meeting, and either an enumeration of the agenda subjects known at the time
of the notice, or a statement that an agenda kept continually current shall
be readily available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   Except for items of an emergency nature, the agenda shall not
be altered later than:



      (1)   Twenty-four hours before the scheduled commencement of
the meeting; or



      (2)   Forty-eight hours before the scheduled commencement of a
meeting of the City Council scheduled outside the corporate limits of the
city.



   (C)   The City Council shall have the right to modify the agenda to
include items of an emergency nature only at public meetings.



   (D)   The minutes of the City Clerk shall include the record of the
manner and advance time by which the advance publicized notice was given, a
statement of how the availability of an agenda of the then known subjects was
communicated, the time and specific place of the meetings, and the names of
each member of the City Council present or absent at each convened meeting.
The minutes of the City Council shall be a public record open to inspection
by the public upon request at any reasonable time at the office of the City
Clerk.



   (E)   Any official action on any question or motion duly moved and
seconded shall be taken only by roll call vote of the City Council in open
session. The record of the City Clerk shall show how each member voted, or
that the member was absent and did not vote.



(Neb. RS 84-1408, 84-1409, 84-1411, 84-1413)  (Prior Code, § 1-503)



§ 30.057  CLOSED SESSION MEETINGS.



   (A)   (1)   Any public body may hold a closed session by the
affirmative vote of a majority of its voting members if a closed session is
clearly necessary for the protection of the public interest or for the
prevention of needless injury to the reputation of an individual, and if the
individual has not requested a public meeting. The subject mater and the
reason necessitating the closed session shall be identified in the motion to
close. Closed sessions may be held for, but shall not be limited to, such
reasons as:



         (a)   Strategy sessions with respect to collective
bargaining, real estate purchases, pending litigation or litigation which is
imminent, as evidenced by communication of a claim or threat of litigation to
or by the public body;



         (b)   Discussion regarding deployment of security
personnel or devices;



         (c)   Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of
criminal misconduct; or



         (d)   Evaluation of the job performance of a person when
necessary to prevent needless injury to the reputation of a person, and if
the person has not requested a public meeting.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting
for discussion of the appointment or election of a new member to any public
body.



   (B)   The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open
session. The entire motion or the vote of each member on the question of
holding a closed session, and the time when the closed session commenced and
concluded shall be recorded in the minutes. If the motion to close passes,
then the presiding officer immediately prior to the closed session shall
restate on the record the limitation of the subject matter at the closed
session. The public body holding a closed session shall restrict its
consideration to matters during the closed portions to only those purposes
set forth in the motion to close as the reason for the closed session. The
meeting shall be reconvened in open session before any formal action may be
taken. For purposes of this section, FORMAL ACTION shall mean a collective
decision or a collective commitment or promise to make a decision on any
question, motion, proposal, resolution, order, or ordinance or formation of a
position or policy, but shall not include negotiating guidance given by
members of the public body to legal counsel or other negotiators in closed
sessions authorized under division (A)(1)(a) above.



   (C)   Any member of the public body shall have the right to
challenge the continuation of a closed session if the member determines that
the session has exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a
closed session, or if the member contends that the closed session is neither
clearly necessary for the protection of the public interest or the prevention
of needless injury to the reputation of an individual. The challenge shall be
overruled only by a majority vote of the members of the public body. The
challenge and its disposition shall be recorded in the minutes.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any
meeting be closed to the public.



   (E)   No person or public body shall fail to invite a portion of its
members to a meeting, and no public body shall designate itself a
subcommittee of the whole body for the purpose of circumventing the
provisions of this chapter. No closed session, informal meeting, chance
meeting, social gathering, or electronic communication shall be used for the
purpose of circumventing the provisions of this chapter.



   (F)   The provisions of this chapter and the Open Meetings Act, Neb.
RS 84-1407 to 84-1414, do not apply to chance meetings, or to attendance at
or travel to conventions or workshops of members of a public body at which
there is no meeting of the body then intentionally convened, and there is no
vote or other action taken regarding any matter over which the public body
has supervision, control, jurisdiction, or advisory power.



(Neb. RS 84-1410)  (Prior Code, § 1-504)



§ 30.058  EMERGENCY MEETINGS.



   When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without reasonable
advance public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated in the
minutes and any formal action taken in the meeting shall pertain only to the
emergency. The emergency meetings may be held by means of electronic or
telecommunication equipment. The provisions of § 30.061 shall be complied
with in conducting emergency meetings. Complete minutes of the emergency
meetings specifying the nature of the emergency and any formal action taken
at the meeting shall be made available to the public by no later than the end
of the next regular business day.



(Neb. RS 84-1411)  (Prior Code, § 1-505)



§ 30.059  MINUTES.



   (A)   Each public body shall keep minutes of all meetings showing
the time, place, members present and absent, and the substance of all matters
discussed.



   (B)   The minutes of all meetings and evidence and documentation
received or disclosed in open session shall be public records and open to
public inspection during normal business hours.



   (C)   Minutes shall be written and available for inspection within
ten working days, or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever occurs
earlier, except that the city may have an additional ten working days if the
employee responsible for writing the minutes is absent due to a serious
illness or emergency.



(Neb. RS 84-1412, 84-1413)  (Prior Code, § 1-506)



§ 30.060  VOTES.



   (A)   Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and
seconded shall be by roll call vote of the public body in open session, and
the record shall state how each member voted, or if the member was absent or
not voting. The requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be
satisfied by the city utilizing an electronic voting device which allows the
yeas and nays of each member of the City Council to be readily seen by the
public.



   (B)   The vote to elect leadership within a public body may be taken
by secret ballot, but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be
recorded in the minutes.



(Neb. RS 17-616, 84-1413)  (Prior Code, § 1-507)



§ 30.061  NEWS MEDIA NOTICE.



   The City Clerk, in the case of the City Council or the Secretary, or
other designee of each public body, shall maintain a list of the news media
requesting notification of meetings and shall make reasonable efforts to
provide advance notification to them of the time and place of each meeting,
and the subjects to be discussed at that meeting.



(Neb. RS 84-1411)  (Prior Code, § 1-508)



§ 30.062  PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, the public shall
have the right to attend and the right to speak at meetings of public bodies
and all or any part of a meeting of a public body, except for closed meetings
called pursuant to § 30.057, may be videotaped, televised, photographed,
broadcast, or recorded by any person in attendance by means of a tape
recorder, camera, video equipment, or any other means of pictorial or sonic
reproduction or in writing.



   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this section for any public
body to make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the
conduct of persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising,
photographing, broadcasting, or recording its meetings. A body may not be
required to allow citizens to speak at each meeting, but it may not forbid
public participation at all meetings. No public body shall require members of
the public to identify themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting
nor shall the body require that the name of any member of the public be
placed on the agenda prior to the meeting in order to speak about items on
the agenda. The body may require any member of the public desiring to address
the body to identify himself or herself. No public body shall, for the
purpose of circumventing the provisions of this chapter, hold a meeting in a
place known by the body to be too small to accommodate the anticipated
audience. No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it
holds its meeting in its traditional meeting place which is located in this
state. An agency which contracts with municipalities outside the state may
hold meetings of any committee outside the state if the meetings are held
only in the contracting municipalities. Final action on any agenda item shall
only be taken by the agency at a meeting in the state, which meeting shall
comply with Neb. RS 84-1408 to 84-1414. The public body shall, upon request,
make a reasonable effort to accommodate the public's right to hear the
discussion and testimony presented at the meeting. Public bodies shall make
available at the meeting, for examination and copying by members of the
public, at least one copy of all reproducible written material to be
discussed at an open meeting. Public bodies shall make available at least one
current copy of the Open Meetings Act posted in the meeting room at a
location accessible to members of the public. At the beginning of the
meeting, the public shall be informed about the location of the posted
information.



(Neb. RS 84-1412, 18-2438)  (Prior Code, § 1-509)



§ 30.063  CHANGE IN OFFICE.



   The change in office shall be made as follows. The Mayor and Council
shall meet on the first regular meeting date in December of each year in
which a city election is held and the outgoing officers and the outgoing
members of the Council shall present their reports, and upon the old Council
having completed its business up to the time, the outgoing members of the
Council shall surrender their offices to the incoming members, and the
outgoing officers shall thereupon each surrender to his or her successor in
office all property, records, papers and moneys, belonging to the same.



(Neb. RS 17-102, 17-104)  (Prior Code, § 1-511)



§ 30.064  ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING.



   The newly elected Council shall convene at the regular place of meeting
in the city on the first regular meeting in December of each year in which a
city election is held immediately after the prior Council adjourns and
proceed to organize themselves for the ensuing year. The Mayor elected for
the new city year shall call the meeting to order. The Council shall then
proceed to examine the credentials of its members and other elective officers
of the city to see that each has been duly and properly elected, and to see
that the oaths and bonds have been given as are required. After ascertaining
that all members are duly qualified, the Council shall then elect one of its
own body who shall be styled as President of the Council. The Mayor shall
then nominate his or her candidates for appointive offices. He or she shall
then proceed with the regular order of business. It is hereby made the duty
of each and every member of the Council, or his or her successor in office,
and of each officer elected to any office, to qualify prior to the first
regular meeting in December following his or her election. All appointive
officers shall qualify within two weeks following their appointments.
Qualification for each officer who is not required to give bond shall consist
in his or her subscribing and taking an oath to support the Constitution of
the United States, the Constitution of the state, the laws of the city, and
to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his or her office, the
oath to be filed in the office of the City Clerk. Each officer who is
required to give a bond shall file the required bond in the office of the
City Clerk with sufficient sureties, conditioned on the faithful discharge of
the duties of his or her office, with the oath endorsed thereon.



(Prior Code, § 1-512)



§ 30.065  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   All meetings of the City Council shall be open to the public. Promptly
at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the members of the
City Council, the City Clerk, the Mayor, and other city officials that may be
required shall take their regular stations in the meeting place, and the
business of the city shall be taken up for consideration, and disposition in
the manner prescribed by the official agenda on file at the office of the
City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 1-510)



§ 30.066  TIME AND PLACE OF REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   The City Council shall hold its regular meetings on the first
and third Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. If the day fixed for any regular
meeting of the Council falls upon a day designated by law as a legal or
national holiday, the meeting shall be held the same hour on a following day,
as may be determined by the Council.



   (B)   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council
Chambers, City Hall; provided, that the Council may adjourn any meeting to
another place as it may deem necessary, desirable, or convenient for the
holding of its session; provided further, that if the meeting is adjourned to
some other place, notice of the place the meeting is being held shall be
affixed to the door of the Council Chambers.



(Prior Code, § 1-513)



§ 30.067  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, or by three
members of the City Council, the object of which shall be submitted to the
Council in writing. The call and object, as well as the disposition thereof,
shall be entered upon the journal by the City Clerk. On filing the call for a
special meeting, the City Clerk shall notify the Council members of the
special meeting, stating the time and its purpose. Notice of a special
meeting need not be given to a Council member known to be out of the state,
or physically unable to be present. A majority of the members of the City
Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a
smaller number may adjourn from day to day and compel the attendance of the
absent members. Whether a quorum is present or not, all absent members shall
be sent for and compelled to attend.



   (B)   At the hour appointed for the meeting, the City Clerk shall
proceed to call the roll of members and announce whether a quorum is present.
If a quorum is present, the Council shall be called to order by the Mayor, if
present, or if absent, by the President of the Council. In the absence of
both the Mayor and the President of the Council, the City Council members
shall elect a President pro tempore. All ordinances passed at any special
meeting shall comply with procedures set forth in §§ 30.085 through 30.090
below.



(Neb. RS 17-106)  (Prior Code, § 1-514)



§ 30.068  AGENDA.



   All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract
documents or other matters to be submitted to the Council shall, at least 24
hours prior to each Council meetings, be delivered to the City Clerk,
whereupon the City Clerk shall immediately arrange a list of matters
according to the order of business and furnish each member of the Council,
the City Administrator, and the City Attorney with a copy of the same prior
to the Council meeting and as far in advance of the meeting as time for
preparation will permit. None of the foregoing matters shall be presented to
the Council by administrative officials, except those of an urgent nature,
and the same, when so presented, shall have the written approval of the City
Administrator before presentation. Any member of the Council may bring before
the Council any matter, although not on the agenda.



(Prior Code, § 1-515)



§ 30.069  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   The presiding officer of the City Council shall be the Mayor, or, in
his or her absence, the Mayor pro tempore. The presiding officer shall
preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the
Council. He or she shall state every question coming before the Council,
announce the decision of the Council on all subjects and decide all questions
of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the Council, in which event a
majority vote of the Council shall govern and conclusively determine the
questions of order. The appeal shall be immediately presented and voted upon
by the Council. He or she shall sign resolutions adopted by the Council
during his or her presence and seek ordinances which are not vetoed or
returned without his or her signature or provided in § 30.015. In the event
of the absence of the Mayor, the presiding officer shall sign resolutions as
then adopted.



(Prior Code, § 1-516)



§ 30.070  CALL TO ORDER; READING OF MINUTES.



   (A)   The Mayor, or in his or her absence, the Mayor pro tempore,
shall take the chair precisely at the hour appointed for the Council meeting,
and shall immediately call the City Council to order. In the absence of the
Mayor or Mayor pro tempore, the City Clerk or his or her assistant shall call
the Council to order, whereupon a temporary Chairperson shall be elected by
the members of the Council present. Upon the arrival of the Mayor or Mayor
pro tempore, the temporary Chairperson shall immediately relinquish the chair
upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the Council. Before
proceeding with the business of the City Council, the City Clerk or his or
her deputy shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present
shall be entered in the minutes. A majority of all the members elected to the
City Council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of
the Council. In the absence of a quorum, a smaller number may adjourn from
time to time and compel the attendance of absent members.



(Prior Code, § 1-517)



   (B)   Unless a reading of the minutes of a City Council meeting is
requested by a member of the Council, the minutes may be approved without
reading if the City Clerk has previously furnished each member with a
synopsis thereof.



(Prior Code, § 1-518)



§ 30.071  ROBERT'S RULES; RULES OF DEBATE.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specified, or unless changed by a specific
provision of this chapter, the City Council shall be governed in all matters
of procedure by that compilation of rules of procedure known as Robert's
Rules of Order.



(Prior Code, § 1-519)



   (B)   (1)   The Mayor, or other member of the City Council as may
be presiding, may move, second, and debate from the chair, subject only to
the limitations of debate as are imposed by these rules on all members, and
shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a Council member
by reason of his or her acting as the presiding officer.



      (2)   Every member desiring to speak shall address the chair,
and upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself or
herself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and
indecorous language.



      (3)   A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when
speaking, unless it is to call him or her to order or as otherwise provided
in this chapter. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, he or she
shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined, and, if in
order, he or she shall be permitted to proceed.



      (4)   A member having the floor shall yield the same for a
point of order addressed to the chair, a question of personal privilege
raised by any member and an inquiry for information addressed to the chair.
He or she may, upon request of any other member, temporarily yield the floor
for any interrogation or a statement by any member, at the conclusion of
which he or she will again be entitled to the floor.



      (5)   (a)   The Council may, by general rule, limit debate
or discussion on any matter, or may, by motion adopted at the time, limit
debate or discussion on any particular subject or motion, and may, by
majority vote of the members present, extend any limit.



         (b)   No member shall speak more than once on any
subject under discussion without permission from the presiding officer.



      (6)   The Council member moving the adoption of an ordinance
or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate.



      (7)   A motion to reconsider any action taken by the Council
may be made only on the day the action was taken. It may be made either
immediately during the same session or at a recessed or adjourned session
thereof. The motion must be made by one of the prevailing side, but may be
seconded by any member, and may be made at any time and have precedence over
all other motions or while a member has the floor and it shall be debatable.
Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent any member of the
Council from making or remaking the same or any other motion at a subsequent
meeting of the Council.



      (8)   A Council member may request, through the Mayor, the
privilege of having an abstract of his or her statement on any subject under
consideration by the Council entered in the minutes. If the Council consents
thereto, the statement shall be entered in the minutes.



      (9)   The City Clerk may be directed by the Mayor, with
consent of the Council, to enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion
of any question coming regularly before the Council.



(Prior Code, § 1-520)



§ 30.072  MEETING CONDUCT.



   (A)   (1)   The presiding officer of the City Council shall
provide opportunity during Council meetings for discussion by interested
persons or their authorized representatives on any Council bill or other
matter before the Council prior to final passage; provided, that the
preference shall be given to any person, who, at least four days prior to the
Council meeting, shall have requested opportunity for discussion by written
notice directed to the City Clerk.



      (2)   Any person may direct a written communication to the
City Council on any matter concerning the city's business by directing the
communication to the City Council through the City Clerk. Any written
communication shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular Council
meeting under the order of business entitled Petitions, Remonstrances and
Communications.



      (3)   Any person desiring to personally address the Council on
any matter not then before it shall notify the City Clerk in writing of his
or her desire at least four days prior to the Council meeting at which he or
she wishes to appear.



      (4)   After a motion is made in the City Council, no person
except a member of the Council shall address the Council.



      (5)   The presiding officer of the Council shall, from time to
time, make rules as he or she may deem necessary to fulfill and carry out the
intent of the provisions of this division.



(Prior Code, § 1-521)



   (B)   Each person addressing the City Council shall step up to the
City Clerk's table, shall give his or her name and address for the records,
and unless further time is granted by the Council, shall limit his or her
address to five minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a
body and not to any member thereof. No person, other than the Council and the
person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion,
either directly or through a member of the Council, without the permission of
the Mayor. No question shall be asked a Council member except through the
presiding officer.



(Prior Code, § 1-522)



   (C)   (1)   While the City Council is in session, the members
shall preserve order and decorum, and no member shall, by conversation or
otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the Council,
nor disturb any member while speaking, nor refuse to obey the orders of the
Council or its Mayor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.



      (2)   No person shall make personal, impertinent, or
slanderous remarks, nor otherwise disturb the order and decorum of any
Council meeting. The sergeant-at-arms, at the direction of the Mayor, shall
remove any person violating the provisions of this division.



(Prior Code, § 1-523)



   (D)   The Chief of Police, or members of the Police Department as he
or she may designate, shall be sergeant-at-arms of the City Council meetings.
He or she shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the Mayor for
the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the Council meetings.



(Prior Code, § 1-524)



   (E)   No person, except city officials, their representatives, and
recognized news representatives, shall be permitted in front of the podium in
the Council Chamber without the express consent of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 1-525)



   (F)   Any member shall have the right to have the reasons for his or
her dissent from or protest against any action of the City Council entered on
the minutes.



(Prior Code, § 1-526)



   (G)   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be
decided without debate.



(Prior Code, § 1-527)



ORDINANCES



§ 30.085  AUTHORITY.



   The City Council shall have the responsibility of making all
ordinances, bylaws, rules, regulations, and resolutions, not inconsistent
with the laws of the state, as may be necessary and proper for maintaining
the peace, good government, and welfare of the city and its trade, commerce,
and security.



(Neb. RS 17-505)  (Prior Code, § 1-601)



§ 30.086  RESOLUTIONS; MOTIONS; CONTRACTS.



   (A)   The City Attorney shall, on request of the City Administrator,
City Council, or any member thereof, prepare any ordinance or resolution.



   (B)   Before any ordinance or resolution shall be finally adopted,
the City Attorney, or his or her authorized assistant, shall endorse thereon
his or her approval as to form.



   (C)   Before any bond, contract, or other legal document binding the
city shall be presented to the Council for final approval, the City
Administrator shall approve the same in writing as to the terms thereof, and
the City Attorney, or his or her authorized assistant, shall approve the same
as to its form and legality and shall endorse approval thereon.



   (D)   Any ordinance, except those containing an emergency clause,
relating to the duties, powers, and function of any administrative department
or office, or affecting in any substantial manner the administration of the
city government shall, on first reading, be referred by the presiding officer
to the City Administrator for his or her report and recommendations thereon,
unless the ordinance shall have been previously approved by him or her.
Further action on ordinances shall be deferred until the next meeting of the
Council.



(Prior Code, § 1-602)



§ 30.087  INTRODUCTION AND PASSAGE.



   (A)   Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects
requiring action by the Council, may be introduced and sponsored by any
member of the Council and by no other person; provided, that the City
Administrator or the City Attorney may present ordinances, resolutions, and
other matters or subjects to the Council, and any Council member assume
sponsorship thereof by introducing the same and moving its adoption;
otherwise, the matters shall not be considered by the Council.



   (B)   Upon its introduction, each ordinance shall be put upon its
first reading and, except for emergency ordinances, or upon motion sustained,
up for consideration until the next session of the Council. If the motion for
immediate consideration is adopted, the ordinance shall be thereupon open for
discussion and amendment, moved to suspend the statutory rule requiring
reading on three different days. Motion to suspend the rules must be adopted
by three-fourths of the Council, except that the requirement shall not be
suspended for any ordinance for the annexation of territory. Move for final
passage on final reading.



   (C)   Any ordinance which shall have had its first reading shall be
taken up by the Council at its next session and shall be read the second
time, and thereupon shall be open for debate and amendment. On the close of
debate or upon the expiration of any limit thereon, the presiding officer
shall entertain a motion to place the ordinance on final passage.
Irrespective of any limit on debate, any member, any time when there is no
motion before the Council, may move to put the proposed ordinance on final
passage. The motion for final passage shall not be debatable and shall take
precedence over all other motions except one for adjournment. Upon being
seconded, the presiding officer shall immediately put the motion to the
Council. If the motion is adopted, no further debate or amendment shall be
allowed, and the Clerk shall immediately call the roll for its final passage.
If the motion is not adopted, the ordinance shall still be open for debate
and amendment until the time as a motion for final passage is adopted.



   (D)   If any ordinance shall have been amended upon its second
reading or on prior consideration thereof, it shall be referred to the City
Attorney for approval as to form as amended before final passage, and if the
amendment shall constitute a change in substance, the ordinance, as amended,
shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk for at least one additional
week, and opportunity afforded for a further public hearing, after which
final action may be taken thereon.



   (E)   No ordinance, except those making appropriations and those
codifying and rearranging existing ordinances, shall relate to more than one
subject, which shall be clearly expressed in the title, and no ordinance or
section thereof or section of the revised ordinances of the city shall be
amended or repealed unless the amending or repealing ordinance refers to the
ordinance, section thereof, or section of the revised ordinances by number
sufficient to identify the items to be repealed or amended.



   (F)   Any resolution may be passed at the meeting at which it is
introduced.



   (G)   All Council bills, whether they are ordinances or resolutions,
shall be deemed to have died on the table when it shall have been tabled or
referred to any committee of the Council or to the administration, and no
action shall have been taken upon the ordinance or resolution prior to the
next succeeding formal organizational meeting of the City Council. The City
Clerk shall expunge from the records all Council bills not acted upon prior
to the time of the organizational meeting of the new City Council.



(Prior Code, § 1-603)



§ 30.088  STYLE.



   The style of all city ordinances shall be: Be it ordained by the Mayor
and Council of the City of Gothenburg, Nebraska.



(Neb. RS 17-613)  (Prior Code, § 1-604)



§ 30.089  PUBLICATION OR POSTING; CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a general nature shall be published one
time, within 15 days after they are passed, in:



      (1)   Some newspaper published in the city, or if no paper is
published in the city, then by posting a written or printed copy thereof in
each of three public places in the city; or



      (2)   In book or pamphlet form.



(Neb. RS 17-613)  (Prior Code, § 1-605)



   (B)   The passage, approval, and publication or posting of all
ordinances shall be sufficiently proven by a certificate under the seal of
the city from the City Clerk showing that the ordinance was passed and
approved, and when, and in what paper, the same was published, or when, and
by whom, and where the same was posted.



(Neb. RS 17-613)  (Prior Code, § 1-606)



§ 30.090  EMERGENCY ORDINANCE; AMENDMENT, REVISION.



   (A)   In the case of riot, infectious or contagious diseases, or
other impending danger, failure of a public utility, or other emergency
requiring its immediate operation, the ordinance shall take effect upon the
proclamation of the Mayor, and the posting thereof in at least three of the
most public places in the city. The emergency notice shall recite the
emergency and be passed by a three-fourths vote of the City Council, and
entered upon the City Clerk's minutes.



(Neb. RS 17-613)  (Prior Code, § 1-607)



   (B)   No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended
unless the new ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised
or amended, and the ordinance or section so amended shall be repealed.



(Neb. RS 17-614)  (Prior Code, § 1-608)



ELECTIONS



§ 30.105  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   All city issues and offices shall be combined on the statewide primary
and general election ballots whenever possible. The issuance of separate
ballots shall be avoided in a statewide election if city offices or issues
can be reasonably be combined with the non-partisan ballot and state law does
not require otherwise. When the city holds an election in conjunction with
the statewide primary or general election, the election shall be held as
provided in the Election Act, being Neb. RS 32-101 to 32-1551. Any other
election by the city shall be held as provided in the Election Act unless
otherwise provided by Neb. RS 19-3001 to 19-3052.



(Neb. RS 32-404(1), 32-556)  (Prior Code, § 1-701)



§ 30.106  OFFICERS; CERTIFICATION OF INFORMATION.



   All city elections involving the election of officers shall be held in
accordance with the Election Act, being Neb. RS 32-101 to 32-1551, and in
conjunction with the statewide general election. No later than January 5 of
each even-numbered year, the City Council shall certify to the Secretary of
State, the Election Commissioner, or the County Clerk the name of the city,
the number of officers to be elected, the length of the terms of office, the
vacancies to be filled by election and length of remaining term, and the
number of votes to be cast by a registered voter for each office.



(Neb. RS 32-404(2), 32-556)  (Prior Code, § 1-702)



§ 30.107  TERMS AND QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICERS.



   (A)   Commencing with the primary election in 1976, and every two
years thereafter, all elected officers of the city shall be nominated at the
statewide primary election and elected at the statewide general election. All
elected officers of the city shall serve for terms of four years or until
their successors are elected and qualified.



(Neb. RS 32-554)



   (B)   The Mayor shall be a resident and registered voter of the city.



   (C)   (1)   The City Council shall consist of not less than four
nor more than twelve residents of the city who are registered voters.



(Neb. RS 17-103)



      (2)   All Council members shall be nominated and elected on a
nonpartisan ballot unless the city provides for a partisan ballot by
ordinance.



(Neb. RS 32-557)



      (3)   If members of the Council are not elected at large:



         (a)   Unless the city elects Council members at large as
provided in Neb. RS 32-554, the city shall be divided into not less than two
nor more than six wards, as provided by ordinance of the City Council. Each
ward shall contain, as nearly as practicable, an equal portion of the
population.



(Neb. RS 17-102)



         (b)   Unless the city elects Council members at large as
provided in Neb. RS 32-554, each ward of the city shall have at least two
Council members elected in the manner provided in the Election Act. No person
shall be eligible to the office of Council member who is not at the time of
the election an actual resident of the ward for which he or she is elected
and a registered voter; and



(Neb. RS 17-104)



         (c)   Such wards shall be substantially equal in
population as determined by the most recent federal decennial census.



(Neb. RS 32-553)



   (D)   The term of office shall begin on the first regular meeting of
the Council in December following the statewide general election.



(Neb. RS 17-104)



   (E)   Members of the Council shall serve for terms of four years or
until their successors are elected and qualified.



(Neb. RS 32-533)



   (F)   If the city operates under a city manager plan, members of the
City Council shall be residents and registered voters of the city and shall
hold no other employment with the city. Any Council member who ceases to
possess any of the qualifications required by this section or who has been
convicted of a felony or of any public offense involving the violation of the
oath of office of such member while in office shall forthwith forfeit such
office.\



(Neb. RS 19-613)



(Prior Code, § 1-703)  (Am. Ord. 948, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 30.108  WARDS.



   (A)   The city shall redistrict as often as necessary using the most
recent federal census to ensure that each ward is substantially equal in
population.



   (B)   The city shall stand divided into the following wards as set
forth herein:



      (1)   All that territory within the corporate limits of the
city lying west of Avenue G and south of 16th Street and all that territory
within the corporate limits of the city lying west of Avenue F and north of
16th Street shall be and constitute the West Ward; and



      (2)   All that territory within the corporate limits of the
city lying east of Avenue G and south of 16th Street and all that territory
within the corporate limits of the city lying east of Avenue F and north of
16th Street shall be and constitute the East Ward.



(Neb. RS 17-102)  (Prior Code, § 1-704)  (Ord. 766, passed 11-6-2001)



§ 30.109  PARTISAN BALLOT.



   All elective city offices shall be nominated and elected on a
nonpartisan basis unless the City Council provides for a partisan ballot by
ordinance. No ordinance providing for nomination and election on a partisan
ballot shall permit affiliation with any party not recognized as a political
party for purposes of the Election Act. The ordinance providing for
nomination and election on a partisan ballot shall be adopted and effective
not less than 60 days prior to the filing deadline.



(Neb. RS 32-557)  (Prior Code, § 1-705)



§ 30.110  NUMBER OF CANDIDATES IN PRIMARY ELECTION.



   If the names of candidates properly filed for nomination at the primary
election for officers of the city does not exceed two candidates for each
position to be filled, the candidates shall be declared nominated and their
names shall not appear on any primary election ballots.



(Neb. RS 32-811)  (Prior Code, § 1-706)



§ 30.111  CERTIFICATE OF NOMINATION.



   The Election Commissioner, County Clerk, or City Clerk shall, within 40
days after the primary election, prepare, sign, and deliver a certificate of
nomination to each person whom the County Canvassing Board has declared to
have received sufficient votes to be nominated as a candidate for the general
election.



(Neb. RS 32-558, 32-1033)  (Prior Code, § 1-707)



§ 30.112  JOINT GENERAL ELECTION; NOTICE.



   The notice of election required to be published by the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk no less than 40 days prior to an election shall
serve as the notice requirement for all city elections which are held in
conjunction with the statewide primary or general election.



(Neb. RS 32-802)  (Prior Code, § 1-708)



§ 30.113  SPECIAL ELECTION TIMING; RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Any issue to be submitted to the registered voters at a
special election by the city shall be certified by the City Clerk to the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk at least 50 days prior to the election.
No special election to be conducted by the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk shall be held within 30 days prior or 60 days after the statewide
primary election, and no special election to be conducted by the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk shall be held within 30 days prior to or 60 days
after the statewide general election.



   (B)   In lieu of submitting the issue at a special election, the
city may submit the issue at a statewide primary or general election or at
any scheduled county election, except that no issue shall be submitted at a
statewide election or scheduled county election unless the issue to be
submitted has been certified by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner
or County Clerk by March 1 for the primary election and by September 1 for
the general election.



   (C)   After the Election Commissioner or County Clerk has received
the certification of the issue to be submitted, he or she shall be
responsible for all matters relating to the submission of the issue to the
registered voters, except that the City Clerk shall be responsible for the
publication or posting of any required special notice of the submission of
the issue other than the notice required to be given of the statewide
election issues. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare the
ballots and issue ballots for early voting and shall also conduct the
submission of the issue, including the receiving and counting of ballots on
the issue. The election returns shall be made to the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk. The ballots shall be counted and canvassed at the same time and
in the same manner as the other ballots. Upon completion of the canvass of
the vote by the County Canvassing Board, the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk shall certify the election results to the City Council. The canvass by
the County Canvassing Board shall have the same force and effect as if made
by the City Council.



(Neb. RS 32-559)  (Prior Code, § 1-709)



§ 30.114  FILING FEE.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section, a
filing fee shall be paid to the City Treasurer by or on behalf of each
candidate for city office prior to filing for office. The fee shall be placed
in the general fund of the city. No candidate filing forms shall be filed
until the proper payment or the proper receipt showing the payment of such
filing fee is presented to the filing officer. On the day of the filing
deadline, the City Treasurer's office shall remain open to receive filing
fees until the hour of the filing deadline.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section, the
filing fee shall be a sum equal to 1% of the annual salary as of November 30
of the year preceding the election for the office for which he or she files
as a candidate.



   (C)   All declared write-in candidates shall pay the filing fees
that are required for the office at the time that they present the write-in
affidavit to the filing officer. Any undeclared write-in candidate who is
nominated or elected by write-in votes shall pay the filing fee required for
the office within ten days after the canvass of votes by the county
canvassing board and shall file the receipt with the person issuing the
certificate of nomination or the certificate of election prior to the
certificate being issued.



   (D)   No filing fee shall be required for any candidate filing for
an office in which a per diem is paid rather than a salary or for which there
is a salary of less than $500 per year.



   (E)   (1)   No filing fee shall be required of any candidate
completing an affidavit requesting to file for elective office in forma
pauperis.



      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         AVAILABLE RESOURCES. Includes every type of property or
interest in property that an individual owns and may convert into cash except:



            1.   Real property used as a home;



            2.   Household goods of a moderate value used in
the home; and



            3.   Assets to a maximum value of $3,000 used by a
recipient in a planned effort directed towards self-support.



         PAUPER. A person whose income and other resources for
maintenance are found under assistance standards to be insufficient for
meeting the cost of his or her requirements and whose reserve of cash or
other available resources does not exceed the maximum available resources
that an eligible individual may own.



   (F)   If any candidate dies prior to an election, the spouse of the
candidate may file a claim for refund of the filing fee with the City Council
prior to the date of the election. Upon approval of the claim by the City
Council, the filing fee shall be refunded.



(Neb. RS 32-608)  (Prior Code, § 1-710)  (Am. Ord. 909, passed 3-17-2015)



§ 30.115  PETITION, WRITE-IN AND OTHER CANDIDATES FOR GENERAL ELECTION
BALLOT; PROCEDURES.



   (A)   (1)   Any registered voter who was not a candidate in the
primary election and who was not registered to vote with a party affiliation
on or after March 1 and before the general election in the calendar year of
the general election may have his or her name placed on the general election
ballot for a partisan office by filing petitions as prescribed in this
section and Neb. RS 32-621 or by nomination by political party convention or
committee pursuant to Neb. RS 32-627 or 32-710.



      (2)   Any candidate who was defeated in the primary election
and any registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary election may
have his or her name placed on the general election ballot if a vacancy
exists on the ballot under Neb. RS 32-625(2) and the candidate files for the
office by petition as prescribed in divisions (B) and (C) of this section,
files as a write-in candidate as prescribed in Neb. RS 32-615, or is
nominated by political party convention or committee pursuant to Neb. RS
32-710.



(Neb. RS 32-616)



   (B)   Petitions for nomination shall conform to the requirements of
Neb. RS 32-628. Petitions shall state the office to be filled and the name
and address of the candidate. Petitions for partisan office shall also
indicate the party affiliation of the candidate. A sample copy of the
petition shall be filed with the filing officer prior to circulation.
Petitions shall be signed by registered voters residing in the city, if
candidates are chosen at large, or in the ward in which the officer is to be
elected, if candidates are chosen by ward, and shall be filed with the filing
officer in the same manner as provided for candidate filing forms in §
30.120. Petition signers and petition circulators shall conform to the
requirements of Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630. No petition for nomination shall
be filed unless there is attached thereto a receipt showing the payment of
the filing fee required pursuant to Neb. RS 32-608. The petitions shall be
filed by September 1 in the year of the general election.



(Neb. RS 32-617)



   (C)   (1)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed
to place the name of a candidate upon the nonpartisan ballot for the general
election shall be at least 10% of the total number of registered voters
voting for Governor or President of the United States at the immediately
preceding general election in the city or in the ward in which the officer is
to be elected, not to exceed 2,000.



      (2)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to
place the name of a candidate for an office upon the partisan ballot for the
general election shall be at least 10% of the registered voters entitled to
vote for the office.



(Neb. RS 32-618)



(Prior Code, § 1-711)  (Am. Ord. 907, passed 3-17-2015; Am. Ord. 957,
passed 9-19-2017)



§ 30.116  REGISTERED VOTER QUALIFICATIONS.



   All registered voters residing within the corporate limits of the city
on or before election day shall be entitled to vote at all city elections.
For purposes of this section, REGISTERED VOTER shall mean an elector, as
defined by Neb. RS 32-110, who has a current voter registration record on
file with the Election Commissioner or County Clerk.



(Neb. RS 17-602, 32-110, 32-115)  (Prior Code, § 1-712)



§ 30.117  CERTIFICATE OF ELECTION.



   The Election Commissioner, County Clerk, or City Clerk shall, within 40
days after the election, prepare, sign, and deliver a certificate of election
to each person whom the County Canvassing Board has declared to have received
the highest vote for each city office.



(Neb. RS 32-558, 32-1033)  (Prior Code, § 1-713)



§ 30.118  INABILITY TO ASSUME OFFICE.



Editor's note:



   The provisions contained in this section (Prior Code, § 1-714) have
been deleted during the 2009 codification due to noncompliance with state
statutes.



§ 30.119  RECALL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      FILING CLERK. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk.



(Neb. RS 32-1301)



   (B)   (1)   The Mayor, any member of the City Council, and any
other elected official of the city may be removed from office by recall
pursuant to this section.



      (2)   The recall procedure and special election provisions of
this section shall apply to members of the City Council who are elected by
ward. Only registered voters of such member's ward may sign a recall petition
or vote at the recall election. The recall election shall be held within the
member's ward. When a member of the City Council is nominated by ward in the
primary election and elected at large in the general election, the recall
provisions shall apply to the registered voters at the general election.



(Neb. RS 32-1302)



   (C)   (1)   A petition demanding that the question of removing
the Mayor, a member of the City Council, or any other elected official be
submitted to the registered voters shall be signed by registered voters equal
in number to at least 35% of the total vote cast for that office in the last
general election, except that for City Council office for which more than one
candidate is chosen, the petition shall be signed by registered voters equal
in number to at least 35% of the number of votes cast for the person
receiving the most votes for such office in the last general election. The
signatures shall be affixed to petition papers and shall be considered part
of the petition.



      (2)   Petition circulators shall conform to the requirements
of Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630.



      (3)   The petition papers shall be procured from the filing
clerk. Prior to the issuance of such petition papers, an affidavit shall be
signed and filed with the filing clerk by at least one registered voter. Such
voter or voters shall be deemed to be the principal circulator or circulators
of the recall petition. The affidavit shall state the name and office of the
official sought to be removed, shall include in typewritten form in concise
language of 60 words or less the reason or reasons for which recall is
sought, and shall request that the filing clerk issue initial petition papers
to the principal circulator for circulation. The filing clerk shall notify
the official sought to be removed by any method specified in Neb. RS
25-505.01 or, if notification cannot be made with reasonable diligence by any
of the methods specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01, by leaving a copy of the
affidavit at the official's usual place of residence and mailing a copy by
first-class mail to the official's last-known address. If the official
chooses, he or she may submit a defense statement in typewritten form in
concise language of 60 words or less for inclusion on the petition. Any such
defense statement shall be submitted to the filing clerk within 20 days after
the official receives the copy of the affidavit. The principal circulator or
circulators shall gather the petition papers within 20 days after the receipt
of the official's defense statement. The filing clerk shall notify the
principal circulator or circulators that the necessary signatures must be
gathered within 30 days from the date of issuing the petitions.



      (4)   The filing clerk, upon issuing the initial petition
papers or any subsequent petition papers, shall enter in a record, to be kept
in his or her office, the name of the principal circulator or circulators to
whom the papers were issued, the date of issuance, and the number of papers
issued. The filing clerk shall certify on the papers the name of the
principal circulator or circulators to whom the papers were issued and the
date they were issued. No petition paper shall be accepted as part of the
petition unless it bears such certificate. The principal circulator or
circulators who check out petitions from the filing clerk may distribute such
petitions to persons who may act as circulators of such petitions.



      (5)   Petition signers shall conform to the requirements of
Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630. Each signer of a recall petition shall be a
registered voter and qualified by his or her place of residence to vote for
the office in question.



(Neb. RS 32-1303)



   (D)   Each petition paper shall conform to the requirements of Neb.
RS 32-1304.



   (E)   (1)   The principal circulator or circulators shall file,
as one instrument, all petition papers comprising a recall petition for
signature verification with the filing clerk within 30 days after the filing
clerk issues the initial petition papers to the principal circulator or
circulators as provided in division (C) of this section.



      (2)   Within 15 days after the filing of the petition, the
filing clerk shall ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the
requisite number of registered voters. No new signatures may be added after
the initial filing of the petition papers.  No signatures may be removed
unless the filing clerk receives an affidavit signed by the person requesting
his or her signature be removed before the petitions are filed with the
filing clerk for signature verification. If the petition is found to be
sufficient, the filing clerk shall attach to the petition a certificate
showing the result of such examination. If the requisite number of signatures
has not been gathered, the filing clerk shall file the petition in his or her
office without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.



(Neb. RS 32-1305)



   (F)   (1)   If the recall petition is found to be sufficient, the
filing clerk shall notify the official whose removal is sought and the City
Council that sufficient signatures have been gathered. Notification of the
official sought to be removed may be by any method specified in Neb. RS
25-505.01 or, if notification cannot be made with reasonable diligence by any
of the methods specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01, by leaving such notice at the
official's usual place of residence and mailing a copy by first-class mail to
the official's last-known address.



      (2)   The City Council shall order an election to be held not
less than 30 nor more than 75 days after the notification of the official
whose removal is sought under division (F)(1) of this section, except that if
any other election is to be held in the city within 90 days after such
notification, the City Council shall provide for the holding of the recall
election on the same day. All resignations shall be tendered as provided in
Neb. RS 32-562. If the official whose removal is sought resigns before the
recall election is held, the City Council may cancel the recall election if
the City Council notifies the election commissioner or county clerk of the
cancellation at least 16 days prior to the election, otherwise the recall
election shall be held as scheduled.



      (3)   If the City Council fails or refuses to order a recall
election within the time required, the election may be ordered by the
district court having jurisdiction over a county in which the elected
official serves. If a filing clerk is subject to a recall election, the
Secretary of State shall conduct the recall election.



(Neb. RS 32-1306)



   (G)   The form of the official ballot at a recall election held
pursuant to division (F) of this section shall conform to the requirements of
Neb. RS 32-1307.



   (H)   (1)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election
are against the removal of the official named on the ballot or the election
results in a tie, the official shall continue in office for the remainder of
his or her term but may be subject to further recall attempts as provided in
division (I) of this section.



      (2)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are
for the removal of the official named on the ballot, he or she shall,
regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed
from office unless a recount is ordered. If the official is deemed removed,
the removal shall result in a vacancy in the office which shall be filled as
otherwise provided in this section and Neb. RS 32-567 to 32-570.



      (3)   If the election results show a margin of votes equal to
1% or less between the removal or retention of the official in question, the
Secretary of State, Election Commissioner, or County Clerk shall order a
recount of the votes cast unless the official named on the ballot files a
written statement with the filing clerk that he or she does not want a
recount.



      (4)   If there are vacancies in the offices of a majority or
more of the members of the City Council or any other governing body at one
time due to the recall of such members, a special election to fill such
vacancies shall be conducted as expeditiously as possible by the Secretary of
State, Election Commissioner, or County Clerk.



      (5)   No official who is removed at a recall election or who
resigns after the initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to fill
the vacancy resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any other
member of the same governing body during the remainder of his or her term of
office.



(Neb. RS 32-1308)



   (I)   No recall petition shall be filed against an elected official
within 12 months after a recall election has failed to remove him or her from
office or within six months after the beginning of his or her term of office
or within six months prior to the incumbent filing deadline for the office.



(Neb. RS 32-1309)  (Prior Code, § 1-715)



§ 30.120  CANDIDATE FILING FORMS; DEADLINES; FILING OFFICER.



   (A)   Any candidate may place his or her name on the primary
election ballot by filing a candidate filing form prescribed by the Secretary
of State as provided in division (B). If a candidate is an incumbent of any
elective office, the filing period for filing the candidate filing form shall
be between December 1 and February 15 prior to the date of the primary
election. No incumbent who resigns from elective office prior to the
expiration of his or her term shall file for any office after February 15 of
that election year. All other candidates shall file for office between
December 1 and March 1 prior to the date of the general election.



(Neb. RS 32-606)



   (B)   Candidate filing forms shall be filed in the office of the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk.



(Neb. RS 32-607)



Statutory reference:



   Filling of vacancy on ballot, see Neb. RS 32-625 and 32-627



   Withdrawal after filing, see Neb. RS 32-622



CITY PROPERTY



§ 30.130  DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SIDEWALK SPACE.  The portion of a street between curb lines and
adjacent property lines.



(Prior Code, § 8-101)



§ 30.131  MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL.



   The City Council shall have the care, supervision, and control of all
public highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public squares, and commons within
the city, and shall cause the same to be kept open and in repair, and free
from nuisances.



(Neb. RS 17-567)  (Prior Code, § 8-102)



§ 30.132  SALE AND CONVEYANCE.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section,
the power of the city to convey any real and personal property owned by it,
including land used for park purposes and public squares, except real
property used in the operation of public utilities, shall be exercised by
resolution, directing the sale at public auction or by sealed bid of the real
and personal property and the manner and terms thereof, except that the real
and personal property shall not be sold at public auction or by sealed bid
when:



         (a)   The property is being sold in compliance with the
requirements of federal or state grants or programs;



         (b)   The property is being conveyed to another public
agency; or



         (c)   The property consists of streets and alleys.



      (2)   The City Council may establish a minimum price for the
real and personal property at which bidding shall begin or shall serve as a
minimum for a sealed bid.



   (B)   After the passage of the resolution directing the sale, notice
of all proposed sales of real and personal property described in division
(A)(1) of this section and the terms thereof, shall be published once each
week for three consecutive weeks in a legal newspaper published in or of
general circulation in the city; provided, if a remonstrance against the
sale, signed by registered voters thereof equal in number to 30% of the
registered voters of the city voting at the last regular city election held
therein, be filed with the City Council, within 30 days after the third
publication of the notice, the property shall not then, nor within one year
thereafter, be sold. If the date for filing the remonstrance falls upon a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the signatures shall be collected within
the 30-day period, but the filing shall be considered timely if filed or
postmarked on or before the next business day. Real estate now owned or
hereafter owned by the city may be conveyed without consideration to the
state for state armory sites or, if acquired for state armory sites, the
property shall be conveyed strictly in accordance with the conditions of Neb.
RS 18-1001 to 18-1006.



   (C)   Following passage of the resolution directing a sale,
publishing of the notice of the proposed sale, and passing of the 30-day
right of remonstrance period, the property shall then be sold. The sale shall
be confirmed by passage of an ordinance stating the name of the purchaser and
terms of the sale. The City Clerk shall, upon passage of the ordinance,
certify the name of the purchaser to the Register of Deeds of the county in
which the property is located.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to the sale of personal property
if the authorizing resolution directs the sale of an item or items of
personal property the total fair market value of which is less than $1,000.
Following the passage of the resolution directing the sale of the property,
notice of the sale shall be posted in a prominent place within the city for a
period of not less than seven days prior to the sale of the property. The
notice shall give a general description of the property offered for sale and
state the terms and conditions of sale. Confirmation of the sale by passage
of an ordinance may be required.



(Neb. RS 17-503, 17-503.01)  (Prior Code, § 8-103)



§ 30.133  OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   Trees and shrubs, growing upon, or near, the lot line, or upon
public ground and interfering with the use, or construction of any public
improvements, shall be deemed an obstruction under this subchapter. The
trees, shrubs, and their roots may be removed by the city at the expense of
the owner of the property upon which the tree or shrub is located should the
owner fail or neglect, after notice, to do so. It shall be unlawful for any
person, persons, firm, or corporation to obstruct, or encumber, by fences,
gates, buildings, structures, or otherwise, any of the streets, alleys, or
sidewalks.



(Neb. RS 17-557.01) (Prior Code, § 8-104)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to top any tree on city
owned land or public right of way within the corporate limits of the city.
The term TOP or TOPPING is defined as removing the vertical leader stems and
cutting the tree limbs back to a stub, bud, or a later branch not large
enough to assume a terminal role, resulting in decay of the trunk and/ or
main branches and sprout production and involves removing more than one-third
of the tree canopy. Any person trimming any trees on city- owned land or on
public right-of-way shall follow trimming guidelines as set forth in the ANSI
A300 Pruning Standards.



   (C)   Persons engaged in the erection, construction, reconstruction,
wrecking, or repairing of any building, or the construction, or repair, of a
sidewalk along any street, may occupy the public street space with the
building material and equipment as long as is necessary, if the persons shall
make application to and receive a permit in writing from the City
Administrator to do so; provided, no permit for the occupancy of the sidewalk
space, and more than one-third of the roadway of the public space adjacent to
the real estate on which the building is to be constructed, erected,
reconstructed, wrecked, or repaired, shall be granted; and provided further,
a suitable passageway for pedestrians shall be maintained within the public
space included in the permit which shall be protected and lighted in the
manner required by the official issuing the permit.



(Prior Code, § 8-105)



   (D)   Persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the penalty set forth in § 30.999.



(Am. Ord. 930, passed 4-19-2016)  Penalty, see § 30.999



§ 30.134  SIGNS AND CANOPIES.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, or maintain, any sign,
signboard, poster, or rigid canopy over any street, sidewalk, alley, or on
other public property without having first obtained a permit therefor.
Permits for signs, canopies, posters, and signboards shall be issued by the
City Clerk, subject to the approval of the City Administrator, upon the
payment of a fee set by resolution of the City Council. All signs and
canopies extending over any public sidewalk, street, alley, or other public
place must be securely fastened and constructed so that there will be no
danger of the same being dislodged by ordinary winds, or falling from other
causes. No sign or canopy shall be erected or maintained which extends over
any public sidewalk, street, alley, or other public place in a location so as
to obstruct the view of any traffic light, sign, or signal. Upon the written
order of the City Council, any person owning or occupying the premise where a
sign, canopy, poster, or signboard is located, shall cause the same to be
removed within the time limit specified on the notice.



(Prior Code, § 8-106)  Penalty, see § 30.999



§ 30.135  ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   (1)   The city is authorized and empowered to:



         (a)   Purchase;



         (b)   Accept by gift or devise;



         (c)   Purchase real estate upon which to erect; and



         (d)   Erect a building or buildings for an auditorium,
fire station, city building, or community house for housing city enterprises
and social and recreation purposes, and other public buildings, and maintain,
manage, and operate the same for the benefit of the inhabitants of the city.



      (2)   Except as provided below, any purchase can be made or
building erected, the question shall be submitted to the electors of the city
at a general city election or at an election duly called for that purpose, or
as set forth in Neb. RS 17-954, and be adopted by a majority of the electors
voting on the questions.



      (3)   If the funds to be used to finance the purchase or
construction of a building under this section are available other than
through a bond issue, notice of the proposed purchase or construction shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and no
election shall be required to approve the purchase or construction unless a
remonstrance against the purchase or construction, signed by electors of the
city equal in number to 15% of the electors of the city voting at the last
regular city election held therein, is filed with the City Council within 30
days of the publication of the notice. If a remonstrance with the necessary
number of qualified signatures is timely filed, the question shall be
submitted to the voters of the city at a general city election or a special
election duly called for that purpose. If the purchase or construction is not
approved, the property involved shall not then, nor within one year
thereafter, be purchased or constructed.



(Neb. RS 17-953)  (Prior Code, § 8-107)



   (B)   (1)   The city shall acquire an interest in real property
by purchase or eminent domain, the city shall do so only after the City
Council has authorized the acquisition by action taken in a public meeting
after notice and public hearing.



      (2)   The city shall provide to the public a right of access
for recreational use to real property acquired for public recreational
purposes. The access shall be at designated access points and shall be equal
to the right of access for recreational use held by adjacent landowners. The
right of access granted to the public for recreational use shall meet or
exceed the right held by a private landowner adjacent to the real property.



(Neb. RS 18-1755)  (Prior Code, § 8-108)



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the city shall not
purchase, lease-purchase, or acquire for consideration, real property having
an estimated value of $100,000 or more unless an appraisal of the property
has been performed by a certified real property appraiser.



(Neb. RS 13-403)  (Prior Code, § 8-109)



COMPENSATION



§ 30.150  COMPENSATION OF OFFICIALS.



   The compensation of any elective official of the city shall not be
increased or diminished during the term for which he or she shall have been
elected except when there has been a merger of offices; provided, the
compensation of the members of the City Council, a board, or commission may
be increased or diminished at the beginning of the full term of any member
whether or not the terms of one or more members commence and end at different
times. No elected official may be rehired at a greater salary if he or she
resigns and desires to be rehired during the unexpired term of office. He or
she may be rehired after the term of office during which he or she resigned
at a greater salary. All salaries shall be set by ordinance of the City
Council and will be available for public inspection at the office of the City
Clerk.



(Neb. RS 17-108.02, 17-612)  (Prior Code, § 1-901)



§ 30.151  CONFLICT OF INTEREST INVOLVING CONTRACT.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      BUSINESS ASSOCIATION.  A business:



         (a)   In which the individual is a partner, limited
liability company member, director, or officer; or



         (b)   In which the individual or a member of the
individual's immediate family is a stockholder of closed corporation stock
worth $1,000 or more at fair market value or which represents more than a 5%
equity interest or is a stockholder of publicly traded stock worth $10,000 or
more at fair market value or which represents more than 10% equity interest.



         (c)   An individual who occupies a confidential
professional relationship protected by law shall be exempt from this
definition. This definition shall not apply to publicly traded stock under a
trading account if the filer reports the name and address of the stockbroker.



(Neb. RS 49-1408)



      IMMEDIATE FAMILY.  A child residing in an individual's
household, a spouse of an individual, or an individual claimed by that
individual or that individual's spouse as a dependent for federal income tax
purposes.



(Neb. RS 49-1425)



      OFFICER.



         (a)   A member of any board or commission of the
municipality which spends and administers its own funds, who is dealing with
a contract made by the board or commission; or



         (b)   Any elected municipal official.



         (c)   OFFICER does not mean volunteer firefighters or
ambulance drivers with respect to their duties as firefighters or ambulance
drivers.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 49-1499.04 or
70-624.04, no officer may have an interest in any contract to which his or
her City Council, or anyone for its benefit, is a party. The existence of an
interest in any contract shall render the contract voidable by decree of a
court of competent jurisdiction as to any person who entered into the
contract or took assignment of the contract with actual knowledge of the
prohibited conflict. An action to have a contract declared void under this
section may be brought by the County Attorney, the City Council, or any
resident within the jurisdiction of the City Council and shall be brought
within one year after the contract is signed or assigned. The decree may
provide for the reimbursement of any person for the reasonable value of all
money, goods, material, labor, or services furnished under the contract, to
the extent that the City Council has benefitted thereby.



      (2)   The prohibition in this division shall apply only when
the officer or his or her parent, spouse, or child:



         (a)   Has a business association with the business
involved in the contract; or



         (b)   Will receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission
as a result of the contract.



   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not apply if the contract is
an agenda item approved at a meeting of the City Council, and the interested
officer:



      (1)   Makes a declaration on the record to the City Council
responsible for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent of his
or her interest prior to official consideration of the contract;



      (2)   Does not vote on the matters of granting the contract,
making payments pursuant to the contract, or accepting performance of work
under the contract, or similar matters relating to the contract, except that
if the number of members of the City Council declaring an interest in the
contract would prevent the body with all members present from securing a
quorum on the issue, then all members may vote on the matters; and



      (3)   Does not act for the City Council which is a party to
the contract as to inspection or performance under the contract in which he
or she has an interest.



   (D)   An officer shall not be deemed to have an interest within the
meaning of this section:



      (1)   Who has no business association with the business
involved in the contract; or



      (2)   Who will not receive a direct pecuniary fee or
commission as a result of the contract.



   (E)   The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and
selling of warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any City Council by a
financial institution shall not be considered a contract for purposes of this
section. The ownership of less than 5% of the outstanding shares of a
corporation shall not constitute an interest within the meaning of this
section.



   (F)   If an officer's parent, spouse, or child is an employee of the
City Council, the officer may vote on all issues of the contract which are
generally applicable to:



      (1)   All employees; or



      (2)   All employees within a classification and do not single
out his or her parent, spouse, or child for special action.



   (G)   Neb. RS 49-14,102 does not apply to contracts covered by this
section.



(Neb. RS 49-14,103.01)



   (H)   (1)   The person charged with keeping records for the City
Council shall maintain separately from other records a ledger containing the
information listed in this division (H)(1)(a) through (e) about every
contract entered into by the City Council in which an officer of the Council
has an interest, and for which disclosure is made pursuant to division (C) of
this section. The information shall be kept in the ledger for five years from
the date of the officer's last day in office, and shall include the:



         (a)   Names of the contracting parties;



         (b)   Nature of the interest of the officer in question;



         (c)   Date that the contract was approved by the City
Council;



         (d)   Amount of the contract; and



         (e)   Basic terms of the contract.



      (2)   The information supplied relative to the contract shall
be provided no later than ten days after the contract has been signed by both
parties. The ledger kept pursuant to this division (H) shall be available for
public inspection during the normal working hours of the office in which it
is kept.



(Neb. RS 49-14,103.02)



   (I)   An open account established for the benefit of any City
Council with a business in which an officer has an interest shall be deemed a
contract subject to this section. The statement required to be filed by
division (H) of this section shall be filed within ten days after the account
is opened. Thereafter, the person charged with keeping records for the City
Council shall maintain a running account of amounts purchased on the open
account. Purchases made from petty cash or a petty cash fund shall not be
subject to this section.



(Neb. RS 49-14,103.03)



   (J)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (I) of this section, the
City Council may prohibit contracts over a specific dollar amount in which an
officer of the City Council may have an interest.



(Neb. RS 49-14,103.05)



   (K)   The City Council may exempt from divisions (A) through (I) of
this section contracts involving $100 or less in which an officer of the
Council may have an interest.



(Neb. RS 49-14,103.06)



(Prior Code, § 1-902)



§ 30.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of §§ 30.001 through 30.003, 30.015
through 30.017, 30.030 through 30.044, 30.055 through 30.072, 30.085 through
30.090, 30.105 through 30.119, 30.150, and 30.151, set forth at full length
herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense.
A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of the
failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 1-1001)



   (B)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of § 30.130 through 30.135, set forth
at full length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of
an offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for
each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24
hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 8-501)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Standing committee provisions



Boards, Commissions, and Committees



   31.15   Library Board



   31.16   Planning Commission



   31.17   Board of Health



   31.18   Recreation Committee



   31.19   Cemetery Board



   31.20   Housing Authority



   31.21   Airport Authority Board



   31.22   Community Redevelopment Authority



   31.23   Tree Board



   31.24   Board of Adjustment



Fire Department



   31.35   Operation and funding



   31.36   Fire Chief duties



   31.37   Members



   31.38   Duties



   31.39   Inspections



   31.40   Notice of violation



   31.41   Arrest power



   31.42   Fire investigation



Police Department



   31.55   Duties



   31.56   Reserve officer bond



   31.57   Arrest jurisdiction



 



   31.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  STANDING COMMITTEE PROVISIONS.



   At the organizational meeting of the City Council, the Mayor shall
appoint members of the standing committees as the City Council may by
ordinance or resolution create. The membership of the standing committees may
be changed at any time by the Mayor. The Mayor shall be a member ex officio
of each standing committee. The members of the standing committees shall
serve a term of office of one year, unless reappointed.



(Prior Code, § 2-101)



BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES



§ 31.15  LIBRARY BOARD.



   (A)   When the City Council has decided by ordinance to establish
and maintain a public library and reading room under Neb. RS 51-201 to
51-219, and except as otherwise provided by the Council pursuant to Neb. RS
51-202, the Library Board shall have five appointed members who shall be
residents of the city and who shall serve terms of four years. The Board
members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the members of the City
Council. Neither the Mayor nor any member of the City Council shall be a
member of the Library Board. The terms of members serving on the effective
date of a change in the number of members shall not be shortened, and any
successors to those members shall be appointed as the terms of those members
expire. In cases of vacancies by resignation, removal, or otherwise, the City
Council shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. No member shall
receive any pay or compensation for any services rendered as a member of the
Library Board.



(Neb. RS 51-202)



   (B)   (1)   The members of the Library Board shall immediately
after their appointment meet and organize by electing from their number a
President, a Secretary, and other officers as may be necessary. A majority of
the members of the Library Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.



(Neb. RS 51-204)



      (2)   No member of the Board shall serve in the capacity of
both the President and Secretary of the Board. It shall be the duty of the
Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings
and to file the same with the City Clerk where they shall be available for
public inspection at any reasonable time.



      (3)   The Board shall meet at times as the Board may
designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the president or a
majority of the members of the Board.



(Prior Code, § 2-201)



Cross-reference:



   Library provisions, see §§ 94.30 through 94.35



§ 31.16  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   (1)   If the City Council adopts zoning or other
regulations pursuant to Neb. RS 19-901 et seq., the Planning Commission shall
consist of seven regular members, who shall represent, insofar as is
possible, the different professions or occupations in the city and shall be
appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of a majority vote of the
members elected to the City Council. Two of the regular members may be
residents of the area over which the city is authorized to exercise
extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation. When there are 500
residents in the area over which the city exercises extraterritorial zoning
and subdivision regulation, one regular member of the Commission shall be a
resident from the area. If it is determined by the City Council that 500
residents reside in the area subject to extraterritorial zoning or
subdivision regulation, and no resident is a regular member of the
Commission, the first available vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by
the appointment of such an individual. A number of Commissioners equal to a
majority of the number of regular members appointed to the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. All regular members
of the Commission shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other
city office except when appointed to serve on the Board of Adjustment as
provided in Neb. RS 19-908. The term of each regular member shall be three
years, except that one-third or fewer of the regular members of the first
Commission to be so appointed shall serve for terms of one year, one-third or
fewer for terms of two years, and the remaining members for terms of three
years. All regular members shall hold office until their successors are
appointed. Any member may, after a public hearing before the Council, be
removed by the Mayor with the consent of a majority vote of the members
elected to the Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in
office or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies occurring otherwise than
through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired portion of
the term by the Mayor.



      (2)   The Mayor may, with the approval of a majority vote of
the elected members of the Council, appoint one alternate member to the
Planning Commission. The alternate member shall serve without compensation
and shall hold no other city office. The term of the alternate member shall
be three years, and he or she shall hold office until his or her successor is
appointed and approved. The alternate member may be removed from office in
the same manner as a regular member. If the alternate member position becomes
vacant other than through the expiration of the term, the vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor with the approval
of a majority vote of the elected members of the Council. The alternate
member may attend any meeting and may serve as a voting and participating
member of the Commission at any time when less than the full number of
regular Commission members is present and capable of voting.



(Neb. RS 19-926)



   (B)   The Commission shall elect its Chairperson from its members
and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term
of the Chairperson shall be one year, and he or she shall be eligible for
reelection. The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each
calendar quarter, except the City Council may require the Commission to meet
more frequently and the Chairperson of the Commission may call for a meeting
when necessary to deal with business pending before the Commission. The
Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of business
and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and
determinations, which shall be a public record.



(Neb. RS 19-927)



   (C)   No member of the Commission shall serve in the capacity of
both the Chairperson and Secretary of the Commission. The Secretary shall
keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and file them
with the City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection
during office hours.



   (D)   The City Council may provide the funds, equipment, and
accommodations necessary for the work of the Commission, but the expenditures
of the Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts
appropriated for that purpose by the Council; and no expenditures nor
agreements for expenditures shall be valid in excess of the amounts.



(Neb. RS 19-928)



   (E)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 19-930 to
19-933, the Planning Commission shall:



            1.   Make and adopt plans for the physical
development of the city, including any areas outside its boundaries which in
the Commission's judgment bear relation to the planning of the city and
including a comprehensive development plan as defined by Neb. RS 19-903;



            2.   Prepare and adopt implemental means such as a
capital improvement program, subdivision regulations, building codes, and a
zoning ordinance in cooperation with other interested city departments; and



            3.   Consult with and advise public officials and
agencies, public utilities, civic organizations, educational institutions,
and citizens with relation to the promulgation and implementation of the
comprehensive development plan and its implemental programs. The Commission
may delegate authority to any group to conduct studies and make surveys for
the Commission, make preliminary reports on its findings, and hold public
hearings before submitting its final reports.



         (b)   The City Council shall not take final action on
matters relating to the comprehensive development plan, capital improvements,
building codes, subdivision development, the annexation of territory, or
zoning until it has received the recommendation of the Planning Commission,
provided that the Planning Commission shall make its recommendation so that
it is received by the City Council within 60 days after the Commission begins
consideration of a matter or within such other number of days as the City
Council has set by ordinance.



         (c)   A recommendation from the Planning Commission
shall not be required for subdivision of existing lots and blocks whenever
all required public improvements have been installed, no new dedication of
public rights-of-way or easements is involved, and the subdivision complies
with the ordinance requirements concerning minimum areas and dimensions of
lots and blocks, if the City Council has designated, by ordinance, an agent
pursuant to Neb. RS 19-916.



      (2)   (a)   The Commission may, with the consent of the
City Council, in its own name:



            1.   Make and enter into contracts with public or
private bodies;



            2.   Receive contributions, bequests, gifts, or
grant funds from public or private sources;



            3.   Expend the funds appropriated to it by the
city;



            4.   Employ agents and employees; and



            5.   Acquire, hold, and dispose of property.



         (b)   The Commission may on its own authority make
arrangements consistent with its program, conduct or sponsor special studies
or planning work for any public body or appropriate agency, receive grants,
remuneration, or reimbursement for studies or work, and at its public
hearings, summon witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the giving of
testimony.



      (3)   (a)   The Commission may grant conditional uses or
special exceptions to property owners for the use of their property if the
City Council has, through a zoning ordinance or special ordinance, generally
authorized the Commission to exercise such powers and has approved the
standards and procedures adopted by the Commission for equitably and
judiciously granting such conditional uses or special exceptions. The
granting of a conditional use permit or special exception shall only allow
property owners to put their property to a special use if it is among those
uses specifically identified in the zoning ordinance as classifications of
uses which may require special conditions or requirements to be met by the
owners before a use permit or building permit is authorized.



         (b)   The power to grant conditional uses or special
exceptions shall be the exclusive authority of the Commission, except that
the City Council may choose to retain for itself the power to grant
conditional uses or special exceptions for those classifications of uses
specified in the zoning ordinance. The Council may exercise such power if it
has formally adopted standards and procedures for granting conditional uses
or special exceptions in a manner that is equitable and will promote the
public interest.



         (c)   An appeal of a decision by the Commission or
Council regarding a conditional use or special exception shall be made to the
district court.



(Neb. RS 19-929)



(Prior Code, § 2-202)



Statutory reference:



   Other provisions on planning commissions, see Neb. RS 19-924 through
19-933



§ 31.17  BOARD OF HEALTH.



   (A)   (1)   The Board of Health shall consist of four members:
the Mayor, who shall be Chairperson, the President of the City Council, and
two other members. One member shall be a physician or health care provider,
if one can be found who is willing to serve. The physician or health care
provider, if appointed, shall be the Board's medical advisor. If the Mayor
has appointed a Chief of Police, the Chief of Police shall serve on the Board
as Secretary and quarantine officer.



      (2)   A majority of the Board of Health shall constitute a
quorum and shall enact rules and regulations, which shall have the full force
and effect of law, to safeguard the health of the people of the city, may
enforce them, and may provide fines and punishments for the violation
thereof. The Board shall have power to and shall make all needful rules and
regulations relating to matters of sanitation of the city, including the
removal of dead animals, the sanitary condition of the streets, alleys,
vacant grounds, stockyards, cattle and hog pens, wells, cisterns, privies,
waterclosets, cesspools, stables, and all buildings and places not specified
where filth, nuisances, or offensive matter is kept or is liable to or does
accumulate. It may regulate, suppress, and prevent the occurrence of
nuisances and enforce all laws of the state and ordinances of the city
relating to nuisances or to matters of sanitation of the city. The Board
shall also have control of hospitals, dispensaries, places for treatment of
sick, and matters relating to the same under restrictions and provisions as
may be provided by ordinance of the city.



(Neb. RS 17-121)



   (B)   The members of the Board of Health other than the Mayor,
President of the Council, and Chief of Police shall serve terms of office of
the length specified by the City Council and may be reappointed.



   (C)   The Board of Health shall reorganize at its meeting after
appointments are regularly considered by the City Council and, if necessary,
select a member to serve as Secretary. No member of the Board of Health shall
hold more than one Board of Health position. The Secretary shall keep full
and correct minutes and records of all meetings and file the same with the
City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection during office
hours.



   (D)   The Board shall meet at times as the City Council may
designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or
any two members of the Board of Health.



   (E)   The members of the Board of Health shall serve without
compensation. The Board of Health shall be funded by the City Council from
time to time out of the General Fund.



   (F)   The Board of Health shall regularly inspect the premises and
businesses as the City Council may direct.



   (G)   All members of the Board of Health shall be responsible for
making reports and performing other duties as the City Council may, from time
to time, designate.



(Prior Code, § 2-204)



Cross-reference:



   Health and safety regulations, see Chapter 94



§ 31.18  RECREATION COMMITTEE.



   The Recreation Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by a majority vote of the elected members of the City Council. The Committee
shall consist of seven members, who shall be resident freeholders in the
city. The members of the Committee shall serve a three-year term of office
unless reappointed. The Committee shall serve without compensation and may be
required, in the discretion of the City Council, to give a bond in a sum set
by resolution of the City Council, and conditioned upon the faithful
performance of its duties. At the time of the Committee's first meeting in
June of each year, the Committee shall organize by selecting from their
number a Chairperson and Secretary. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to
keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings, and to file
the same with the City Clerk, where they shall be available for public
inspection at any reasonable time. A majority of the Committee members shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Committee shall meet
at such times as the City Council may designate. Special meetings may be held
upon the call of the Chairperson, or any four of the Committee members. It
shall be the duty of the Committee to organize recreational programs and
activities for the benefit of the residents of the city. The Committee shall
establish appropriate rules and regulations for the management, use, and
operation of the same. All actions of the Committee shall be subject to the
review and control of the City Council. The Committee shall be responsible
for making reports and performing other duties as the City Council may, from
time to time, designate. No member of the Recreation Committee shall serve in
the capacity of both the Chairperson and Secretary of the Committee.



(Prior Code, § 2-205)



§ 31.19  CEMETERY BOARD.



   (A)   The Mayor, by and with the consent of the Council or a
majority thereof,  may appoint a Board of not fewer than three nor more than
six members, to be known as the Cemetery Board, from among the citizens at
large of the city, who shall serve without pay and shall have entire control
and management of any cemetery belonging to the city. Neither the Mayor nor
any member of the Council may be a member of the Cemetery Board. At the time
of establishing a Cemetery Board, approximately one-third of the members
shall be appointed for a term of one year, one-third for a term of two years,
and one-third for a term of three years, and thereafter members shall be
appointed for terms of three years. Vacancies in the membership of the Board
other than through the expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired
portion of the term.



   (B)   (1)   The Mayor and Council, for the purpose of defraying
the cost of the care, management, improvement, beautifying, and welfare of
the cemeteries and the inhabitants thereof, may each year levy a tax not
exceeding five and two-tenths cents on each $100 upon the taxable value of
all the taxable property in the city subject to taxation for general
purposes. The tax shall be collected and paid to the city as taxes for
general purposes are collected and paid to the city. All taxes collected for
this purpose shall constitute and be known as the Cemetery Fund and shall be
used for the general care, management, improvement, beautifying, and welfare
of the cemetery and the inhabitants thereof. Warrants upon this fund shall be
drawn by the Cemetery Board and shall be paid by the City Treasurer. The City
Council may issue a warrant from the Cemetery Fund if a payment is due and
the Cemetery Board is not scheduled to meet prior to the due date to
authorize the warrant.



      (2)   The Mayor and Council may set aside the proceeds of the
sale of lots as a perpetual fund to be invested as provided by ordinance. The
income from the fund may be used for the general care, management,
maintenance, improvement, beautifying, and welfare of the cemetery. The
principal of the perpetual fund may be used for the general care, management,
maintenance, improvement, beautifying, and welfare of the cemetery as long as
no more than 20% of the principal is so used in any fiscal year and no more
than 40% of the principal is so used in any period of ten consecutive fiscal
years. The principal of the perpetual fund may also be used for the purchase
and development of additional land to be used for cemetery purposes as long
as no more than 25% of the principal is so used in any fiscal year and no
more than 35% of the principal is so used in any period of ten consecutive
fiscal years.



      (3)   The Mayor and Council may receive money by donation,
bequest, or otherwise for credit to the perpetual fund to be invested as
provided by ordinance or as conditioned by the donor. The income therefrom
may be used for the general care, management, maintenance, improvement,
beautifying, and welfare of the cemetery as the donor may designate. The
principal therefrom may be used for the general care, management,
maintenance, improvement, beautifying and welfare of the cemetery as the
donor may designate as long as no more than 20% of the principal is so used
in any fiscal year and no more than 40% of the principal is so used in any
period of ten consecutive fiscal years. The principal therefrom may also be
used for the purchase and development of additional land to be used for
cemetery purposes as the donor may designate as long as no more than 25% of
the principal is so used in any fiscal year and no more than 35% of the
principal is so used in any period of ten consecutive fiscal years.



      (4)   This section does not limit the use of any money that
comes to the city by donation, bequest, or otherwise that is not designated
to be credited to the perpetual fund or that allows greater use for purchase
or development of additional land to be used for cemetery purposes.



   (C)   The members of the Cemetery Board may select  officers from
among their own number as they may deem necessary, and shall have the power
to employ labor and assistants as they may deem necessary from persons not
belonging to the Board.



(Neb. RS 12-401 through 12-403) (Prior Code, § 2-206)



§ 31.20  HOUSING AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The City Housing Authority established under state law prior
to December 25, 1969, shall have continued existence after that date under
the State Housing Authority Law. All Commissioners of the Authority, and all
officers, legal counsel, technical experts, directors, and other appointees
or employees of the Authority, holding office or employment by virtue of
prior state law on December 25, 1969, shall be deemed to have been appointed
or employed by the Mayor under the provisions of the State Housing Authority
Law and shall from that date forward conduct their operations consistent with
the provisions of that Act.



(Prior Code, § 2-207)



   (B)   The City Housing Authority is owned by the city and operated
through the Housing Authority Commission. The Housing Authority shall
constitute a body corporate and politic, and shall have all the powers
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of the State Housing Authority Law.



(Prior Code, § 2-208)



   (C)   Except as otherwise specifically provided, the definitions and
terms set out in the state statutes relating to housing authorities under the
State Housing Authority Law are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist
or may hereafter be amended.



(Prior Code, § 2-209)



   (D)   The Housing Authority may establish from time to time rules
and regulations consistent with the purposes of the State Housing Authority
Law concerning the priority of eligible applicants for occupancy who are
entitled to the benefits of status as a member of the armed forces or
veteran, or as a disabled member of the armed forces or veteran, and the
applicant's age or disability, housing conditions, urgency of housing need,
and source of income. In any system of priority, displaced persons in need
shall have a priority ahead of all other persons who may be entitled to the
benefits of the law. No tenant in good standing in occupancy and qualified
for continued  occupancy  shall  have his or her tenancy terminated in
order to provide dwelling units for classes or categories of applicants as
the Authority may establish.



(Prior Code, § 2-210)



Statutory reference:



   Local Housing Agencies; continuance of Housing Authorities, see Neb. RS
71-1572 – 71-1580



§ 31.21  AIRPORT AUTHORITY BOARD.



   The Airport Authority Board shall have the full and exclusive
jurisdiction and control over all facilities owned or hereafter acquired by
the city for the purpose of aviation operation, air navigation, and air
safety operation. The Board is a body corporate and politic, constituting a
public corporation, and an agency of the city. The Board shall consist of
five members. Members of the Board shall be nominated and elected in the
manner provided by law for the election of other elected officials and shall
take office at the same time as the officers of the city on the first Tuesday
in June of each city election year. Members of the Board shall be residents
of the city and shall serve a term of six years. Two members of the Board
shall be elected in each city election year; provided, that in each third
election year, one member only shall be elected  to the Airport Authority
Board. Any vacancy on the Board resulting from any other cause than the
expiration of a term of office, shall be filled by temporary appointment by
the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, until a successor can be
elected at the next general city election to serve the unexpired portion of
the term. A member of the Board may be removed from office for incompetence,
neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. An action for the removal of the
officer may be brought, upon resolution of the City Council, in the District
Court of the county. The Board shall have other powers and duties as may be
prescribed by state law.



(Neb. RS 3-501 through 3-514)  (Prior Code, § 2-211)



§ 31.22  COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.



   There is hereby created the Community Redevelopment Authority of the
city. The Authority shall have all of the powers set forth in Neb. RS 18-2101
through 18-2154 and any additional powers granted by the legislature of the
state from time to time for the authorities. The affairs of the Community
Redevelopment Authority of the city shall be administered by a Board of five
persons appointed by the Mayor, and confirmed by a majority vote of the
elected members of the City Council. The terms of office of the members of
the authority initially appointed shall be for one year, two years, three
years, four years, and five years as designated by the Mayor in making the
appointments. As the terms of the members of the authority expire, the Mayor,
with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint or reappoint a member of
the Authority for a term of five years to succeed the member whose term
expires. The Community Redevelopment Authority of the city, at its
organizational meeting each year, shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and shall have the power to employ counsel and a director and other officers
and employees as may be desired.



(Neb. RS 18-2101.01)  (Prior Code, § 2-212)



§ 31.23  TREE BOARD.



   A Tree Board shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the
City Council. The Tree Board shall consist of seven members. The members of
the Tree Board shall serve a three-year term of office, and the terms of the
initial Board shall be staggered upon appointment. The Board shall serve
without compensation and may be required, in the discretion of the City
Council to give a bond in the sum set by resolution of the City Council
conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. At the time of the
Board's first meeting in January of each year, the Board shall organize by
selecting from their number a Chairperson and Secretary. It shall be the duty
of the Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of all
meetings and shall file the same with the City Clerk, where they shall be
available for public inspection at any reasonable time. A majority of the
Board members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
Board shall meet at such times as the City Council may designate. Special
meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or any three members of
the Board. The Board shall have the ability, with consent of the City
Council, to appoint a forester and have other employees. It shall be the duty
of the Board to have the general charge of the inspection, planting,
preservation and condemnation of all trees within the city. The Board shall
establish a planting program for the enhancement and beautification of all
public ways. The Board shall have supervisory authority over all employees of
the Board. All actions of the Board shall be subject to the review and
supervision of the City Council. The Board shall be responsible for making
reports and additional duties as the City Council may designate from time to
time.



(Prior Code, § 2-213)  (Ord. 804, passed 3-17-2006)



§ 31.24  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   If the City Council adopts zoning or other regulations
pursuant to Neb. RS 19-901 et seq., except as provided in division (B), the
Council shall provide for the appointment of a Board of Adjustment and
approved by the City Council. Any actions taken by the Board of Adjustment
shall not exceed the powers granted by division (E).



(Neb. RS 19-907)



   (B)   (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five regular
members, plus one additional member designated as an alternate who shall
attend and serve only when one of the regular members is unable to attend for
any reason, each to be appointed for a term of three years and removable for
cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public
hearings. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member
whose term becomes vacant. One member only of the Board of Adjustment shall
be appointed from the membership of the Planning Commission, and the loss of
membership on the Planning Commission by the member shall also result in his
or her immediate loss of membership on the Board of Adjustment and the
appointment of another Planning Commissioner to the Board of Adjustment. The
first vacancy occurring on the Board of Adjustment shall be filled by the
appointment of a person who resides in the extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction of the city at the time as more than 200 persons reside within
such area if the Board does not already include such a person. Thereafter, at
all times, at least one member of the Board of Adjustment shall reside
outside of the corporate boundaries of the city but within its
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.



      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance
with the provisions of any ordinance adopted pursuant to Neb. RS 19-901 to
19-914. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at other times as the Board may determine. The Chairperson,
or in his or her absence the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open
to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating the fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of
the Board and shall be a public record.



(Neb. RS 19-908)



   (C)   A number of members equal to a majority of the number of
regular members appointed to the Board of Adjustment shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of any business. All members of an appointed Board
of Adjustment shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other city
office except for the member of the Planning Commission appointed to serve on
the Board of Adjustment. No member of the Board of Adjustment shall serve in
the capacity of both Chairperson and Secretary of the Board. The Secretary
shall keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and file
them with the City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection
during office hours.



   (D)   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city
affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be
taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by
filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of
Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer
from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her,
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application on
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any
party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.



(Neb. RS 19-909)



   (E)   (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall, subject to such
appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be established by the City
Council, have only the following powers:



         (a)   To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
an administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of
any zoning regulation or any regulation relating to the location or soundness
of structures, except that the authority to hear and decide appeals shall not
apply to decisions made by the City Council or Planning Commission regarding
a conditional use or special exception under Neb. RS 19-929(3);



         (b)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the
provisions of any zoning regulation, requests for interpretation of any map;
and



         (c)   When by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the
enactment of the zoning regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of
such piece of property, the strict application of any enacted regulation
under Neb. RS 19-901 and 19-903 to 19-904.01 and divisions (B) and (E) would
result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional
and undue hardships upon the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an
appeal relating to the property, a variance from such strict application so
as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially
impairing the intent and purpose of any ordinance or resolution.



      (2)   (a)   No variance shall be authorized by the Board
unless it finds that:



            1.   The strict application of the zoning
regulation would produce undue hardship;



            2.   The hardship is not shared generally by other
properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity;



            3.   The authorization of such variance will not
be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the
district will not be changed by the granting of the variance; and



            4.   The granting of the variance is based upon
reason of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from
variations for purposes of convenience, profit, or caprice.



         (b)   No variance shall be authorized unless the Board
finds that the condition or situation of the property concerned or the
intended use of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to
make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be
adopted as an amendment to the zoning regulations.



      (3)   In exercising the powers granted in this division (F),
the Board may, in conformity with Neb. RS 19-901 to 19-915, reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision,
or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the
powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of
four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of any such administrative official
or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is
required to pass under any regulation or to effect any variation in the
regulation.



(Neb. RS 19-910)



   (F)   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any
decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer,
department, board, or bureau of the city, may present to the district court a
petition duly verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole
or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must
be presented to the court within 15 days after the filing of the decision in
the office of the Board. Upon the filing of the petition, a summons shall be
issued and be served upon the Board of Adjustment, together with a copy of
the petition. Return of service shall be made within four days after the
issuance of the summons. Within ten days after the return day of the summons,
the Board of Adjustment shall file an answer to the petition which shall
admit or deny the substantial averments of the petition and shall state the
contentions of the Board with reference to the matters in dispute as
disclosed by the petition. The answer shall be verified in like manner as
required for the petition. At the expiration of the time for filing answer,
the court shall proceed to hear and determine the cause without delay and
shall render judgment thereon according to the forms of law. If, upon the
hearing, it appears to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper
disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a referee to take
such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with his or
her findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of
the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The
court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision
brought up for review. The appeal to the district court shall not stay
proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on
application, on notice to the Board and on due cause shown, grant a
restraining order. Any appeal from such judgment of the district court shall
be prosecuted in accordance with the general laws of the state regulating
appeals in actions at law.



(Neb. RS 19-912)



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 31.35  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city operates the City Fire Department through the City Fire Chief
and firefighters. The city is also authorized to enter into agreement with
the appropriate Rural Fire District for the mutual aid and protection of the
residents of the city and the Rural Fire District and to expend sums as
necessary to carry out the purpose of providing that mutual aid and
protection. The City Council, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the
management, maintenance, and improving the Fire Department may each year levy
a tax not exceeding the maximum limits prescribed by state law, on the actual
valuation of all real estate and personal property within the city that is
subject to taxation. The revenue from the tax shall be known as the Fire
Department Fund. The Fund shall be at all times in the possession of the City
Treasurer. The Fire Chief shall manage the Fire Department and it shall be
his or her duty to inform the City Council when any of the fire engines,
hose, ladders, or other apparatus needs repair. Upon the written consent and
directive of the City Council, the Fire Chief shall cause the repair,
improvement, or maintenance of the equipment and shall personally supervise
and approve of the same.



(Neb. RS 17-147, 17-718, 17-953)  (Prior Code, § 3-501)



§ 31.36  FIRE CHIEF DUTIES.



   The Fire Chief shall manage the Fire Department, and it shall be his or
her duty to inform the City Council when any of the fire engines, hose,
ladders, or other apparatus needs repair. Upon the written consent and
directive of the City Council, the Fire Chief shall cause the repair,
improvement, or maintenance of the equipment and shall personally supervise
and approve of the same. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to come
before the City Council at the regular meeting in January of each year to
give an annual report to the City Council of the general condition and the
proposed additions or improvements recommended by him or her.



(Prior Code, § 3-502)



§ 31.37  MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall appoint no more than 25 members for each
Fire Department Company subject to the review and approval of the City
Council. All vacancies shall be filled in this manner. Members shall be
considered to be employees of the city for the purpose of providing them with
worker's compensation and other benefits. Each member shall be entitled to a
term life insurance policy in the amount of at least $5,000 for death from
any cause to age 65 and the policy shall, at the option of the individual
firefighter, be convertible to a permanent form of life insurance at age 65;
provided, that the firefighters covered are actively and faithfully
performing the duties of their position. The Fire Department shall consist of
so many members as may be decided by the City Council. The members may
organize themselves in any way they may decide, subject to the review of the
City Council. They may hold meetings and engage in social activities with the
approval of the City Council. The Secretary shall, upon request, keep a
record of all meetings and shall make a report to the City Council of all
meetings and activities of the Fire Department. The City Council may, for
services rendered, compensate or reward any member or members of the Fire
Department in an amount set by resolution. All members of the Fire Department
shall be subject to the rules and regulations, and shall perform the duties,
as may be prescribed or required of them by the Fire Chief or the City
Council. The members of the Fire Department shall, during the time of a fire
or great public danger, have and exercise the powers and duties of police
officers and shall have full power and authority to arrest all persons guilty
of any violation of the code of ordinances, or the laws of the state.



   (B)   Provided, however, volunteer firefighters and rescue squad
members testifying as a witness in connection with his or her officially
assigned duties in that capacity alone shall not be deemed employees of the
state or of the city.



(Neb. RS 33-139.01, 35-101 through 35-103, 35-108)  (Prior Code, § 3-503)



§ 31.38  DUTIES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to use all proper
means for the extinguishment of fires; to protect property within the city;
and to secure the observance of all ordinances, laws, and other rules and
regulations with respect to fires and fire prevention.



(Prior Code, § 3-504)



   (B)   The firefighters of the city shall be considered as acting in
the performance and within the scope of their duties in fighting fire or
saving property or life outside the corporate limits of the city when
directed to do so by the Mayor or Chief of the Fire Department or some person
authorized to act for the Chief and in so doing, may take the fire equipment
of the city as may be designated by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-505)



§ 31.39  INSPECTIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, when directed to do so by the
City Council, Building Inspector, State Fire Marshal, or if deemed necessary
by the Fire Chief, to inspect or cause to be inspected by Fire Department
officers, members, or some other official all buildings, premises, and public
thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to create a
fire hazard. The inspection shall be of the storage, sale, and use of
flammable liquids, combustibles, and explosives; electric wiring and heating;
and the means and adequacy of exits, in case of fire in schools, churches,
hotels, halls, theaters, factories, hospitals, and all other buildings in
which numbers of persons congregate from time to time for any purpose whether
publicly or privately owned; the design, construction, location,
installation, and operation of equipment for storing, handling, and utilizing
of liquefied petroleum gases, specifying the odorization of gases and the
degree thereof; and chemicals, prozylin plastics, nitrocellulose films, or
any other hazardous material that may now or hereafter exist.



(Neb. RS 81-512)  (Prior Code, § 3-506)



§ 31.40  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Upon the finding that the code of ordinances has been violated, the
Fire Chief shall notify, or cause to be notified, the owner, occupant, or
manager of the premise where a violation has occurred. Notice may be made
personally or by delivering a copy to the premise and affixing it to the door
of the main entrance of the premise. Whenever it may be necessary to serve an
order upon the owner, the order may be served personally, or by mailing a
copy to the owner's last known post office address if the owner is absent
from the jurisdiction. Any order shall be immediately complied with by the
owner, occupant, or manager of the premise or building. The owner, occupant,
or manager may, within five days after the order by the Chief of the Fire
Department or his or her agent, appeal the order with the City Council
requesting a review, and it shall be the duty of the City Council to hear the
same within not less than five days nor more than ten days from the time when
the request was filed in writing with the City Clerk. The City Council shall
then affirm, modify, or rescind the order as safety and justice may require
and the decision shall then be final, subject only to any remedy which the
aggrieved person may have at law or equity. The order shall be modified or
rescinded only where it is evident that reasonable safety exists and that
conditions necessitate a variance due to the probable hardship in complying
literally with the order of the Fire Chief. A copy of any decision so made
shall be sent to both the Fire Chief and the owner, occupant, or manager
making the appeal.



(Prior Code, § 3-507)



§ 31.41  ARREST POWER.



   The City Fire Chief or the Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power
during the time of a fire and for a period of 36 hours after its
extinguishment, to arrest any suspected arsonist, or other person hindering
or resisting the fire fighting effort, or any person who conducts himself or
herself in a noisy or disorderly manner. The officials shall be severally
vested with the usual powers and authority of city police officers to command
all persons to assist them in the performance of their duties.



(Prior Code, § 3-508)



§ 31.42  FIRE INVESTIGATION.



   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to investigate or cause to
be investigated, the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring
in the city in which property has been destroyed or damaged in excess of $50.
All fires of unknown origin shall be reported, and the officers shall
especially make an investigation and report as to whether the fire was the
result of carelessness, accident, or design. The investigation shall be begun
within two days of the occurrence of the fire, and the State Fire Marshal
shall have the right to supervise and direct the investigation whenever he or
she deems it expedient or necessary. The officer making the investigation of
fires occurring within the city shall immediately notify the State Fire
Marshal and shall, within one week of the occurrence of the fire, furnish him
or her with a written statement of all the facts relating to the cause and
origin of the fire, and further information as he or she may call for.



(Neb. RS 81-506)  (Prior Code, § 3-509)



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 31.55  DUTIES.



   The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such
further number of regular police officers as may be duly ordered by
resolution of the Council. The Chief of Police shall, subject to the
direction of the Mayor, have control and management of all matters relating
to the Police Department, its officers and members, and shall have the
custody and control of all property and books belonging to the Department. He
or she shall devote his or her whole time to the city affairs, interests of
the city, and to the preservation of peace, order, safety, and cleanliness
thereof. The Department shall execute and enforce all laws and also the
orders of the Mayor. It shall be the duty of the Department to protect the
rights of persons and property. There shall be a proper police force at all
fires. The Department shall take notice of all nuisances, impediments,
obstructions, and defects in the streets, avenues, alleys, business places,
and residences of the city. The Department shall execute, or cause to be
executed, the processes issued and shall cause all persons arrested to be
brought before the proper court for trial as speedily as possible. The Chief
of Police and all regular and special police officers shall become thoroughly
conversant with the laws of the city, and shall see that the same are
strictly enforced and shall make sworn complaints against any person or
persons for violation of the same.



(Prior Code, § 3-601)



§ 31.56  RESERVE OFFICER BOND.



   No appointment of a law enforcement reserve officer shall be valid
until a bond in the amount of $2,000, payable to the city, has been filed
with the City Clerk by the individual appointed, or a blanket surety bond
arranged and paid for by the City Council and bonding all officers of the
City Council has been filed. The bonds shall be subject to the provisions of
Neb. RS Chapter 11, Article 1.



(Neb. RS 81-1444)  (Prior Code, § 3-602)



§ 31.57  ARREST JURISDICTION.



   (A)   The police officers of the municipality shall have the power
to arrest all offenders against the laws of the state or of the city, by day
or by night, in the same manner as the County Sheriff and to keep such
offenders in the municipal prison or other place to prevent their escape
until trial can be had before the proper officer.



(Neb. RS 17-118)



   (B)   Every municipal law enforcement officer has the power and
authority to enforce the laws of this state and the municipality or otherwise
perform the functions of that office anywhere within his or her primary
jurisdiction.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER IN NEED OF ASSISTANCE.



         (a)   A law enforcement officer whose life is in danger;
or



         (b)   A law enforcement officer who needs assistance in
making an arrest and the suspect:



            1.   Will not be apprehended unless immediately
arrested;



            2.   May cause injury to himself or herself or
others or damage to property unless immediately arrested; or



            3.   May destroy or conceal evidence of the
commission of a crime.



      PRIMARY JURISDICTION.  The geographic area within territorial
limits of the municipality.



   (D)   Any municipal law enforcement officer who is within this
state, but beyond his or her primary jurisdiction, has the power and
authority to enforce the laws of this state or any legal ordinance of any
city or incorporated village or otherwise perform the functions of his or her
office, including the authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if
enforcing the laws or performing the functions within his or her primary
jurisdiction in the following cases:



      (1)   Any municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh
attempt to apprehend a person suspected of committing a felony, may follow
that person into any other jurisdiction in this state and there arrest and
detain that person and return that person to the officer's primary
jurisdiction;



      (2)   Any municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh
attempt to apprehend a person suspected of committing a misdemeanor or a
traffic infraction, may follow that person anywhere in an area within 25
miles of the boundaries of the officer's primary jurisdiction and there
arrest and detain that person and return that person to the officer's primary
jurisdiction;



      (3)   Any municipal law enforcement officer has this
enforcement and arrest and detention authority when responding to a call in
which a local, state, or federal law enforcement officer is in need of
assistance; and



      (4)   If the municipality, under the provisions of the
Interlocal Cooperation Act or the Joint Public Agency Act, enters into a
contract with any other municipality or county for law enforcement services
or joint law enforcement services, law enforcement personnel may have this
enforcement authority within the jurisdiction of each of the participating
political subdivisions if provided for in the agreement.  Unless otherwise
provided in the agreement, the municipality shall provide liability insurance
coverage for its own law enforcement personnel as provided in Neb. RS 13-1802.



   (E)   When probable cause exists to believe that a person is
operating or in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle, motorboat,
personal watercraft, or aircraft while under the influence of alcoholic
liquor or of any drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. RS 28-1465, 28-1466,
28-1472, 37-1254.01, 37-1254.02, 60-4,163, 60-4,164, 60-6,196, 60-6,197,
60-6,211.01, or 60-6,211.02, a municipal law enforcement officer has the
power and authority to do any of the following or any combination thereof:



      (1)   Transport that person to a facility outside of the law
enforcement officer's primary jurisdiction for appropriate chemical testing
of the person;



      (2)   Administer outside of the law enforcement officer's
primary jurisdiction any post-arrest test advisement to the person; or



      (3)   With respect to that person, perform other procedures or
functions outside of the law enforcement officer's primary jurisdiction which
are directly and solely related to enforcing the laws that concern a person
operating or being in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle,
motorboat, personal watercraft, or aircraft while under the influence of
alcoholic liquor or of any other drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. RS
28-1465, 28-1466, 28-1472, 37-1254.01, 37-1254.02, 60-4,163, 60-4,164,
60-6,196, 60-6,197, 60-6,211.01, or 60-6,211.02.



(Neb. RS 29-215)



   (F)   If municipal law enforcement personnel are rendering aid in
their law enforcement capacity outside the limits of the municipality in the
event of disaster, emergency, or civil defense emergency or in connection
with any program of practice or training for a disaster, emergency, or civil
defense emergency when that program is conducted or participated in by the
Nebraska Emergency Management Agency or with any other related training
program, the law enforcement personnel have the power and authority to
enforce the laws of this state or any legal ordinances or resolutions of the
local government where they are rendering aid or otherwise perform the
functions of their office, including the authority to arrest and detain
suspects, as if enforcing the laws or performing the functions within their
primary jurisdiction.  The municipality shall self-insure or contract for
insurance against any liability for personal injuries or property damage that
may be incurred by it or by its personnel as the result of any movement made
pursuant to this division.



(Neb. RS 81-829.65)  (Prior Code, § 3-603)



§ 31.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of §§ 31.01, and 31.15 through 31.23,
set forth at full length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed
guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100 for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been
committed every 24 hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 2-301)



   (B)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of §§ 31.35 through 31.42, and §§
31.55 through 31.57, set forth at full length herein or incorporated by
reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A new violation shall be
deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 3-1101)



CHAPTER 32:  FINANCES



Section



General Provisions



   32.01   Public funds defined



   32.02   Annual audit; financial statements



   32.03   Contracts and purchases; bidding and other requirements



   32.04   Orders or warrants for money; contracts; expenditures;
requirements



   32.05   Claims and accounts payable



   32.06   Collection of special assessments; procedure



   32.07   Special assessment fund



   32.08   Sinking funds; gifts of money or property



   32.09   Deposit of funds



   32.10   Certificates of deposit; time deposits; conditions



   32.11   Investment and use of surplus funds



   32.12   Bond issues



   32.13   Debt collection; authority to contract with collection agency



   32.14   Credit cards; authority to accept



Annual Budget



   32.25   Fiscal year



   32.26   Budget procedures



   32.27   Expenditures prior to adoption of budget



   32.28   Proposed budget statement; contents; availability; correction



   32.29   Proposed budget statement; hearing; adoption; certification
of tax amount



   32.30   Adopted budget statement; filing; certification of tax amount



   32.31   Appropriation bill



   32.32   General Fund



   32.33   Transfer of funds



   32.34   Budget revision



   32.35   Proprietary functions; fiscal year; budget statements;
filing; hearing; adoption; reconciliation



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 32.01  PUBLIC FUNDS DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC FUNDS.  All money, including non-tax money, used in the
operation and functions of governing bodies. If the city has a lottery
established under the Nebraska County and City Lottery Act, only those net
proceeds which are actually received by the city from a licensed lottery
operator shall be considered PUBLIC FUNDS, and PUBLIC FUNDS shall not include
amounts awarded as prizes.



(Neb. RS 13-503)



§ 32.02  ANNUAL AUDIT; FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this division (A), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         ACCOUNTANT.  A duly licensed public accountant or
certified public accountant who otherwise is not an employee of or connected
in any way with the city.



         ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT.  The written report of the accountant
and all appended statements and schedules relating thereto presenting or
recording the findings of an examination or audit of the financial
transactions, affairs, or financial condition of the city and its proprietary
functions for the fiscal year immediately prior to the making of the annual
report.



         FISCAL YEAR.  The fiscal year for the city or the fiscal
year established in Neb. RS 18-2804 for a proprietary function if different
than the city fiscal year.



(Neb. RS 19-2902)



      (2)   The City Council shall cause an audit of the city's
accounts to be made by a recognized independent and qualified accountant as
expeditiously as possible following the close of the fiscal year and to cover
all financial transactions and affairs of the city for that preceding fiscal
year. The audit shall be made on a cash or accrual method at the discretion
of the City Council. The audit shall be completed and the annual audit report
made by the accountant shall be submitted within six months after the close
of the fiscal year in any event, unless an extension of time is granted by a
written resolution adopted by the City Council. If the city owns or operates
any type of public utility or other enterprise which substantially generates
its own revenue, that phase of the affairs of the city shall be audited
separately from other functions of the city and the result shall appear
separately in the annual audit report made by the accountant to the city and
such audit shall be on an accrual basis and shall contain statements and
materials which conform to generally accepted accounting principles. For the
utilities operated through the Board of Public Works, the City Council may
provide for an entirely separate audit, on an accrual basis, of such
operations and report and by a different accountant than the one making the
general audit.



(Neb. RS 19-2903)



      (3)   The annual audit report shall set forth, insofar as
possible, the financial position and results of financial operations for each
fund or group of accounts of the city. When the accrual method is selected
for the annual audit report, the report shall be in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. The annual audit report shall also include
the professional opinion of the accountant with respect to the financial
statements, or, if an opinion cannot be expressed, a declaration that the
accountant is unable to express such an opinion with an explanation of the
reasons why he or she cannot do so.



(Neb. RS 19-2904)



      (4)   At least three copies of the annual audit report shall
be properly signed and attested by the accountant; two copies shall be filed
with the City Clerk, and one copy shall be filed with the Auditor of Public
Accounts. The annual audit report filed, together with any accompanying
comment or explanation, shall become a part of the public records of the City
Clerk and shall at all times thereafter be open and subject to public
inspection.



(Neb. RS 19-2905)



   (B)   The City Council shall provide and file with the City Clerk,
not later than August 1 of each year, financial statements showing the city's
actual and budgeted figures for the most recently completed fiscal year.



(Neb. RS 13-606)



Statutory reference:



   Other provisions on audits, Neb. RS 19-2906 through 19-2909



§ 32.03  CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES; BIDDING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01 for a contract with a
public power district to operate, renew, replace, or add to the electric
distribution, transmission, or generation system of the city, no contract for
enlargement or general improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public
heating system, bridges, work on streets, or any other work or improvement
when the cost of the enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property,
costing over $30,000, shall be made unless it is first approved by the
governing body.



   (B)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01, before the governing
body makes any contract in excess of $30,000 for enlargement or general
improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating system,
bridges, work on streets, or any other work or improvement when the cost of
the enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property, an estimate of
the cost shall be made by the Municipal Engineer and submitted to the
governing body.  In advertising for bids as provided in divisions (C) and
(E) of this section, the governing body may publish the amount of the
estimate.



   (C)   Advertisements for bids shall be required for any contract
costing over $30,000 entered into:



      (1)   For enlargement or general improvements, such as water
extensions, sewers, public heating system, bridges, work on streets, or any
other work or improvement when the cost of the enlargement or improvement is
assessed to the property; or



      (2)   For the purchase of equipment used in the construction
of the enlargement or general improvements.



   (D)   A municipal electric utility may enter into a contract for the
enlargement or improvement of the electric system or for the purchase of
equipment used for the enlargement or improvement without advertising for
bids if the price is:



      (1)   $30,000 or less;



      (2)   $60,000 or less and the city electric utility has gross
annual revenue from retail sales in excess of $1,000,000;



      (3)   $90,000 or less and the city electric utility has gross
annual revenue from retail sales in excess of $5,000,000; or



      (4)   $120,000 or less and the city electric utility has gross
annual revenue from retail sales in excess of $10,000,000.



   (E)   The advertisement provided for in division (C) of this section
shall be published at least seven days prior to the bid closing in a legal
newspaper published in or of general circulation in the municipality, and if
there is no legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the
municipality, then in some newspaper of general circulation published in the
county in which the municipality is located, and if there is no legal
newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the
municipality is located, then in a newspaper, designated by the County Board,
having a general circulation within the county where bids are required, and
if no newspaper is published in the municipality or county, or if no
newspaper has general circulation in the county, then by posting a written or
printed copy thereof in each of three public places in the municipality at
least seven days prior to the bid closing.  In case of a public emergency
resulting from infectious or contagious diseases, destructive windstorms,
floods, snow, war, or an exigency or pressing necessity or unforeseen need
calling for immediate action or remedy to prevent a serious loss of or
serious injury or damage to life, health, or property, estimates of costs and
advertising for bids may be waived in the emergency ordinance authorized by
Neb. RS 17-613 when adopted by a three-fourths vote of the governing body and
entered of record.



   (F)   If, after advertising for bids as provided in this section,
the governing body receives fewer than two bids on a contract or if the bids
received by the governing body contain a price which exceeds the estimated
cost, the governing body may negotiate a contract in an attempt to complete
the proposed enlargement or general improvements at a cost commensurate with
the estimate given.



   (G)   If the materials are of such a nature that, in the opinion of
the manufacturer and with the concurrence of the governing body or Board of
Public Works, no cost can be estimated until the materials have been
manufactured or assembled to the specific qualifications of the city, the
governing body or Board of Public Works may authorize the manufacture and
assemblage of those materials and may thereafter approve the estimated cost
expenditure when it is provided by the manufacturer.



(Neb. RS 17-568.01)



   (H)   Any bidding procedure may be waived by the governing body or
Board of Public Works:



      (1)   When materials or equipment are purchased at the same
price and from the same seller as materials or equipment which have formerly
been obtained pursuant to the state bidding procedure in Neb. RS 81-145
through 81-162; or



      (2)   When the contract is negotiated directly with a
sheltered workshop pursuant to Neb. RS 48-1503; or



      (3)   When required to comply with any federal grant, loan, or
program.



(Neb. RS 17-568.02)



   (I)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law or a home
rule charter, a municipality which has established, by an interlocal
agreement with any county, a joint purchasing division or agency may purchase
personal property without competitive bidding if the price for the property
has been established by the federal General Services Administration or the
materiel division of the Department of Administrative Services.



      (2)   For the purpose of this division (I), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes but is not limited to
supplies, materials, and equipment used by or furnished to any officer,
office, department, institution, board, or other agency.



         PURCHASING or PURCHASE.  The obtaining of personal
property by sale, lease, or other contractual means.



(Neb. RS 18-1756)



Statutory reference:



   Requirements for public lettings, see Neb. RS 73-101 et seq.



§ 32.04  ORDERS OR WARRANTS FOR MONEY; CONTRACTS; EXPENDITURES;
REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Mayor and City Council shall have no power to appropriate,
issue, or draw any order or warrant on the City Treasurer for money, unless
the same has been appropriated or ordered by ordinance, or the claim for the
payment of which such order or warrant is issued has been allowed according
to the provisions of § 32.05, and funds for the class or object out of which
the claim is payable have been included in the adopted budget statement or
transferred according to law.



(Neb. RS 17-708)



   (B)   No contract shall be hereafter made by the City Council, or
any committee or member thereof, and no expense shall be incurred by any of
the officers or departments of the city, whether the object of the
expenditures shall have been ordered by the City Council or not, unless an
appropriation shall have been previously made concerning such expense, except
as otherwise expressly provided in division (A).



(Neb. 17-709)



   (C)   All warrants drawn upon the City Treasurer must be signed by
the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk, stating the particular fund to
which the same is chargeable, the person to whom payable, and for what
particular object. No money shall be otherwise paid than upon the warrants so
drawn. Each warrant shall specify the amount included in the adopted budget
statement for the fund upon which it is drawn and the amount already expended
of the fund.



(Neb. 17-711)



§ 32.05  CLAIMS AND ACCOUNTS PAYABLE.



   (A)   (1)   All liquidated and unliquidated claims and accounts
payable against the city shall:



         (a)   Be presented in writing;



         (b)   State the name and address of the claimant and the
amount of the claim; and



         (c)   Fully and accurately identify the items or
services for which payment is claimed or the time, place, nature, and
circumstances giving rise to the claim.



      (2)   As a condition precedent to maintaining an action for a
claim, other than a tort claim as defined in Neb. RS 13-903, the claimant
shall file the claim within 90 days of the accrual of the claim in the office
of the City Clerk.



      (3)   The City Clerk shall notify the claimant or his or her
agent or attorney by letter mailed to the claimant's address within five days
if the claim is disallowed by the City Council.



      (4)   No costs shall be recovered against the city in any
action brought against it for any claim or for any claim allowed in part
which has not been presented to the City Council to be audited, unless the
recovery is for a greater sum than the amount allowed with the interest due.



(Neb. RS 17-714)



   (B)   Upon the allowance of claims by the City Council, the order
for their payment shall specify the particular fund or appropriation out of
which they are payable as specified in the adopted budget statement; and no
order or warrant shall be drawn in excess of 85% of the current levy for the
purpose for which it is drawn, unless there is sufficient money in the
treasury at the credit of the proper fund for its payment; provided that if
there exists at the time the warrant is drawn, obligated funds from the
federal government or the state, or both from the federal government and the
state, for the general purpose or purposes of the warrant, then the warrant
may be drawn in excess of 85% of the current levy for the purpose for which
it is drawn to the additional extent of 100% of the obligated federal or
state funds. No claim shall be audited or allowed unless an order or warrant
for the payment thereof may legally be drawn.



(Neb. RS 17-715)



§ 32.06  COLLECTION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The city shall have authority to collect the special
assessments which it levies and to perform all other necessary functions
related thereto including foreclosure.



   (B)   The City Council of any city collecting its own special
assessments shall direct that notice that special assessments are due shall
be mailed or otherwise delivered to the last known address of the person
against whom those special assessments are assessed or to the lending
institution or other party responsible for paying those special assessments.
Failure to receive the notice shall not relieve the taxpayer from any
liability to pay the special assessments and any interest or penalties
accrued thereon.



   (C)   A city collecting its own assessments shall:



      (1)   File notice of the assessments and the amount of
assessment being levied for each lot or tract of land to the Register of
Deeds; and



      (2)   File a release of assessment upon final payment of each
assessment with the Register of Deeds.



(Neb. RS 18-1216)



Statutory reference:



   Refunding erroneously paid special assessments, see Neb. RS 17-703



§ 32.07  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND.



   All money received on special assessments shall be held by the City
Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement
for which the assessment was made, and this money shall be used for no other
purpose whatever, unless to reimburse the city for money expended for any
improvement.



(Neb. RS 17-710)



§ 32.08  SINKING FUNDS; GIFTS OF MONEY OR PROPERTY.



   (A)   The city is hereby empowered to receive money or property by
donation, bequest, gift, devise, or otherwise for the benefit of any one or
more of the public purposes for which sinking funds are established by the
provisions of this section, as stipulated by the donor. The title to the
money or property so donated shall vest in the City Council, or in its
successors in office, who shall become the owners thereof in trust to the
uses of the sinking fund or funds; provided, if the donation is real estate,
the City Council may manage the same as in the case of real estate donated to
the city for city library purposes under the provisions of Neb. RS 51-215 and
51-216.



(Neb. RS 19-1301)



   (B)   The City Council, subject to all the limitations set forth in
this section, shall have the power to levy a tax of not to exceed $0.105 on
each $100 in any one year upon the taxable value of all the taxable property
within the city for a term of not to exceed ten years, in addition to the
amount of tax which may be annually levied for the purposes of the adopted
budget statement of the city, for the purpose of establishing a sinking fund
for the construction, purchase, improvement, extension, original equipment,
or repair, not including maintenance, of any one or more of the following
public improvements, including acquisition of any land incident to the making
thereof: city library; city auditorium or community house for social or
recreational purposes; City Hall; city public library, auditorium, or
community house in a single building; city swimming pool and appurtenances
thereto; city jail; city building to house equipment or personnel of a fire
department, together with firefighting equipment or apparatus; city park;
city cemetery; city medical clinic building, together with furnishings and
equipment; or city hospital. The city shall not be authorized to levy the tax
or to establish the sinking fund as provided in this division if, having
bonded indebtedness, such city has been in default in the payment of interest
thereon or principal thereof for a period of 10 years prior to the date of
the passage of the resolution providing for the submission of the proposition
for establishment of the sinking fund as required in division (C).



(Neb. RS 19-1302)



   (C)   Before any sinking fund or funds are established or before any
annual tax is levied for any planned city improvement mentioned in division
(B) by the city, the City Council shall declare its purpose by resolution to
submit to the qualified electors of the city at the next general city
election the proposition to provide the city with the specific city
improvement planned for consummation under this section. The resolution of
submission shall, among other things, set forth a clear description of the
improvement planned, the estimated cost according to the prevailing costs,
the amount of annual levy over a definite period of years, not exceeding ten
years, required to provide the cost, and the specific name or designation for
the sinking fund sought to be established to carry out the planned
improvement, together with a statement of the proposition for placement upon
the ballot at the election. Notice of the submission of the proposition,
together with a copy of the official ballot containing the same, shall be
published in its entirety three successive weeks before the day of the
election in a legal newspaper published in the city or, if no legal newspaper
is published therein, in some legal newspaper published in the county in
which the city is located and of general circulation. If no legal newspaper
is published in the county, the notice shall be published in some legal
newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the city is located.
No sinking fund shall be established unless the same has been authorized by a
majority or more of the legal votes of the city cast for or against the
proposition. If less than a majority of the legal votes favor the
establishment of the sinking fund, the planned improvement shall not be made,
no annual tax shall be levied therefor, and no sinking fund or sinking funds
shall be established in connection therewith, but the resolution of
submission shall immediately be repealed. If the proposition shall carry at
the election in the manner prescribed in this division, the City Council and
its successors in office shall proceed to do all things authorized under the
resolution of submission but never inconsistent with this section. Provisions
of the statutes of this state relating to election of officers, voting
places, election apparatus and blanks, preparation and form of ballots,
information to voters, delivery of ballots, conduct of elections, manner of
voting, counting of votes, records and certificates of elections, and
recounts of votes, so far as applicable, shall apply to voting on the
proposition under this section.



(Neb. RS 19-1303)



   (D)   All funds received by the City Treasurer, by donation or by
tax levy, as hereinbefore provided, shall, as they accumulate, be immediately
invested by the Treasurer, with the written approval of the City Council, in
the manner provided in § 32.11. Whenever investments of the sinking fund or
funds are made, as aforesaid, the nature and character of the same shall be
reported to the City Council, and the investment report shall be made a
matter of record by the City Clerk in the proceedings of the City Council.
The sinking fund, or sinking funds, accumulated under the provisions of this
section, shall constitute a special fund, or funds, for the purpose or
purposes for which the same was authorized and shall not be used for any
other purpose unless authorized by 60% of the qualified electors of the city
voting at a general election favoring the change in the use of the sinking
fund or sinking funds; provided that the question of the change in the use of
the sinking fund or sinking funds, when it fails to carry, shall not be
resubmitted in substance for a period of one year from and after the date of
the election.



(Neb. RS 19-1304)



Statutory reference:



   Additional levy limitations, see Neb. RS 17-702



   Investment in warrants, see Neb. RS 77-2337



§ 32.09  DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.



   (A)   (1)   The City Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times
keep on deposit, for safekeeping, in banks, capital stock financial
institutions, or qualifying mutual financial institutions of approved and
responsible standing, all money collected, received, or held by him or her as
City Treasurer. These deposits shall be subject to all regulations imposed by
law or adopted by the City Council for the receiving and holding thereof. The
fact that a stockholder, director, or other officer of the bank, capital
stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution is
also serving as Mayor, a member of the City Council, as a member of the Board
of Public Works, or as any other officer of the city shall not disqualify the
bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial
institution from acting as a depository for the city funds.



      (2)   The City Council shall require from all banks, capital
stock financial institutions, or qualifying mutual financial institutions a
bond in the penal sum as may be the maximum amount on deposit at any time
less the amount insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation or, in lieu thereof, security given as provided in the Public
Funds Deposit Security Act, to secure the payment of all deposits and
accretions. The City Council shall approve this bond or giving of security.
The City Treasurer shall not be liable for any loss of any money sustained by
reason of the failure of any such depository so designated and approved.



(Neb. RS 17-607)



   (B)   The insurance afforded to depositors in banks, capital stock
financial institutions, or qualifying mutual financial institutions through
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall be deemed and construed to be
a surety bond or bonds to the extent that the deposits are insured or
guaranteed by that corporation, and for deposits so insured or guaranteed, no
other surety bond or bonds or other security shall be required.



(Neb. RS 77-2362)



   (C)   Neb. RS 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock
financial institutions. Neb. RS 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in
qualifying mutual financial institutions.



(Neb. RS 17-607 and 77-2362)



Statutory reference:



   Other provisions on deposits of public funds, see Neb. RS 77-2363 and
77-2364



   Public Funds Deposit Security Act, see Neb. RS 77-2386



§ 32.10  CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT; TIME DEPOSITS; CONDITIONS.



   The City Treasurer may, upon resolution of the Mayor and City Council
authorizing the same, purchase certificates of deposit from and make time
deposits in any bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying
mutual financial institution in the state to the extent that those
certificates of deposit or time deposits are insured or guaranteed by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Deposits may be made in excess of the
amounts so secured by the corporation, and the amount of the excess deposit
shall be secured by a bond or by security given in the same manner as is
provided for cities of the first class in Neb. RS 16-714 through 16-716 as of
the time the deposit is made. Neb. RS 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in
capital stock financial institutions. Neb. RS 77-2365.01 shall apply to
deposits in qualifying mutual financial institutions.



(Neb. RS 17-720)



§ 32.11  INVESTMENT AND USE OF SURPLUS FUNDS.



   (A)   When the City Treasurer holds funds of the city in excess of
the amount required for maintenance or set aside for betterments and
improvements, the Mayor and City Council may, by resolution, direct and
authorize the Treasurer to invest the surplus funds in the outstanding bonds
or registered warrants of the city, bonds and debentures issued either singly
or collectively by any of the 12 federal land banks, the 12 intermediate
credit banks, or the 13 banks for cooperatives under the supervision of the
Farm Credit Administration, or in interest-bearing bonds or the obligations
of the United States. The interest on the bonds or warrants shall be credited
to the fund out of which the bonds or warrants were purchased.



(Neb. RS 17-608)



   (B)   All income received by the city from public utilities and from
the payment and collection of water taxes, rents, rates or assessments shall
be applied to the payment of running expenses, interest on bonds or money
borrowed and the erection and construction of public utilities; should there
be any surplus, it shall be annually created into a sinking fund for the
payment of public utility bonds or for the improvements of the works, or into
the General Fund as the Council may direct. The surplus remaining, if any,
may, if the Council, be invested in interest-bearing bonds or obligations of
the United States.



(Neb. RS 17-540)



   (C)   The Mayor and City Council may, by resolution, direct and
authorize the Treasurer to dispose of the surplus electric light, water, or
gas funds, or the funds arising from the sale of electric light, water, or
natural gas distribution properties, by the payment of outstanding electric
light, water, or gas distribution bonds or water warrants then due. The
excess, if any, after the payments, may be transferred to the General Fund of
the city.



(Neb. RS 17-609)



   (D)   Any surplus funds arising out of the operation of any system
of waterworks, power plant, ice plant, gas plant, sewerage, heating or
lighting plant, or distribution system by the Board of Public Works, or by
the City Council, where any of the utilities are not being operated by such a
Board, may be invested, if not invested pursuant to the provisions of any
other law upon the subject, in like manner and subject to the same conditions
as the investment of similar funds of cities of the first class, as provided
in Neb. RS 16-691.01.



(Neb. RS 17-803)



   (E)   (1)   Whenever the city has accumulated a surplus of any
fund in excess of its current needs or has accumulated a sinking fund for the
payment of its bonds and the money in such sinking fund exceeds the amount
necessary to pay the principal and interest of any bonds which become due
during the current year, the City Council may invest any surplus in excess of
current needs or such excess in its sinking fund in certificates of deposit,
in time deposits, and in any securities in which the State Investment Officer
is authorized to invest pursuant to the Nebraska Capital Expansion Act and
the Nebraska State Funds Investment Act and as provided in the authorized
investment guidelines of the Nebraska Investment Council in effect on the
date the investment is made. The State Investment Officer shall upon request
furnish a copy of current authorized investment guidelines of the Nebraska
Investment Council.



      (2)   Nothing in division (E)(1) shall be construed to
authorize investments in venture capital.



(Neb. RS 77-2341)



§ 32.12  BOND ISSUES.



   The City Council may, after meeting all the requirements of state law,
issue bonds, fund bonds, and retire bonds for purposes as may be permitted by
state law. The City Council shall have the authority to levy special
assessments for the payment of interest and principal on these bonds and may
spread the payments up to the maximum number of years permitted by state law.



Statutory reference:



   Bonds in general, see Neb. RS 18-1801 through 18-1805



   Funding and refunding bonds, see Neb. RS 10-606 through 10-612



   General provisions, see Neb. RS 10-101 through 10-143



§ 32.13  DEBT COLLECTION; AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT WITH COLLECTION AGENCY.



   (A)   The city may contract to retain a collection agency licensed
pursuant to Neb. RS 45-601 through 45-622, within or without this state, for
the purpose of collecting public debts owed by any person to the city.



   (B)   No debt owed pursuant to division (A) of this section may be
assigned to a collection agency unless:



      (1)   There has been an attempt to advise the debtor by
first-class mail, postage prepaid, at the last known address of the debtor:



         (a)   Of the existence of the debt; and



         (b)   The debt may be assigned to a collection agency
for collection if the debt is not paid.



      (2)   At least 30 days have elapsed from the time the notice
was sent.



   (C)   A collection agency which is assigned a debt under this
section shall have only those remedies and powers which would be available to
it as an assignee of a private creditor.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, debt shall include all
delinquent fees or payments except delinquent property taxes on real estate.
In the case of debt arising as a result of an order or judgment of a court in
a criminal or traffic matter, a collection fee may be added to the debt. The
collection fee shall be $25 or 4.5% of the debt, whichever is greater. The
collection fee shall be paid by the person who owes the debt directly to the
person or agency providing the collection service.



(Neb. RS 45-623)



§ 32.14  CREDIT CARDS; AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT.



   (A)   If authorized by the City Council, any city official may
accept credit cards, charge cards, or debit cards, whether presented in
person or electronically, or electronic funds transfers as a method of cash
payment of any tax, levy, excise, duty, custom, toll, interest, penalty,
fine, license, fee, or assessment of whatever kind or nature, whether general
or special, as provided by Neb. RS 77-1702.



   (B)   The total amount of the taxes, levies, excises, duties,
customs, tolls, interest, penalties, fines, licenses, fees, or assessments of
whatever kind or nature, whether general or special, paid for by credit card,
charge card, debit card, or electronic funds transfer shall be collected by
the city official.



   (C)   With respect to a facility which it operates in a proprietary
capacity, the City Council may choose to accept credit cards, charge cards,
or debit cards, whether presented in person or electronically, or electronic
funds transfers as a means of cash payment and may adjust the price for
services to reflect the handling and payment costs.



   (D)   The city official shall obtain, for each transaction,
authorization for use of any credit card, charge card, or debit card used
pursuant to this section from the financial institution, vending service
company, credit card or charge card company, or third-party merchant bank
providing that service.



   (E)   The types of credit cards, charge cards, or debit cards
accepted and the payment services provided shall be determined by the State
Treasurer and the Director of Administrative Services with the advice of a
committee convened by the State Treasurer and the director. The committee
shall consist of the State Treasurer, the Tax Commissioner, the director, and
representatives from counties, cities, and other political subdivisions as
may be appropriate. The committee shall develop recommendations for the
contracting of such services. The State Treasurer and the director shall
contract with one or more credit card, charge card, or debit card companies
or third-party merchant banks for services on behalf of the state and those
counties, cities, and political subdivisions that choose to participate in
the state contract for such services. The State Treasurer and the director
shall consider, for purposes of this section, any negotiated discount,
processing, or transaction fee imposed by a credit card, charge card, or
debit card company or third-party merchant bank as an administrative expense.
If the City Council chooses not to participate in the state contract, it may
choose types of credit cards, charge cards, and debit cards and may negotiate
and contract independently or collectively as a governmental entity with one
or more financial institutions, vending service companies, credit card,
charge card, or debit card companies, or third-party merchant banks for the
provision of these services.



   (F)   Subject to the direction of the City Council, a city
official  authorizing acceptance of credit card or charge card payments
shall be authorized but not required to impose a surcharge or convenience fee
upon the person making a payment by credit card or charge card so as to
wholly or partially offset the amount of any discount or administrative fees
charged to the city, but the surcharge or convenience fee shall not exceed
the surcharge or convenience fee imposed by the credit card or charge card
companies or third-party merchant banks which have contracted under division
(E) of this section. The surcharge or convenience fee shall be applied only
when allowed by the operating rules and regulations of the credit card or
charge card involved or when authorized in writing by the credit card or
charge card company involved. When a person elects to make a payment to the
city by credit card or charge card and such a surcharge or convenience fee is
imposed, the payment of the surcharge or convenience fee shall be deemed
voluntary by that person and shall be in no case refundable. If a payment is
made electronically by credit card, charge card, debit card, or electronic
funds transfer as part of a system for providing or retrieving information
electronically, the city official shall be authorized but not required to
impose an additional surcharge or convenience fee upon the person making a
payment.



   (G)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER.  The movement of funds by nonpaper
means, usually through a payment system, including, but not limited to, an
automated clearinghouse or the Federal Reserve's Fedwire system.



(Neb. RS 13-609)



ANNUAL BUDGET



§ 32.25  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year of the city and any public utility of the city
commences on October 1 and extends through the following September 30 except
as provided in the Municipal Proprietary Function Act.



(Neb. RS 17-701)



§ 32.26  BUDGET PROCEDURES.



   The budget instruction manual prepared by the Auditor of Public
Accounts is incorporated by reference for the purpose of proper budget
preparation.



§ 32.27  EXPENDITURES PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF BUDGET.



   (A)   On and after the first day of its fiscal year in 1993 and of
each succeeding year and until the adoption of the budget by the City Council
in September, the City Council may expend any balance of cash on hand for the
current expenses of the city. Except as provided in division (B) of this
section, these expenditures shall not exceed an amount equivalent to the
total amount expended under the last budget in the equivalent period of the
prior budget year. These expenditures shall be charged against the
appropriations for each individual fund or purpose as provided in the budget
when adopted.



(Neb. RS 13-509.01)



   (B)   The restriction on expenditures in division (A) of this
section may be exceeded upon the express finding of the City Council that
expenditures beyond the amount authorized are necessary to enable the city to
meet its statutory duties and responsibilities. The finding and approval of
the expenditures in excess of the statutory authorization shall be adopted by
the City Council in open public session. Expenditures authorized by this
section shall be charged against appropriations for each individual fund or
purpose as provided in the budget when adopted, and nothing in this section
shall be construed to authorize expenditures by the city in excess of that
authorized by any other statutory provision.



(Neb. RS 13-509.02)



§ 32.28  PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; CONTENTS; AVAILABILITY; CORRECTION.



   (A)   The City Council shall annually prepare a proposed budget
statement on forms prescribed and furnished by the Auditor of Public
Accounts. The proposed budget statement shall be made available to the public
prior to publication of the notice of the hearing on the proposed budget
statement pursuant to § 32.29. A proposed budget statement shall contain the
following information, except as provided by state law:



      (1)   For the immediately preceding fiscal year, the revenue
from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue received
from personal and real property taxation, allocated to the funds and
separately stated as to each such source:  the unencumbered cash balance at
the beginning and end of the year; the amount received by taxation of
personal and real property; and the amount of actual expenditures;



      (2)   For the current fiscal year, actual and estimated
revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, allocated to the
funds and separately stated as to each such source:  the actual unencumbered
cash balance available at the beginning of the year; the amount received from
personal and real property taxation; and the amount of actual and estimated
expenditures, whichever is applicable. This statement shall contain the cash
reserve for each fiscal year and shall note whether or not the reserve is
encumbered. The cash reserve projections shall be based upon the actual
experience of prior years. The cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the total
budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;



      (3)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year, an estimate of
revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue
to be received from taxation of personal and real property, separately stated
as to each such source:  the actual or estimated unencumbered cash balances,
whichever is applicable, to be available at the beginning of the year; the
amounts proposed to be expended during the year; and the amount of cash
reserve, based on actual experience of prior years, which cash reserve shall
not exceed 50% of the total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;



      (4)   A statement setting out separately the amount sought to
be raised from the levy of a tax on the taxable value of real property:



         (a)   For the purpose of paying the principal or
interest on bonds issued by the City Council; and



         (b)   For all other purposes.



      (5)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement,
including each proprietary function fund included in a separate proprietary
budget statement prepared pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act,
and a grand total of all funds maintained by the City Council; and



      (6)   A list of the proprietary functions which are not
included in the budget statement. These proprietary functions shall have a
separate budget statement which is approved by the City Council as provided
in the Municipal Proprietary Function Act.



   (B)   The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance required to
be included in the budget statement by this section shall include deposits
and investments of the city as well as any funds held by the County Treasurer
for the city and shall be accurately stated on the proposed budget statement.



   (C)   The city shall correct any material errors in the budget
statement detected by the Auditor of Public Accounts or by other sources.



(Neb. RS 13-504)



   (D)   The estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for
the ensuing fiscal year less all estimated and actual unencumbered balances
at the beginning of the year and less the estimated income from all sources,
including motor vehicle taxes, other than taxation of personal and real
property shall equal the amount to be received from taxes, and that amount
shall be shown on the proposed budget statement pursuant to this section. The
amount to be raised from taxation of personal and real property, as
determined above, plus the estimated revenue from other sources, including
motor vehicle taxes, and the unencumbered balances shall equal the estimated
expenditures, plus the necessary required cash reserve, for the ensuing year.



(Neb. RS 13-505)



§ 32.29  PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; HEARING; ADOPTION; CERTIFICATION OF TAX
AMOUNT.



   (A)   The City Council shall each year conduct a public hearing on
its proposed budget statement. Notice of the place and time of the hearing,
together with a summary of the proposed budget statement, shall be published
at least five days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city's jurisdiction.



   (B)   After the hearing, the proposed budget statement shall be
adopted, or amended and adopted as amended, and a written record shall be
kept of the hearing. The amount to be received from personal and real
property taxation shall be certified to the levying board after the proposed
budget statement is adopted or is amended and adopted as amended. The
certification of the amount to be received from personal and real property
taxation shall specify separately the amount to be applied to the payment of
principal or interest on bonds issued by the City Council and the amount to
be received for all other purposes.



   (C)   If the adopted budget statement reflects a change from that
shown in the published proposed budget statement, a summary of the changes
shall be published within 20 days after its adoption in the manner provided
in this section, but without provision for hearing, setting forth the items
changed and the reasons for the changes.



   (D)   Upon approval by City Council, the budget shall be filed with
the Auditor of Public Accounts. The Auditor may review the budget for errors
in mathematics, improper accounting, and noncompliance with the provisions of
the Nebraska Budget Act or Neb. RS 13-518 to 13-522. If the Auditor detects
such errors, he or she shall immediately notify the Council of the errors.
The Council shall correct any error as provided in § 32.34. Warrants for the
payment of expenditures provided in the budget adopted under this section
shall be valid notwithstanding any errors or noncompliance for which the
Auditor has notified the Council.



(Neb. RS 13-506)



   (E)   When a levy increase has been authorized by vote of the
electors, the adopted budget statement shall indicate the amount of the levy
increase.



(Neb. RS 13-507)



§ 32.30  ADOPTED BUDGET STATEMENT; FILING; CERTIFICATION OF TAX AMOUNT.



   (A)   (1)   After publication and hearing on the proposed budget
statement and within the time prescribed by law, the City Council shall file
with and certify to the levying board or boards on or before September 20 of
each year and file with the Auditor of Public Accounts a copy of the adopted
budget statement which complies with Neb. RS 13-518 to 13-522, together with
the amount of the tax required to fund the adopted budget, setting out
separately:



         (a)   The amount to be levied for the payment of
principal or interest on bonds issued by the City Council; and



         (b)   The amount to be levied for all other purposes.



      (2)   Proof of publication shall be attached to the statements.



   (B)   The City Council, in certifying the amount required, may make
allowance for delinquent taxes not exceeding 5% of the amount required plus
the actual percentage of delinquent taxes for the preceding tax year and for
the amount of estimated tax loss from any pending or anticipated litigation
which involves taxation and in which tax collections have been or can be
withheld or escrowed by court order. For purposes of this section,
anticipated litigation shall be limited to the anticipation of an action
being filed by a taxpayer who or which filed a similar action for the
preceding year which is still pending. Except for the allowances, the City
Council shall not certify an amount of tax more than 1% greater or lesser
than the amount determined under § 32.28.



   (C)   The City Council shall use the certified taxable values as
provided by the County Assessor pursuant to Neb. RS 13-509 for the current
year in setting or certifying the levy. The City Council may designate one of
its members to perform any duty or responsibility required of the Council by
this section.



(Neb. RS 13-508)



§ 32.31  APPROPRIATION BILL.



   The City Council shall adopt a budget statement pursuant to the
Nebraska Budget Act, to be termed, "The Annual Appropriation Bill," in which
the Council may appropriate those sums of money as may be deemed necessary to
defray all necessary expenses and liabilities of the city.



(Neb. RS 17-706)



§ 32.32  GENERAL FUND.



   If the city has not decided to follow the all-purpose levy method of
financing for the fiscal year, all money not specifically appropriated in the
annual appropriation bill shall be deposited in and known as the General Fund.



§ 32.33  TRANSFER OF FUNDS.



   (A)   Whenever during the current fiscal year it becomes apparent to
the City Council that due to unforeseen emergencies there is temporarily
insufficient money in a particular fund to meet the requirements of the
adopted budget of expenditures for that fund, the Council may by a majority
vote, unless otherwise provided by state law, transfer money from other funds
to the fund.



   (B)   No expenditure during any fiscal year shall be made in excess
of the amounts indicated in the adopted budget statement, except as
authorized in § 32.34 or by state law.



   (C)   Any officer or officers of the City Council who obligate funds
contrary to the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense.



(Neb. RS 13-510)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.34  BUDGET REVISION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided by law, the City Council may propose
to revise the previously adopted budget statement and shall conduct a public
hearing on that proposal whenever during the current fiscal year it becomes
apparent to the City Council that:



      (1)   There are circumstances which could not reasonably have
been anticipated at the time the budget for the current year was adopted;



      (2)   The budget adopted violated Neb. RS 13-518 through
13-522, so that the revenue of the current fiscal year for any fund thereof
will be insufficient, additional expenses will be necessarily incurred, or
there is a need to reduce the budget requirements to comply with Neb. RS
13-518 through 13-522; or



      (3)   The City Council has been notified by the Auditor of
Public Accounts of a mathematical or accounting error or noncompliance with
the Nebraska Budget Act.



   (B)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published
at least five days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Council's jurisdiction. This published notice
shall set forth:



      (1)   The time and place of the hearing;



      (2)   The amount in dollars of additional or reduced money
required and for what purpose;



      (3)   A statement setting forth the nature of the
unanticipated circumstances and, if the budget requirements are to be
increased, the reasons why the previously adopted budget of expenditures
cannot be reduced during the remainder of the current year to meet the need
for additional money in that manner;



      (4)   A copy of the summary of the originally adopted budget
previously published; and



      (5)   A copy of the summary of the proposed revised budget.



   (C)   At the hearing any taxpayer may appear or file a written
statement protesting any application for additional money. A written record
shall be kept of all hearings.



   (D)   Upon conclusion of the public hearing on the proposed revised
budget and approval of the proposed revised budget by the City Council, the
Council shall file with the County Clerk of the county or counties in which
the City Council is located, and with the Auditor of Public Accounts, a copy
of the revised budget, as adopted. The City Council may then issue warrants
in payment for expenditures authorized by the adopted revised budget. These
warrants shall be referred to as registered warrants and shall be repaid
during the next fiscal year from funds derived from taxes levied therefor.



   (E)   Within 30 days after the adoption of the budget under §
32.29, the City Council may, or within 30 days after notification of an error
by the Auditor of Public Accounts, the Council shall correct an adopted
budget which contains a clerical, mathematical, or accounting error which
does not affect the total amount budgeted by more than 1% or increase the
amount required from property taxes. No public hearing shall be required for
such a correction. After correction, the City Council shall file a copy of
the corrected budget with the County Clerk of the county or counties in which
the City Council is located and with the Auditor of Public Accounts. The City
Council may then issue warrants in payment for expenditures authorized by the
budget.



(Neb. RS 13-511)



§ 32.35  PROPRIETARY FUNCTIONS; FISCAL YEAR; BUDGET STATEMENTS; FILING;
HEARING; ADOPTION; RECONCILIATION.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PROPRIETARY FUNCTION.  A water supply or distribution utility, a
wastewater collection or treatment utility, an electric generation,
transmission, or distribution utility, a gas supply, transmission, or
distribution utility, an integrated solid waste management collection,
disposal, or handling utility, or a hospital or a nursing home owned by the
city.



(Neb. RS 18-2803)



      SUBSIDIZATION.  The costs of operation of a proprietary function
are regularly financed by appropriations from the city's General Fund in
excess of the amount paid by the city to the proprietary function for actual
service or services received.



(Neb. RS 18-2804)



   (B)   The City Council may establish a separate fiscal year for each
proprietary function, except that any proprietary function which is
subsidized by appropriations from the city's General Fund shall have the same
fiscal year as the city.



   (C)   (1)   At least 30 days prior to the start of the fiscal
year of each proprietary function, a proposed proprietary budget statement
shall be prepared in writing and filed with the City Clerk containing the
following information:



         (a)   For the immediately preceding fiscal year, the
revenue from all sources, the unencumbered cash balance at the beginning and
end of the year, the amount received by taxation, and the amount of actual
expenditure;



         (b)   For the current fiscal year, actual and estimated
revenue from all sources separately stated as to each source, the actual
unencumbered cash balance available at the beginning of the year, the amount
received from taxation, and the amount of actual and estimated expenditure,
whichever is applicable;



         (c)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year, an
estimate of revenue from all sources separately stated as to each source, the
actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance, whichever is applicable, to be
available at the beginning of the year, the amounts proposed to be expended
during the fiscal year, and the amount of cash reserve based on actual
experience of prior years; and



         (d)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement
which shall include a total of all funds maintained for the proprietary
function.



      (2)   The statement shall contain the estimated cash reserve
for each fiscal year and shall note whether or not the reserve is encumbered.
The cash reserve projections shall be based upon the actual experience of
prior years.



      (3)   Each proprietary budget statement shall be filed on
forms prescribed and furnished by the Auditor of Public Accounts following
consultation with representatives of the governing bodies as operate
proprietary functions subject to the provisions of the Municipal Proprietary
Function Act.



(Neb. RS 18-2805)



   (D)   (1)   After a proposed proprietary budget statement is
filed with the City Clerk, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing on
the statement. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, a summary of the
proposed proprietary budget statement, and notice that the full proposed
proprietary budget statement is available for public review with the City
Clerk during normal business hours shall be published one time at least five
days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the
City Council's jurisdiction or by mailing to each resident within the City
Council's jurisdiction.



      (2)   After the hearing, the proposed proprietary budget
statement shall be adopted or amended and adopted as amended, and a written
record shall be kept of the hearing. If the adopted proprietary budget
statement reflects a change from the proposed proprietary statement presented
at the hearing, a copy of the adopted proprietary budget statement shall be
filed with the City Clerk within 20 days after its adoption and published in
a newspaper of general circulation within the City Council's jurisdiction or
by mailing to each resident within the City Council's jurisdiction.



(Neb. RS 18-2806)



   (E)   If the actual expenditures for a proprietary function exceed
the estimated expenditures in the proprietary budget statement during its
fiscal year, the City Council shall adopt a proprietary function
reconciliation statement within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year
which reflects any difference between the adopted proprietary budget
statement for the previous fiscal year and the actual expenditures and
revenue for that fiscal year. After the adoption of a proprietary function
reconciliation statement, it shall be filed with the City Clerk and published
in a newspaper of general circulation within the City Council's jurisdiction
or by mailing to each resident within the City Council's jurisdiction. If the
difference between the adopted proprietary budget for the previous fiscal
year and the actual expenditures and revenues for that fiscal year is greater
than 10%, the proprietary function reconciliation statement shall only be
adopted following a public hearing.



(Neb. RS 18-2807)



   (F)   If the budget of a proprietary function is included in the
city budget statement created pursuant to the Nebraska Budget Act, the
Municipal Proprietary Function Act need not be followed for that proprietary
function. Any income from a proprietary function which is transferred to the
General Fund of the city shall be shown as a source of revenue in the city
budget statement created pursuant to the Nebraska Budget Act.



(Neb. RS 18-2808)



CHAPTER 33:  TAXATION



Section



   33.01   General property tax



   33.02   Motor vehicle fee



   33.03   Sales and use tax



   33.04   Levies authorized



§ 33.01  GENERAL PROPERTY TAX.



   The City Council shall cause to be certified to the County Clerk the
amount of tax to be levied upon the actual value of all the taxable property
of the city for the requirements of the adopted budget for the ensuing year,
including all special assessments and taxes. The maximum amount of tax which
may be certified and assessed shall not require a tax levy in excess of the
legal maximum as prescribed by state law.



(Neb. RS 17-702)  (Prior Code, § 1-812)



§ 33.02  MOTOR VEHICLE FEE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      LIMITS OF THE MUNICIPALITY. Includes the extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction of the municipality.



      PERSON.  Includes bodies corporate, societies, communities, the
public generally, individuals, partnerships, limited liability companies,
joint-stock companies, cooperatives, and associations. Person does not
include any federal, state, or local government or any political subdivision
thereof.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D) of this section,
the governing body of the municipality shall have power to require any
individual whose primary residence or person who owns a place of business
which is within the limits of the municipality and that owns and operates a
motor vehicle within such limits to pay an annual motor vehicle fee and to
require the payment of such fee upon the change of ownership of such vehicle.
All such fees which may be provided for under this section shall be used
exclusively for constructing, repairing, maintaining, or improving streets,
roads, alleys, public ways, or parts thereof or for the amortization of
bonded indebtedness when created for such purposes.



   (C)   No motor vehicle fee shall be required under this section if:



      (1)   A vehicle is used or stored but temporarily in the
municipality for a period of six months or less in a 12-month period;



      (2)   An individual does not have a primary residence or a
person does not own a place of business within the limits of the municipality
and does not own and operate a motor vehicle within the limits of the
municipality; or



      (3)   An individual is a full-time student attending a
postsecondary institution within the limits of the municipality and the motor
vehicle's situs under the Motor Vehicle Certificate of Title Act is different
from the place at which he or she is attending such institution.



   (D)   After December 31, 2012, no motor vehicle fee shall be
required of any individual whose primary residence is or person who owns a
place of business within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the
municipality.



   (E)   Until the implementation date designated by the Director of
Motor Vehicles under Neb. RS 23-186, the fee shall be paid to the designated
county official of the county in which the city is located when the
registration fees as provided in the Motor Vehicle Registration Act are
paid.  These fees shall be remitted to the County Treasurer for credit to
the road fund of the city.  On and after the implementation date designated
under Neb. RS 23-186, the fee shall be paid to the County Treasurer for
credit to such road fund.



(Neb. RS 18-1214)  (Prior Code, § 1-824)



Statutory reference:



   Designation of county official, see Neb. RS 23-186



   Motor Vehicle Registration Act, see Neb. RS 60-301



§ 33.03  SALES AND USE TAX.



   (A)   Pursuant to the approval of the electors of the city, at the
city’s special election held on August 12, 1997 there is hereby adopted
pursuant to the provisions of the Neb. RS 77-2701 to 77-27,135.01, as
amended, known as the Nebraska Revenue Act of 1967, and Neb. RS 77-27,142 to
77-27,148, as amended, known as the Local Option Revenue Act of 1969, a sales
and use tax effective on and after January 1, 1998, of 1%, (in addition to
the current 0.5% sales tax for a total of 1.5%) upon the same transactions
within the corporate limits of the city, as the same may, from time to time,
be extended, on which the state is authorized to impose a tax pursuant to the
provisions of the aforementioned statutes of the state as the same may, from
time to time, be amended.



(Prior Code, § 1-825)



   (B)   The administration of the sales and use tax imposed by this
section, the making of returns for the ascertainment and assessment, the
provisions for tax claims and remedies, the laws governing consummation of
sales, penalties, and collection, and for the disposition and distribution of
the taxes so imposed and collected shall be as provided by Neb. RS 77-27,142
to 77-27,148, as amended and Neb. RS 77-2701 to 77-27,135.01.



   (C)   The tax imposed by this section shall commence on January 1,
1998.



   (D)   The proceeds of the 1% sales tax shall be used for relief of
general property tax requirements, and shall be deposited to the General Fund
of the city to pay for all costs and expenses which are lawful for city to
pay, including the principal, interest and cost of issuance and all related
costs of bonds issued by the city for any and all improvements and public
works of the city.



   (E)   The tax imposed by division (A) above shall be used for
community economic development and community redevelopment, as determined by
the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 1-826)



(Ord. 682, passed 8-19-1997)



§ 33.04  LEVIES AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   The city shall have power to raise revenue by levying and
collecting a license tax on any occupation or business within the limits of
the city and regulate the same by ordinance. Any occupation tax imposed
pursuant to this section shall make a reasonable classification of
businesses, users of space, or kinds of transactions for purposes of imposing
such tax, except that no occupation tax shall be imposed on any transaction
which is subject to tax under Neb. RS 53-160, 66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140,
66-4,145, 66-4,146, 77-2602, or 77-4008 or which is exempt from tax under
Neb. RS 77-2704.24. The occupation tax shall be imposed in the manner
provided in Neb. RS 18-1208, except that Neb. RS 18-1208 does not apply to an
occupation tax subject to Neb. RS 86-704. All such taxes shall be uniform in
respect to the classes upon which they are imposed. All scientific and
literary lectures and entertainments shall be exempt from such taxation, as
well as concerts and other musical entertainments given exclusively by the
citizens of the city.



(Neb. RS 17-525)



   (B)   The City Council shall have authority, by ordinance, to impose
an occupation tax of not more than $5 per annum on each fire insurance
corporation, company, or association, doing business in the city, for the
use, support, and benefit of volunteer fire departments, regularly organized
under the laws of the state regulating the same. The City Clerk shall collect
with diligence the occupation tax so imposed. Upon the receipt of the tax the
Clerk shall pay over the proceeds thereof to the City Treasurer who shall
credit the same to a fund to be known as special occupation tax fund for
benefit of the volunteer fire department. Upon proper claim filed by the
Chief of the Fire Department and allowed by the City Council, the Treasurer
shall pay over the proceeds of the tax in the fund from time to time for the
use of the Fire Department, as hereinbefore provided.



(Neb. RS 35-106)



   (C)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to the
contrary, the city shall not impose an occupation tax on the business of any
person, firm, or corporation licensed under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act
and doing business within the corporate limits of the city in any sum which
exceeds two times the amount of the license fee required to be paid under the
Act to obtain such license.



(Neb. RS 53-132)



(Ord. 908, passed 3-17-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Occupation taxes generating more than $300,000; imposition or increase;
election required, see Neb. RS 18-1208



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY





         51.   GARBAGE





         52.   WATER





         53.   SEWERS





         54.   ELECTRICITY




CHAPTER 50:  UTILITIES GENERALLY



Section



   50.01   Unified deposit



   50.02   Collection of utility bill



   50.03   Discontinuance of service; notice, procedure



   50.04   Arrears as lien upon property



   50.05   Diversion of services



 



   50.99   Penalty



§ 50.01  UNIFIED DEPOSIT.



   (A)   Any person desiring to use the electrical, water, or sewer
service of the city shall make application therefore in the office of the
City Clerk. Prior to any service being connected, the person shall pay the
City Clerk a unified deposit securing the payment of the monthly service
charge for the services, as set forth in the rate ordinances of the city.



   (B)   In the event any of the foregoing utility services are
disconnected, for any reason, the unified utility deposit shall be set off
against the final bill rendered to the customer. The foregoing unified
deposits shall be transferred at the request of a customer for service at a
different location within the corporate limits, and shall be refunded in full
after service has been provided to the same customer for a period of 12
months; provided, however, in the event that the customer has made three or
more payments for the utilities after the due date therefore, in any
consecutive 12-month period, the City Administrator may require that the
deposit be retained for an additional 12-month period.



   (C)   If a customer is disconnected for non-payment, a customer may
be required to pay all of his or her accounts in full and an additional or
new deposit may also be required before service is reconnected. The deposit
shall be set in the rate ordinance of the city.



   (D)   In addition to the foregoing unified utility deposit, the city
shall charge the customer non-refundable and non-transferable service fees,
which shall be allocated one-half to the Electric Fund and one-half to the
Water Fund prior to service connection. The fees shall be applied when the
account is setup, transferred to a new name, or reconnected for non-payment.
The fees may include an additional charge for any after-hour service for
connection or reconnection of services. The fees shall be set in the rate
ordinances of the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-404)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 50.02  COLLECTION OF UTILITY BILL.



   Charges for water, sewer, and electric service shall be billed jointly
on a monthly basis. The City Administrator shall read or cause to be read the
water and electric meters by the twenty-fifth day of each month. Utility
bills shall be mailed on the eighth day of each month, and shall be due and
payable upon receipt. Bills not paid by the twentieth day of each month shall
be deemed to be delinquent and shall be assessed a service fee as set forth
in the rate ordinances of the city. Failure to receive a properly rendered
bill will not entitle the customer relief from any penalties for late payment
nor disconnection from service. Upon being deemed to be delinquent, as herein
defined, the city may discontinue water and/or electric service pursuant to
§ 50.03. Once discontinued, service shall not be recommenced except upon
payment in full of all delinquent charges and upon further payment of a
reconnection fee in the amount as specified in the rate ordinances of the
city. The city may also take any action authorized by law to effect
collection of the delinquent charges.



(Neb. RS 17-542)  (Prior Code, § 3-401)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 50.03  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; NOTICE, PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The city shall have the right to discontinue services and
remove its properties if the charges for the services are not paid within
seven days after the date that they become delinquent. Before any
termination, the city shall first give notice by first class mail or in
person to any domestic subscriber whose service is proposed to be terminated.
If notice is given by first class mail, the mail shall be conspicuously
marked as to its importance. Service shall not be discontinued for at least
seven days, weekends and holidays excluded. As to any subscriber who has
previously been identified as a welfare recipient to the utility by the
Department of Social Services, the notice shall be by certified mail and
notice of the proposed termination shall be given to the Department of Social
Services.



   (B)   The notice shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The reason for the proposed disconnection;



      (2)   A statement of the intention to disconnect unless the
domestic subscriber either pays the bill or reaches an agreement with the
city regarding payment of the bill;



      (3)   The date upon which service will be disconnected if the
domestic subscriber does not take appropriate action;



      (4)   The name, address, and telephone number of the employee
or department to whom the domestic subscriber may address an inquiry or
complaint;



      (5)   The domestic subscriber's right, prior to the
disconnection date, to request a conference regarding any dispute over the
proposed disconnection;



      (6)   A statement that the city may not disconnect service
pending the conclusion of the conference;



      (7)   A statement to the effect that disconnection may be
postponed or prevented upon presentation of a duly licensed physician's
certificate, which shall certify that the domestic subscriber, or resident
within the subscriber's household, has an existing illness or handicap which
would cause the subscriber or resident to suffer an immediate and serious
health hazard by the disconnection of the utility's service to that
household. The certificate shall be filed with the city within five days of
receiving notice under this section and will prevent the disconnection of the
city's services for a period of 30 days from the filing. Only one
postponement of disconnection shall be allowed under this division for each
incidence of non-payment of any due account;



      (8)   The cost that will be borne by the domestic subscriber
for restoration of service;



      (9)   A statement that the domestic subscriber may arrange
with the city for an installment payment plan;



      (10)   A statement to the effect that domestic subscribers who
are welfare recipients may qualify for assistance in payment of their utility
bill, and that they should contact their caseworker in that regard; and



      (11)   Any additional information not inconsistent with this
section which has received prior approval from the City Council.



   (C)   A domestic subscriber may dispute the proposed discontinuance
of service by notifying the city with a written statement that sets forth the
reasons for the dispute and the relief requested. If a statement has been
made by the subscriber, a conference shall be held before the city may
discontinue services.



   (D)   The procedures adopted by the City Council for resolving
utility bills, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk, are hereby incorporated by reference in addition to any amendments
thereto and are made a part hereof as though set out in full.



   (E)   This section shall not apply to any disconnections or
interruptions of services made necessary by the city for reasons of repair or
maintenance or to protect the health or safety of the domestic subscriber or
of the general public.



(Neb. RS 70-1601 et seq.)  (Prior Code, § 3-402)  (Ord. 800, passed
10-18-2005)



§ 50.04  ARREARS AS LIEN UPON PROPERTY.



   In addition to all other remedies, if a customer shall for any reason
remain indebted to the city for utilities service furnished, the amount due,
together with any rents and charges in arrears, shall be considered a
delinquent utility rent which is hereby declared to be a lien upon the real
estate for which the service was furnished. The City Clerk shall notify in
writing, or cause to be notified in writing, all owners of premises or their
agents whenever their tenants or lessees are 60 days or more delinquent in
the payment of the utilities rent. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to
report to the City Council a list of all unpaid accounts due for utilities
service, together with a description of the premises served. The report shall
be examined, and if approved by the City Council, shall be certified by the
City Clerk to the County Clerk to be collected as a special tax in the manner
provided by law.



(Neb. RS 17-538, 17-925.01, 18-503)  (Prior Code, § 3-405)  (Ord. 800,
passed 10-18-2005)



§ 50.05  DIVERSION OF SERVICES.



   (A)   The city may bring a civil action for damages against any
person who commits, authorizes, solicits, aids, abets, or attempts:



      (1)   Bypassing;



      (2)   Tampering; or



      (3)   Unauthorized metering when the act results in damages to
a city utility.



   (B)   The city may bring a civil action for damages pursuant to this
section against any person receiving the benefit of utility service through
means of bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering.



(Prior Code, § 3-403)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   In any civil action brought pursuant to this chapter, the city
shall be entitled, upon proof of willful or intentional bypassing, tampering,
or unauthorized metering, to recover as damages:



      (1)   The amount of actual damage or loss if the amount of the
damage or loss is susceptible of reasonable calculation; or



      (2)   Liquidated damages of $750 if the amount of actual
damage or loss is not susceptible of reasonable calculation.



   (B)   In addition to damage or loss under division (A)(1) or (2)
above, the city may recover all reasonable expenses and costs incurred on
account of the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering including, but
not limited to, disconnection, reconnection, service calls, equipment, costs
of the suit, and reasonable attorneys' fees in cases within the scope of Neb.
RS 25-1801.



   (C)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a tenant or
occupant at any premises where bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering
is proven to exist caused or had knowledge of the bypassing, tampering, or
unauthorized metering if the tenant or occupant:



      (1)   Had access to the part of the utility supply system on
the premises where the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering is
proven to exist; and



      (2)   Was responsible or partially responsible for payment,
either directly or indirectly, to the utility or to any other person for
utility services to the premises.



   (D)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a customer at any
premises where bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering is proven to
exist caused or had knowledge of the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized
metering if the customer controlled access to the part of the utility supply
system on the premises where the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized
metering was proven to exist.



   (E)   The remedies provided by this section shall be deemed to be
supplemental and additional to powers conferred by existing laws, and the
remedies provided in this section are in addition to, and not in limitation
of, any other civil or criminal statutory or common law remedies.



(Prior Code, § 3-403)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



CHAPTER 51:  GARBAGE



Section



General Provisions



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Collection and disposal



   51.03   Franchise required; exception; non-transferable; revocation



   51.04   Containers required



   51.05   Service; billing



   51.06   Hazardous waste; special handling



   51.07   Additional regulations



   51.08   Service charge; delinquency; collection



   51.09   Nuisance abatement



Refuse Dumpsters



   51.20   Definitions



   51.21   License requirements



   51.22   Rules



   51.23   Dumpsters in the public right-of-way



   51.24   Denial of dumpster use



   51.25   Violation of this subchapter



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE.  Rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of
animal, fruit, or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attend
the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl,
fruit, or vegetable.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Any waste designated or defined as a hazardous waste
by N.A.C. Title 128 - Rules and Regulations Governing Hazardous Waste
Management in Nebraska, which for purposes or general definition is a SOLID
WASTE which, because of quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or
infectious characteristics may:



      (1)   Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in
mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible, or incapacitating
reversible illness; or



      (2)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   REFUSE.  Putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator
residue, street cleanings, industrial wastes, and other  wastes.



   RUBBISH.  Non-putrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin
cans, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind that will be a
detriment to the public health and safety.



   SOLID WASTE.  Any garbage, refuse, or sludge from a waste treatment
plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility and
other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained
gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, and mining
operations, and from community activities.



   YARD WASTE.  Grass and leaves.



(Prior Code, § 4-201)



§ 51.02  COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.



   The city shall provide or contract for the collection and disposal of
nonhazardous solid waste from residential, commercial, institutional, and
governmental premises within its solid waste jurisdiction area. The wastes
shall be collected on a regularly scheduled basis and shall be disposed of
only in a licensed landfill facility approved by the City Council and which
meets all state and federal criteria. The City Council shall approve and is
authorized to contract with any licensed landfill facility for these purposes.



(Neb. RS 13-2020)  (Prior Code, § 4-202)



§ 51.03  FRANCHISE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION; NON-TRANSFERABLE; REVOCATION.



   (A)   The city may contract with independent contractors to provide
for the collection and disposal of nonhazardous solid waste. Any contractor
shall enter into a written agreement with the city, which agreement shall
provide for the rates to be charged and other terms and conditions as may be
required by the City Council. All franchises issued pursuant to this section
shall be nonexclusive and be for a period of three years.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to haul for hire, other
than a person granted a franchise pursuant to division (A) of this section,
any solid waste, garbage, refuse, or rubbish within the city or away from the
city; provided, that this section shall not apply to any person who elects to
haul, transport, and dispose of his or her own solid waste, garbage, refuse,
or rubbish, who may do so in accordance with the rules and regulations
established by the City Council and only at a licensed landfill facility
approved by the City Council. This section shall not be construed to prevent
any person from collecting and hauling material from the city to be recycled.



   (C)   Any franchise granted pursuant to this section shall not be
deemed a property right and may not be transferred to any person. Any sale of
a solid waste collection and disposal business may not transfer any franchise
issued pursuant to this section. Any person desiring to obtain a franchise
must make application to the City Council.



   (D)   The City Council may, for cause, revoke a franchise after
providing the franchisee with notice of the charges therefore and after a
public hearing thereon by the City Council.



(Neb. RS 13-2020)  (Prior Code, § 4-203)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.04  CONTAINERS REQUIRED.



   The owner or occupant of every residential, commercial, industrial, and
governmental building or premises serviced by the city solid waste collection
and disposal service shall use only enclosed containers for the keeping and
storage for collection of solid waste, garbage, refuse, or rubbish, which
containers are provided by the franchisees.



(Neb. RS 13-2020)  (Prior Code, § 4-204)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.05  SERVICE; BILLING.



   (A)   Every residential, commercial, institutional, and governmental
building or premises in city solid waste jurisdiction area which is served by
the city electrical system shall be served by the solid waste collection and
disposal service system offered by the city, and shall be subject to the
assessment and payment of charges for the service as set from time to time by
the City Council. The city may also agree to provide the service to persons
who do not live within the corporate limits of the city but who are served by
the city electrical system or who are within such close distance to the
corporate limits of the city as to make the service economical and practical
for the city and its contracted haulers.



   (B)   Charges for solid waste disposal services shall be billed and
collected in the same manner as utility bills, pursuant to § 50.02.



(Neb. RS 13-2027)  (Prior Code, § 4-205)



§ 51.06  HAZARDOUS WASTE; SPECIAL HANDLING.



   Any person, firm, or corporation within the city solid waste
jurisdiction area who generates or creates hazardous waste or waste requiring
special handling or disposal shall be responsible for the transportation and
disposal of the same. All handling and disposal shall in all respects comply
with state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to the specific type
of waste generated.



(Neb. RS 13-2020, 13-2023, 13-2026)  (Prior Code, § 4-206)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 51.07  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.



   The City Council may, from time to time, make and adopt by ordinance
additional rules and regulations governing the use, operation, and control of
the solid waste collection and disposal system and the regulation of solid
waste with the city solid waste jurisdiction area as it may deem necessary to
promote the efficient operation and management of the system and to protect
the environment and the health, safety, and welfare of all persons within the
city solid waste jurisdiction area.



(Neb. RS 13-2020, 13-2023, 13-2026)  (Prior Code, § 4-207)



§ 51.08  SERVICE CHARGE; DELINQUENCY; COLLECTION.



   If the charges for solid waste collection and disposal service
established pursuant to § 51.03 are not paid when due, the sum may be
recovered by the city in a civil action or, following notice by regular
United States mail to the last-known address of the property owner of record
and an opportunity for a hearing, may be certified by the City Council to the
County Treasurer and assessed against the premises served and collected or
returned in the same manner as other taxes are certified, assessed,
collected, and returned.



(Neb. RS 13-2020)  (Prior Code, § 4-208)



§ 51.09  NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful, and declared to be a nuisance, for any person to
keep in, on, or about any dwelling, building, or premise, or any other place
within the city solid waste jurisdiction area, decayed vegetable or animal
substance, garbage, or refuse matter of any kind that may be injurious to the
public health or offensive to the residents of the city unless the same is
kept in approved receptacles as nearly airtight as may be practical. It shall
be unlawful, and declared to be a nuisance, to throw or sweep into the
streets, alleys, parks, or other public grounds, any dirt, paper, nails,
pieces of glass, garbage, refuse, or rubbish of any kind. No person shall
permit garbage, refuse, or rubbish to collect and all persons shall remove
the same within 24 hours after being notified to do so by the Board of Health.



(Neb. RS 18-1720)  (Prior Code, § 4-209)  Penalty, see § 10.99



REFUSE DUMPSTERS



§ 51.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   REFUSE DUMPSTER or DUMPSTER.  Any portable container used or designed
for collection of, transportation of, or disposal of refuse, waste,
construction/demolition materials, or the like. REFUSE DUMPSTER shall
include, but is not limited to, roll off boxes or containers, collection
bins, tubs, and portable storage containers. All containers meeting the
definition shall be referred to as DUMPSTER in this subchapter.



(Ord. 845, passed 5-5-2009)



§ 51.21  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   Any company owning and emptying the dumpster within city limits must be
the holder of a valid franchise agreement with the city.



(Ord. 845, passed 5-5-2009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.22  RULES.



   (A)   A dumpster must be well maintained and in good working
condition, displaying the name or logo and telephone number of the owner of
the dumpster, and be suitably supported at each contact point to prevent
damage to paved surfaces.



   (B)   A dumpster must be covered when materials inside are easily
airborne, pose a hazard, emit an odor, or are otherwise offensive.



   (C)   A dumpster must have all debris placed inside the dumpster;
not along side or on top of the dumpster.



   (D)   A dumpster is required to be emptied when full. For the
purpose of this subchapter, FULL is defined as when the contents of the
dumpster reach an average level of one foot below the top edge of the
dumpster sides. Any dumpster which has reached the full status, and is not
emptied within seven calendar days shall be considered in violation of this
subchapter.



   (E)   Cleaning dumpsters on the street or sidewalk is not permitted.



(Ord. 845, passed 5-5-2009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.23  DUMPSTERS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   A dumpster shall not be placed on public right-of-way, nor
block access to or use of a sidewalk, street or alley unless a permit has
been issued by the city. A dumpster that is used on an on-going basis as part
of normal solid waste operations and contains less than a five cubic yards,
shall be exempt from this subchapter; provided the dumpster creates no safety
issues to passers-by. The City Administrator shall have discretion to
detennine whether or not a dumpster meets the criteria of this section.



   (B)   Dumpster permit fees shall be set by resolution of the City
Council under the fees resolution.



   (C)   The permit issued by the city shall contain at a minimum the
following provisions:



      (1)   All permits will be issued by the Chief of Police or his
or her designee. A permit will expire after of ten days from the date of
issuance. At no time shall a dumpster remain on a street right-of-way for
more than ten days except as allowed under division (C)(4) below.



      (2)   Dumpster placed in the public right-of-way must have a
flasher or reflector on the outside corner facing traffic at all times. Where
traffic may approach from either side, the dumpster must have a flasher or
reflector on the outside corner on both sides. Type I or Type II barricades
may be used as an alternate to flashers or reflectors. All flashers,
reflectors and barricades shall conform to the standards of the latest
addition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.



      (3)   Dumpsters shall not block a public sidewalk or be placed
in a location that restricts the sight lines of an intersection. Sight lines
will be determined by the City Services Director at the request of the Chief
of Police or his or her designee.



      (4)   In circumstances where the use of a dumpster is required
for more than ten days, a dumpster may be placed in the public right-of-way
for construction, remodeling, or demolition projects may exceed the ten day
rule with written permission from the City Administrator. However, it shall
be removed immediately upon the completion of the project. No dumpster shall
be placed in the public right-of-way for more than 30 days without approval
from the City Council. The placement for more than ten days shall not be for
convenience, but for demonstrated necessity.



      (5)   No dumpster shall be placed on streets, sides of streets
or areas designated as "No Parking." Public parking lots or parks shall also
require a permit unless at the request of the city.



      (6)   The owner and/or the user of a dumpster on a public
right-of-way is/are responsible for any public property, street, curb and
gutter, or public infrastructure damage.



      (7)   No dumpster shall be placed in the public right-of-way
during the winter snow season, defined for this purpose of this subchapter as
the period from November 1 to the next following April 1 without written
approval from the City Administrator.



      (8)   The owner of the dumpster shall, prior to receipt of the
permit for placement on public right-of-way, provide to the Chief of Police,
a certificate of insurance showing coverage of a minimum of $1,000,000 for
any claims involving the dumpster, which certificate shows the city as an
additional insured.



(Ord. 845, passed 5-5-2009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.24  DENIAL OF DUMPSTER USE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police and/or his or her designee may deny the
use of dumpsters in the public right-of-way if the dumpster is too wide to
allow public safety vehicles through, or due to any other traffic concerns.



   (B)   The Chief of Police and/or his or her designee may deny the
use of dumpster to protect public health or safety concerns.



   (C)   Any appeal to the denial of a permit may be first brought to
the attention of the City Administrator. If further denied, the applicant may
bring the matter before the City Council.



(Ord. 845, passed 5-5-2009)



§ 51.25  VIOLATION OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.



   Any violation of this subchapter is a misdemeanor.



   (A)   The city may remove or have a container removed from the
public right-of-way, if the dumpster is in violation of this subchapter.



   (B)   The owner of the dumpster, (or if the owner cannot be
determined, the person) placing it in the public right-of-way shall pay all
costs, fees, penalties, or other expenses incurred by the city in removal,
storage fees, and disposal of any container and its contents.



   (C)   If the dumpster is not claimed within 30 days by its owner or
person responsible for placing it in the public right-of-way, it may be
disposed of as abandoned property, but disposal shall not diminish the
responsibility of the owner or the person responsible for placing the
container in the public right-of-way to pay all amounts due.



   (D)   The city shall not release a dumpster from storage until all
amounts due under this section have been paid.



(Ord. 845, passed 5-5-2009)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section



General Provisions



   52.001   Definitions



   52.002   Operation and funding



   52.003   Fluoride in water system prohibited



Service



   52.015   Application for service



   52.016   Water contract



   52.017   Installation expense



   52.018   Repairs and maintenance



   52.019   Restrictions on use; unlawful to divert



Connections



   52.030   Hook-up to system mandatory



   52.031   Access for inspection



   52.032   Backflow prevention device required



   52.033   Unsafe connection to system



Wellhead Protection



   52.045   Purpose



   52.046   Definition



   52.047   Minimum distances from well



   52.048   Exception to distance limits; conditions



   52.049   Existing wells



   52.050   Water conservation, drought, emergency, and shortage
contingency plan



Fees and Rates



   52.060   Rates and collection



   52.061   Minimum rates



Unlawful Acts



   52.075   Fire hydrants



   52.076   Pollution



   52.077   Destruction of property



 



   52.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MAIN.  Any pipe, other than a supply or service pipe, that is used for
the purpose of carrying water to, and dispersing the same in, the city.



   SEPARATE PREMISE.  More than one consumer procuring water from the
same service or supply pipe. The second premise may be a separate dwelling,
apartment, building, or structure used for a separate business.



   SERVICE PIPE.  Any pipe extending from the shut-off, stop box, or curb
cock at or near the lot line to and beyond the property line of the consumer
to the location on the premise where the water is to be dispersed.



   SUPPLY PIPE.  Any pipe tapped into a main and extending from there to
a point at or near the lot line of the consumer's premise where the shut-off,
stop box, or curb cock is located.



(Prior Code, § 3-102)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 52.002  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and operates the City Water Department through the City
Services Director, who is responsible directly to the City Administrator. The
City Council, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management,
and maintenance of the City Water Department may each year levy a tax not
exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the actual valuation
of all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits that is
subject to taxation. The revenue from the tax shall be known as the Water
Fund and shall remain in the custody of the City Treasurer. The City
Administrator shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the
sanitary and efficient management of the Water Department subject to the
supervision and review of the City Council. The City Council shall set the
rates to be charged for services rendered by ordinance and shall file a copy
of the rates in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection at any
reasonable time.



(Neb. RS 17-531, 17-534, 19-1305)  (Prior Code, § 3-101)  (Ord. 776,
passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 52.003  FLUORIDE IN WATER SYSTEM PROHIBITED.



   Fluoride shall not be added to the water system of the city.



(Ord. 840, passed 1-6-2009)



SERVICE



§ 52.015  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.



   Every person or persons desiring a supply of water must make
application therefor to the City Administrator. The City Administrator may
require any applicant to make a service deposit in the amount as he or she
deems necessary subject to the review of the City Council. Water may not be
supplied to any house or private service pipe except upon the order of the
City Administrator. The Department shall not supply to any person outside the
corporate limits water service without special permission from the City
Council; provided, the entire cost of laying mains, service pipe, and supply
pipe shall be paid by the consumer. Nothing herein shall be construed to
obligate the city to provide water service to nonresidents.



(Neb. RS 17-537, 19-2701)  (Prior Code, § 3-103)  (Ord. 800, passed
10-18-2005)



§ 52.016  WATER CONTRACT.



   (A)   The city, through its Water Department, shall furnish water to
persons within its corporate limits whose premises abut a street or alley in
which a commercial main now is or may hereafter be laid. The city may furnish
water to persons within its corporate limits whose premises do not abut a
street or alley in which  a city commercial main is now or may hereafter be
laid and may also furnish water to persons whose premises are situated
outside the corporate limits of the city, as and when, according to law, the
City Council may see fit to do so. The rules, regulations, and water rates
hereinafter named in this chapter shall be considered a part of every
application hereafter made for water service and shall be considered a part
of the contract between every consumer now or hereafter served. Without
further formality, the making of application on the part of any applicant or
the use or consumption of water service by present consumers thereof and the
furnishing of water service to the consumer shall constitute a contract
between the consumer and the city, to which contract both parties are bound.
If the consumer shall violate any of the provisions of the contract or any
reasonable rules and regulations that the City Council may hereafter adopt,
the City Administrator, or his or her agent, may cut off or disconnect the
water service from the building or premise or place of the violation. No
further connection for water service to the building, premise, or place shall
again be made except by order of the Administrator or his or her agent.



(Prior Code, § 3-104)



   (B)   Contracts for water service are not transferable. Any person
wishing to change from one location to another shall make a new application
and sign a new contract. If any consumer shall move from the premise where
service is furnished, or if the premise is destroyed by fire or other
casualty, he or she shall at once inform the City Services Director who shall
cause the water service to be shut off at the premise. If the consumer should
fail to give notice, he or she shall be charged for all water used on the
premise until the City Services Director is otherwise advised of the
circumstances.



(Neb. RS 17-537)



(Prior Code, § 3-114)  (Ord. 776, passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 800, passed
10-18-2005)



§ 52.017  INSTALLATION EXPENSE.



   The expense of providing water service or replacement of water service
from the main to the lot line shall be paid by the consumer and installed by
the city. The consumer shall then also pay the cost of installation and pipe
from the lot line to the place of dispersement. In the event the consumer
receiving new water service is a commercial class customer, the city shall
also supply and install the required water meter. The consumer shall be
required to pay the expense of furnishing and installing pipe, trenching, and
the necessary labor to bring water service from the lot line to the place of
dispersement.



(Neb. RS 17-542)  (Prior Code, § 3-105)  (Ord. 776, passed 8-20-2002; Ord.
800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 52.018  REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.



   The city shall repair all supply pipe between the commercial main and
the stop box. The customer, at his or her own expense, shall replace and keep
in repair all service pipe from the stop box to the place of dispersement.
When leaks occur in service pipes, the City Services Director shall shut off
water service until the leak is repaired at the expense of the customer to
the satisfaction of the City Services Director. All water meters shall be
kept in repair by the city at the expense of the city. When meters are worn
out, they shall be replaced and reset by the city at the expense of the city;
provided, that if the customer permits or allows a water meter to be damaged,
injured, or destroyed through his or her own recklessness, carelessness, or
neglect so that the meter must be repaired or replaced, the City
Administrator shall bill and collect from the customer the cost of the meter
repair or replacement in the same manner as water rent is collected.
Permitting a water meter to be damaged or destroyed by freezing shall always
be considered negligence on the part of the customer. All meters shall be
tested at the customer's request at the expense of the customer any
reasonable number of times; provided, that if the test shows the water meter
to be running 2% or more fast, the expense of the test shall be borne by the
city. The city reserves the right to test any water service meter at any
time, and if the meter is found to be beyond repair, the city shall always
have the right to place a new meter on the customer's water service fixtures
at city expense. Should a consumer's meter fail to register properly, the
customer shall be charged for water during the time the meter is out of
repair on the basis of the monthly consumption during the same month of the
preceding year; provided, that if no basis for comparison exists, the
customer shall be charged the amount as may be reasonably fixed by the City
Administrator. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any water
meter, or by any means or device to divert water from the service pipe so
that the same shall not pass through the meter, or while passing through the
meter, to cause the same to register inaccurately.



(Neb. RS 17-537)  (Prior Code, § 3-106)  (Ord. 776, passed 8-20-2002; Ord.
800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 52.019  RESTRICTIONS ON USE; UNLAWFUL TO DIVERT.



   (A)   The City Council or the City Administrator may order a
reduction in the use of water or shut off the water on any premise in the
event of a water shortage due to fire or other good and sufficient cause. The
city shall not be liable for any damages caused by shutting off the supply of
water of any consumer while the system, or any part thereof, is undergoing
repairs or when there is a shortage of water due to circumstances over which
the city has no control.



(Prior Code, § 3-110)



   (B)   No consumer shall supply water to other families, or allow
them to take water from his or her premise, nor after water is supplied into
a building shall any person make or employ a plumber or other person to make
a tap or connection with the pipe upon the premise for alteration, extension,
or attachment without the written permission of the City Administrator. It
shall further be unlawful for any person to tamper with any water meter or by
means of any contrivance or device to divert the water from the service pipe
so that the water will not pass through the meter or while passing through
the meter to cause the meter to register inaccurately.



(Prior Code, § 3-109)



(Neb. RS 17-537)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



CONNECTIONS



§ 52.030  HOOK-UP TO SYSTEM MANDATORY.



   All persons whose property abuts a water main that is now or may
hereafter be laid shall be required, upon notice by the City Council, to
hook-up the city water system.



(Neb. RS 17-539)  (Prior Code, § 3-113)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 52.031  ACCESS FOR INSPECTION.



   The City Services Director, or his or her duly authorized agents, shall
have free access, at any reasonable time, to all parts of each premise and
building to, or in which, water is delivered for the purpose of examining the
pipes, fixtures, and other portions of the system to ascertain whether there
is any disrepair or unnecessary waste of water.



(Neb. RS 17-537)  (Prior Code, § 3-115)  (Ord. 776, passed 8-20-2002; Ord.
800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 52.032  BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE REQUIRED.



   (A)   A customer of the City Water Department may be required by the
City Services Director to install and maintain a properly located backflow
prevention device at his or her expense appropriate to the potential hazards
set forth in Title 179, State Department of Health, and approved by the City
Services Director.



   (B)   The customer shall make application to the City Services
Director to install a required  backflow prevention device on a form
provided by the city. The application shall contain at a minimum the name and
address of the applicant, the potential hazard, the type of protection
required, and the type of backflow device to be installed, including brand
and model number.



   (C)   The City Services Director shall approve or disapprove the
application based on his or her opinion of whether the installation will
protect the city water distribution system from potential backflow and
back-siphonage hazards.



   (D)   The installation of the device shall be subject to all other
sections of this code of ordinances dealing with installation of plumbing,
including the use of a plumber licensed by the city if applicable.



   (E)   The customer shall also certify to the city at least one time
annually that the backflow prevention device, except those backflow
prevention devices attached to a lawn sprinkler system, has been tested by a
State Department of Health Grade VI Certified Water Operator if the device is
equipped with a test port. The certification shall be made on a form
available at the office of the City Clerk. Failure to certify the devices may
result in immediate termination of service at the discretion of the City
Services Director.



   (F)   Customers with lawn sprinklers are not required to inspect the
backflow prevention devices that attach to the lawn sprinkler system.



   (G)   Any decision of the City Services Director may be appealed to
the City Council.



   (H)   The City Services Director for purposes of this section shall
mean the duly acting City Services Director of the city, or his or her
authorized representative.



(Prior Code, § 3-117)  (Ord. 752, passed 1-16-2001; Ord. 800, passed
10-18-2005)



§ 52.033  UNSAFE CONNECTION TO SYSTEM.



   (A)   No customer or other person shall cause, allow, or create any
physical connection between the city water distribution system and any pipes,
pumps, hydrants, tanks, steam condensate returns, engine jackets, heat
exchangers, other water supplies, or any other connection whereby potentially
unsafe or contaminating materials may be discharged or drawn into the city
water distribution system.



   (B)   At least one time every five years, customers or the city
water distribution and supply system shall be required to assess and report
potential backflow and back-siphonage hazards to the city on a form supplied
by the city to the customer. The customer shall take any steps necessary for
protection of public health and safety as determined by the City Services
Director.



(Prior Code, § 3-118)  (Ord. 776, passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 800, passed
10-18-2005)



WELLHEAD PROTECTION



§ 52.045  PURPOSE.



   The intent of this subchapter is to establish control by the city over
the location of future potential sources of contamination within the
proximity of the city's drinking water system, so as to prevent or minimize
any hazard to the safety of the city's drinking water.



(Prior Code, § 4-401)



§ 52.046  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   WATER WELL.  Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed,
driven, dug, jetted, or otherwise constructed for the purpose of exploring
for ground water, monitoring ground water, utilizing the geothermal
properties of the ground, or extracting water from or injecting water into
the underground water reservoir. WATER WELL shall not include any excavation
made for obtaining or prospecting for oil, natural gas, minerals, or products
mined or quarried or inserting media to repressure oil or natural gas bearing
formations.



(Prior Code, § 4-402)



§ 52.047  MINIMUM DISTANCES FROM WELL.



   It shall be unlawful to place, maintain, construct, or replace any of
the following structures or conduct any of the following activities within
the distance specified below from an existing municipal water well:



 

Category
 
Distance




Water well
 
1,000 feet


Sewage lagoon
 
1,000 feet


Cesspool
 
500 feet


Dump
 
500 feet


Feedlot or feedlot runoff
 
500 feet


Corral
 
500 feet


Chemical storage
 
500 feet


Petroleum storage
 
500 feet


Pit toilet
 
500 feet


Sanitary landfill
 
500 feet


Septic tank
 
500 feet


Sewage treatment plant
 
500 feet


Sewage wet well
 
500 feet


Absorption or disposal field for waste
 
500 feet




 



(Prior Code, § 4-403)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.048  EXCEPTION TO DISTANCE LIMITS; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   The City Council may consider allowing placement of water
wells, as defined by state regulations governing public water supply systems
(Title 179, N.A.C. 2) and state regulations governing water well
construction, pump installation, and water well abandonment standards (Title
178, N.A.C. 12) as amended from time to time, closer to a city water well
than the limitations set forth in § 52.047.



   (B)   Closer placement shall be allowed only under the following
conditions:



      (1)   (a)   An application must first be filed with the
city showing the type of water well to be installed, the materials used, the
operation of the proposed unit, and the person responsible for the actual
installation of the water well. Preference, for approval, will be given to
installations that do not disturb any water bearing strata.



         (b)   The city shall refer the application to its
engineer for evaluation and report. The estimated cost of the engineer's fees
must be paid at the time of filing the application. Any additional costs,
which are reasonably incurred by the engineer in making their examination and
report, shall be paid by the applicant, in addition to any previously paid
estimated costs.



      (2)   (a)   The City Council shall consider the engineer's
report and any additional information submitted by the applicant. In reaching
its decision on whether to allow the placement of a water well, as above
defined, the City Council must act to prevent all sources of possible or
likely water contamination.



         (b)   If the City Council approves the installation, it
shall submit the application, together with the engineer's report, to the
State Department of Health for final approval or denial.



         (c)   No installation shall be made without the approval
of both the City Council and the State Department of Health.



(Prior Code, § 4-404)



§ 52.049  EXISTING WELLS.



   Water wells in existence and use, as of the effective date of this
subchapter, shall continue to be permitted unless the continued existence or
use presents a hazard to the quality or quantity of the drinking water
available for public use to the city's drinking water. The owner of any water
well shall have the burden of establishing the existence and use of the well
at the time of the effective date of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-405)



§ 52.050  WATER CONSERVATION, DROUGHT, EMERGENCY, AND SHORTAGE CONTINGENCY
PLAN.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to adopt a plan for
the declaration of a water supply watch, warning or emergency and the
implementation of voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures
throughout the city in the event such a watch, warning or emergency is
declared. Said plan shall be named the City of Gothenburg Water Management
Plan.



   (B)   Class of uses of water established. The following classes of
water use are hereby established for users of water on the municipal water
system:



      (1)   Class I. Domestic usage. Water necessary only to sustain
human life and the lives of domestic pets, and to maintain standards of
hygiene and sanitation.



      (2)   Class II. Commercial, industrial or agricultural
purpose. Water used for commercial, industrial or agricultural purposes.
However, water actually necessary to maintain the health and personal hygiene
of bona fide employees while such employees are engaged in the performance of
their duties at their place of employment is exempt from this classification.



      (3)   Class III. Non-essential purpose. Water used for outdoor
watering; either public or private. Said use shall be for gardens, lawns,
trees, shrubs, plants, parks, playing fields, swimming pools or other
recreational areas; or the washing of motor vehicles, boats, trailers,
sidewalks, driveways, the exterior of any building or structure; or any other
use similar in nature.



   (C)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CONSUMER.  The customer of record using water for any purpose
from the city distribution system and for which either a regular charge is
made or, in the case of coin sales, a cash charge is made at the site of
delivery.



      DRAWDOWN.  The distance between the static water level and the
pumping water level.



      PLAN.  Refers to the City of Gothenburg Water Management Plan.



      PUMPING WATER LEVEL.  The level of water in a well when the pump
is pumping.



      SHORTAGE.  The inability of the municipal water system to
provide enough water to all customers for basic living needs, and adequate
firefighting reserves.



      STATIC WATER LEVEL.  The level of water in a well when the pump
is not pumping.



      TRIGGERS. Significant events which indicate the implementation of
the different stages of this plan.



      WASTE OF WATER.  Includes but is not limited to:



         (a)   Permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch,
or other surface drain; or



         (b)   Failure to repair a controllable leak of water due
to defective plumbing; or



         (c)   Any other use as determined by the City
Administrator as a waste.



      WATER.  Any water supplied by the city through the Municipal
Water System.



      WATER SYSTEM CAPACITY. For the purposes of this plan, is
determined by aggregate production capacity of all wells available in gallons
per minute times 60 minutes in an hour times 24 hours per day.



      WATER SYSTEM DEMAND.  Total daily aggregate consumption
calculated by subtracting the previous day reading for each well from the
current day reading for each well.



   (D)   Water plan established. In order to assure the continued
supply of safe drinking water to the citizens of the city, the City Council
adopts the following plan addressing conservation, drought, emergency, and
shortage contingencies. The plan is based upon demand on the system and
implements a series of stages depending upon the severity of the demand.



      (1)   Normal system.  There are no restrictions on water
usage. However, the public is asked to adhere to a voluntary restriction on
Class III watering from 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 from June 1 through August 31 of
each respective year.



      (2)   Stage 1: Water Watch.



         (a)   Triggers. This stage may be triggered by any one
of the following conditions:



            1.   When the calculated water system demand
equals 60% of the calculated water system capacity.



            2.   When the drawdown of the wells is more than
normal for that time of year as determined by the water operator.



            3.   When the system storage reservoir cannot be
filled to 100% of capacity by 5:00 a.m. each morning.



            4.   Any other issue in the Municipal Water System
in which it is deemed prudent by the city to trigger Stage 1.



         (b)   Goals. The goals of this stage are to heighten
awareness of the public regarding water conditions and to maintain the
integrity of the water supply system and may reduce overall weekly
consumption by 7%.



         (c)   Education actions.



            1.   The city may make occasional news releases to
the local media, as well as posting at City Hall, describing present
conditions and indicating the regulatory action.



            2.   The triggers necessitating the Stage 1: Water
Watch may also be made available to the news media along with an explanation
of terms.



         (d)   Management action.



            1.   The city will ascertain that each well is
operating at peak efficiency.



            2.   Leaks detected will be repaired within 48
hours.



            3.   The city shall curtail weekly use of Class
III uses by 7%.



         (e)   Regulatory action. The public shall be asked to
voluntarily reduce the use of water as defined in Class III.



         (f)   Declaration of a Water Watch. Whenever the City
Administrator finds that conditions exist as described in the plan under
Stage 1, the City Administrator shall declare a Stage 1: Water Watch and
implement the steps outlined under this section. The implementation declaring
the existence and end of a Stage 1 shall be effective upon issuing of news
releases and posting at City Hall.



      (3)   Stage 2: Water Warning.



         (a)   Triggers. This stage is triggered by any one of
the following conditions:



            1.   When the calculated water system demand
equals 70% of the calculated water system capacity.



            2.   When the drawdown of the wells increases
significantly over and above the level determined in Stage 1.



            3.   When the system storage reservoir cannot be
filled to 90% of capacity by 5:00 a.m. each morning.



            4.   Any other issue in the Municipal Water System
in which it is deemed prudent by the city to trigger Stage 2.



         (b)   Goals. The goal of this stage is to reduce overall
weekly consumption by 15%.



         (c)   Education actions.



            1.   The city may make news releases to the local
media and by posting, describing present conditions and projecting the
outlook for the coming week.



            2.   The triggers necessitating the Stage 2 may
also be made available to the public through news releases and posting at
city hall along with an explanation of terms.



            3.   Water conservation articles may be provided
to the local newspaper and posted at City Hall.



         (d)   Management actions.



            1.   The city will continue to monitor water
supplies on a daily basis.



            2.   Leaks shall be repaired within 48 hours or a
violation notice shall be issued.



            3.   The city shall curtail weekly use of Class
III by 15%.



            4.   The city may terminate its usage of water
classified in Class II and Class III.



         (e)   Regulation action. Water classified as Class III
shall be terminated except as follows:



            1.   A staggered lawn watering system shall be
imposed on city residents. The City Administrator shall determine the lawn
watering schedule at the time of the declaration.



            2.   Class III use, including lawn watering
allowed under the previous section shall be restricted to before 11:00 a.m.
and after 7:00 p.m. of each day.



         (f)   Declaration of a Water Warning. Whenever the City
Administrator finds that conditions exist as described in the plan under
Stage 2, the City Administrator shall declare a Stage 2: Water Warning, and
implement the steps outlined under this section. The implementation declaring
the existence and end of a Stage 2: Water Warning shall be effective upon a
news release and posting at City Hall.



      (4)   Stage 3: Water Emergency.



         (a)   Triggers. This stage is triggered by any one of
the following conditions:



            1.   When the calculated water system demand
equals 80% of the calculated water system capacity.



            2.   When the drawdown of the wells increases
significantly over and above the level determined in Stage 2.



            3.   When the system storage reservoir cannot be
filled to 80% of capacity by 5:00 a.m. each morning.



            4.   Any other issue in the Municipal Water System
in which it is deemed prudent by the city to trigger Stage 3.



         (b)   Goals. The goals of this stage are to reduce the
overall weekly consumption by 25% and maintain the integrity of the system.



         (c)   Education actions.



            1.   The city may make news releases to the local
media and by posting, describing present conditions and projecting the
outlook for the coming week.



            2.   The triggers necessitating the Stage 3: Water
emergency may also be made available to the public through news releases and
posting at City Hall along with an explanation of terms.



            3.   Water conservation articles may be provided
to the local newspaper and posted.



            4.   The city may conduct public meetings to
discuss the emergency; the status of the city water supply and further
actions, which may needed to be taken.



         (d)   Management actions.



            1.   The city water supplies shall be monitored
daily.



            2.   Leaks shall be repaired within 24 hours.



            3.   The city may seek additional emergency
supplies from other sources.



         (e)   Regulation actions.



            1.   Uses of water in Class II and Class III shall
be prohibited.



         (f)   Declaration of a Water Emergency. Whenever the
Governing Body of the city finds that conditions exist as described in this
plan under Stage 3, it shall be empowered to declare, by resolution, that a
Stage 3: Water Emergency exists and implement the steps outlined under this
plan. The resolution declaring the existence of a Stage 3: Water Emergency
shall be effective upon news release and/or posting at City Hall. In the
event of a system failure, or natural disaster, the City Administrator shall
have the authority to declare a Stage 3: Water Emergency. The City
Administrator shall declare the end of a Stage 3 Water Emergency.



   (E)   Waste of water.  Waste of water shall not be allowed at any
time or during any system stage.



   (F)   Administrative enforcement provisions.



      (1)   Warning. The City Council hereby appoints, in addition
to police officers, the City Administrator or his agent(s) to issue written
warnings and/or citations to any consumer violating Stage 2: Water Warning
and Stage 3: Water Emergency. Such warning shall advise the consumer that a
second violation at the same premise within a six-month period shall result
in the issuance of an administrative notice of violation for which a penalty
charge of $100 shall be added to the premises monthly consumption. Such
penalty charge shall be imposed for six months following the notice of the
violation. The City Clerk shall weekly post the names of the consumers issued
a written warning during the previous week. The names of the consumers given
a warning shall be posted in the same locations as the declaration.



      (2)   Administrative notice of violation. The City Council
hereby appoints, in addition to police officers, the City Administrator and
or agent(s) to issue a written administrative notice of violation to any
consumer violating Stage 2: Water Warning and Stage 3: Water Emergency for a
second time. Such notice shall advise the consumer that they will be assessed
a penalty charge of $ 100 for the next six months and that a subsequent
violation at the same premise within a six-month period shall result in the
immediate termination of all water service to the premise. The consumer shall
further be notified that they have a right to appeal the issuance of the
administrative notice of violation by filing a notice of appeal with the City
Clerk within ten days of the issuance of the notice. The action shall be
final if no appeal is filed within the ten-day period. The City Administrator
shall hear such appeal within ten days.



      (3)   Notice of termination of service. The City Council
hereby appoints, in addition to police officers, the City Administrator and
or his agent(s) to issue a written notice of termination of service to any
consumer violating Stage 2: Water Warning and Stage 3: Water Emergency for a
third time. Such notice shall advise the consumer that all water service to
the premises in violation shall be discontinued, beginning not less than 48
hours after the notice and not more than 72 hours after the notice, unless a
further violation is found to have occurred at which time termination shall
be immediate for the protection of the municipal water system. The consumer
may appeal the decision by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within the 48-hour period after notice of termination of service is given.
Such appeal shall stay the action of termination for up to 48 hours or until
a meeting with the City Administrator shall he called unless the City
Administrator determines that a further violation has occurred, at which time
termination shall be immediate for the protection of the Municipal Water
System. If service is terminated then service may be reconnected only upon
the filing for water service reconnection with the city and the payment of
the reconnection fee as set by the city. Additionally, the applicant must
file a written statement advising that they are aware that a water warning or
water emergency is in effect and that a subsequent violation of its
provisions will result in the termination of water service for a period of
not less than 30 days unless such termination would pose a health hazard to
the occupants of the premises as determined by the City Administrator or his
agent(s) shall cause the termination of water service of the violating
consumer as provided above or directed by the City Council.



   (G)   Emergency termination. Nothing in this section shall limit the
ability of the City Administrator from terminating the supply of water to any
or all customers upon the determination of said officials that emergency
termination of water service is required to protect the health and safety of
the public.



   (H)   Violation; penalty. Any person who shall violate or refuse to
comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of
an offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined $100 for the first
offense and $200 for the second and subsequent offense. A new violation shall
be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such failure to comply. In
addition to police officers, the City Council hereby appoints the City
Administrator, or his agent(s) to issue citations for violation of the
provisions of this section.



   (I)   Exemptions by permit. Customers may apply for and be granted
permits for:



      (1)   New turf sod application for up to three weeks.



      (2)   New grass seed application for up to four weeks. However
the city strongly discourages new grass seed between July 1 and August 31.



      (3)   Landscape in large common or public areas that, because
of irrigation system limitations, cannot be sustained by following mandatory
drought restrictions in this section.



   The above may be canceled by the city in the event a Stage 3: Water
Emergency is declared.



(Ord. 881, passed 1-15-2013)



FEES AND RATES



§ 52.060  RATES AND COLLECTION.



   (A)   The City Council has the power and authority to fix the rates
to be paid by the water consumers for the use of water from the Water
Department. All fees shall be on file for public inspection at the office of
the City Clerk. The Public Works Division shall bill the consumers and
collect all money received by the city on the account of the Water
Department. The Division shall faithfully account for, and pay to the City
Treasurer all revenue collected by it, taking its receipt therefor in
duplicate, filing one with the City Clerk and keeping the other on file in
the Water Department's official records.



   (B)   The city shall, from time to time, recommend water rates to be
charged to the customers of the Public Works Division. The Council shall
approve the rates recommended before the city shall put them into effect.
Upon approval of these rates by the City Council, the rates shall be placed
on file with the City Clerk.



(Neb. RS 17-540)  (Prior Code, § 3-107)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 52.061  MINIMUM RATES.



   All water consumers shall be liable for the minimum rate provided by
ordinance unless and until the consumer shall, by written order, direct the
City Services Director to shut off the water at the stop box, in which case
he or she shall not be liable thereafter for water rental until the water is
turned on again.



(Neb. RS 17-542)  (Prior Code, § 3-108)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



UNLAWFUL ACTS



§ 52.075  FIRE HYDRANTS.



   All hydrants for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared
to be public hydrants, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than
members of the City Fire Department under the orders of the Fire Chief, or
the Assistant Fire Chief, or members of the Water Department, to open or
attempt to open any of the hydrants and draw water from the same, or in any
manner to interfere with the hydrants.



(Prior Code, § 3-111)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.076  POLLUTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or attempt to pollute
any stream or source of water for the supply of the City Water Department.



(Neb. RS 17-536)  (Prior Code, § 3-112)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005) 
Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.077  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the Water Works. Any
person violating this provision shall at a minimum be subject to immediate
arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.



   (B)   No person may deposit anything in a stop box or commit any act
tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of any of the above mentioned
property without the written permission of the City Services Director.



(Prior Code, § 3-116)  (Ord. 776, passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 800, passed
10-18-2005)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of §§ 52.001 through 52.003, 52.015
through 52.019, 52.030 through 52.033, 52.045, 52.046, and 52.075 through
52.077, set forth at full length herein or incorporated by reference, shall
be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not more than $100 for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have
been committed every 24 hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, §§  3-1101, 4-501)



   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this code of
ordinances, the city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the
same, in the manner provided by law.



      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(Prior Code, § 4-502)



CHAPTER 53:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   53.001   Definitions



   53.002   Operation and funding



Service



   53.015   Application for permit



   53.016   Sewer contract; service



   53.017   Installation; repair and maintenance



Public Sewers



   53.030   Mandatory hook-up



   53.031   Unlawful deposits



Private Sewers



   53.045   Private systems prohibited; exception



   53.046   Single residential dwelling permit required; fee



   53.047   State approval required; permit; fee



   53.048   Inspection; effective date of permit



   53.049   Specifications; maintenance



Building Sewers



   53.060   Permit required



   53.061   Permit application; fee



   53.062   Installation expense



   53.063   Separate building sewer required; exception



   53.064   Use of existing sewers



   53.065   Construction codes



   53.066   Inspections; excavation requirements



   53.067   Unlawful connection



Sewer System



   53.080   Repairs and replacement



   53.081   Hazardous and prohibited discharges



   53.082   Preliminary treatment; City Administrator determinations



   53.083   City Administrator options for discharge



   53.084   Grass and sand interceptors



   53.085   Maintenance of flow-equalizing or preliminary treatment
facilities



   53.086   Control manhole and sampling



   53.087   Authority to grant exceptions maintained



   53.088   Inspections



   53.089   Notice of accidental spillage



   53.090   Destruction of property



Rates and Fees



   53.105   Classification permitted



   53.106   Rates established



 



   53.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  Quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20ºC, expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, or other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the
inner  face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  Extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.



   CITY ADMINISTRATOR.  The City Administrator of the City of Gothenburg,
or his or her authorized deputy, agent, or representative.



   COMBINED SEWER.  Sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of
produce.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.



   MAY.  The language is permissive.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or groundwater.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, or group.



   pH.  Logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  Wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to a degree so that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.



   RESPONSIBLE PERSON.



      (1)   Owner;



      (2)   President;



      (3)   Manager;



      (4)   Stockholder owning 25% or more of the company;



      (5)   Partner of the company;



      (6)   Supervisor; or



      (7)   Any employee of the company having knowledge of the
discharges.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage, and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE.  Combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
with ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.  Arrangement of devices and structures used
for treating sewage.



   SEWAGE WORKS.  Facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.



   SEWER.  Pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   SHALL.  The language is mandatory.



   SLUG.  Discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.



   STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER.  Drain or sewer for conveying water,
groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   WATERCOURSE.  Channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(Prior Code, § 3-202)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.002  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   (A)   The city owns and operates the city sewer system through the
City Services Director, who is directly responsible to the City
Administrator. The City Council, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the
management and maintenance of the city sewer system, may each year levy a tax
not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law on the actual
valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate
limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the tax shall be known
as the Sewer Maintenance Fund.



   (B)   The Administrator shall have the direct management and control
of the Sewer Department and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his or
her office. He or she shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations
for the sanitary and efficient management of the Department, subject to the
supervision and review of the City Council.



(Neb. RS 17-149, 17-925.01)  (Prior Code, § 3-201)  (Ord. 800, passed
10-18-2005)



SERVICE



§ 53.015  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Any person wishing to connect with the sewer system shall make an
application therefor to the City Administrator. The Administrator may require
any applicant to make a service deposit in an amount as he or she deems
necessary, subject to the review of the City Council. Sewer service may not
be supplied to any house or building except upon the order of the City
Administrator. The Department shall not supply sewer service to any person
outside the corporate limits without special permission from the City
Council, provided that the entire cost of pipe and other installation charges
shall be paid by the consumers. Nothing herein shall be construed to obligate
the city to provide sewer service to nonresidents.



(Neb. RS 17-149, 19-2701)  (Prior Code, § 3-203)  (Ord. 800, passed
10-18-2005)



§ 53.016  SEWER CONTRACT; SERVICE.



   (A)   The city, through the City Sewer Department, shall furnish
sewer services to persons within its corporate limits whose premises abut a
street or alley in which a commercial main is now, or may hereafter, be laid.
The city may also furnish sewer service to persons whose premises are
situated outside the corporate limits of the city, as and when, according to
law, the City Council may see fit to do so. The rules, regulations, and sewer
rental rates hereinafter named in this chapter shall be considered a part of
every application hereafter made for sewer service, and shall be considered a
part of the contract between every customer now or hereafter served. Without
further formality, the making of the application on the part of any
applicant, or the use of sewer service by present customers thereof, shall
constitute a contract between the customer and the city to which both parties
are bound. If the customer shall violate any of the provisions of the
contract or any reasonable rules and regulations that the City Council may
hereafter adopt, the City Administrator, or his or her agent, may cut off or
disconnect the sewer service from the building or premise of the violation.
No further connection for sewer service to the building or premise shall
again be made save or except by order of the City Administrator or his or her
agent.



(Prior Code, § 3-204)



   (B)   Contracts for sewer service are not transferable. Any person
wishing to change from one location to another shall make a new application
and sign a new contract. If any customer shall move from the premise where
service is furnished, or if the premise is destroyed by fire or other
casualty, he or she shall at once inform the City Services Director, who
shall cause the sewer service to be shut off from the premise. If the
customer should fail to give notice, he or she shall be charged for that
period of time until the official in charge of sewers is otherwise advised of
the circumstances.



(Prior Code, § 3-205)



(Neb. RS 17-901, 17-902, 18-503)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.017  INSTALLATION; REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   The expense of providing sewer service from the main to the
lot line shall be paid by the consumer and installed by the city. The
consumer shall then also pay the cost of installation and pipe from the lot
line to the place of collection. The consumer shall be required to pay the
expense of procuring the services of a licensed plumber, and shall pay the
expense of furnishing and installing pipe, trenching, and the necessary labor
to bring sewer service from the lot line to the place of collection.



(Prior Code, § 3-206)



   (B)   The customer, at his or her own expense, shall maintain the
sewer line between the city main and the lot line. Any maintenance that
requires the sewer to be excavated and/or repaired due to deterioration, age,
and the like, from the city main to the lot line, shall be paid for by the
customer and repaired by the city, except in a situation where the line, tap,
and the like has been shown to be improperly installed, and in that case, all
expense shall be paid for by the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-207)



(Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 53.030  MANDATORY HOOK-UP.



   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and
abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located,
or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
city, is hereby required, at his or her expense, to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days
after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is
within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.



(Prior Code, § 3-213)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.031  UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human
or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.



(Prior Code, § 3-210)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-211)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)  Penalty, see §
53.999



PRIVATE SEWERS



§ 53.045  PRIVATE SYSTEMS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(Prior Code, § 3-212)



   (B)   (1)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not
available under the provisions of § 53.030, the building sewer shall be
connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with Title 124
provisions of other State Department of Environmental Quality regulations and
this chapter.



      (2)   As a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 53.030, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance
with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private
sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge, and filled
with suitable material.



(Prior Code, § 3-214)



(Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.046  SINGLE RESIDENTIAL DWELLING PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system
for a single residential dwelling, the owner shall first obtain a written
permit signed by the City Administrator. The application for the permit shall
be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supply
plans, materials utilized, soil seepage rates, and other information as
deemed necessary by the City Administrator. A permit and inspection fee shall
be paid to the city at the time the application is filed in an amount
established by resolution by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-215)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.047  STATE APPROVAL REQUIRED; PERMIT; FEE.



   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system
for anything other than a single residential dwelling, the owner shall obtain
written approval of plans, specifications and necessary operational permits
from the State Department of Environmental Quality. A copy of approved plans,
specifications, and operational permit shall be submitted to the City
Administrator for application of a permit. A permit and inspection fee shall
be paid to the city at the time the application is filed in an amount
established by resolution of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-216)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.048  INSPECTION; EFFECTIVE DATE OF PERMIT.



   Usage of a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the City
Administrator. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
City Administrator when the work is ready for final inspection, and before
any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within
eight hours of the receipt of notice by the City Administrator.



(Prior Code, § 3-217)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.049  SPECIFICATIONS; MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department
of Environmental Quality. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.



(Prior Code, § 3-218)



   (B)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
city.



(Prior Code, § 3-219)



   (C)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed
to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the City
Administrator.



(Prior Code, § 3-220)



(Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



BUILDING SEWERS



§ 53.060  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City Administrator.



(Prior Code, § 3-221)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.061  PERMIT APPLICATION; FEE.



   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:



      (1)   For residential and commercial service; and



      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the city.



   (B)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the City Administrator. A separate permit and inspection fee for a
residential or commercial building sewer permit and for an industrial
building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application
is filed, in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-222)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.062  INSTALLATION EXPENSE.



   All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.



(Prior Code, § 3-223)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.063  SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.



(Prior Code, § 3-224)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.064  USE OF EXISTING SEWERS.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the City Administrator, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-225)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.065  CONSTRUCTION CODES



   (A)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall
apply.



   (B)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.



   (C)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of
Practice No. 9. All connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by
the City Administrator before installation.



(Prior Code, § 3-226)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.066  INSPECTIONS; EXCAVATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
City Administrator when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made
under the supervision of the City Administrator or his or her representative.



(Prior Code, § 3-228)



   (B)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-229)



(Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.067  UNLAWFUL CONNECTION.



   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior and
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface
runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer.



(Prior Code, § 3-227)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)  Penalty, see §
53.999



SEWER SYSTEM



§ 53.080  REPAIRS AND REPLACEMENT.



   (A)  The City Sewer Department may require the owner of any property
which is within the city and connected to the public sewers or drains to
repair or replace any connection line which serves the owner's property and
is broken, clogged, or otherwise in need of repair or replacement. The
property owner's duty to repair or replace a connection line shall include
those portions upon the owner's property and those portions upon public
property or easements up to and including the point of junction with the
public main.



   (B)   The City Services Director shall give the property owner
notice by registered letter or certified mail, directed to the last-known
address of the owner or the agent of the owner, directing the repair or
replacement of the connection line. If within 30 days of mailing the notice
the property owner fails or neglects to cause the repairs or replacements to
be made, the City Services Director may cause the work to be done and assess
the cost upon the property served by the connection.



(Neb. RS 18-1748)  (Prior Code, § 3-230)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.081  HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged,
any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
including interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial waters to any sanitary sewer.



      (2)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to sewers specifically designated as combined sewers or storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the City Administrator. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged on approval of
the City Administrator, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.



(Prior Code, § 3-231)



   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters  or wastes to any public sewers:



      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater
treatment plant, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two
mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer;



      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works;



      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



(Prior Code, § 3-232)



(Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.082  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT; CITY ADMINISTRATOR DETERMINATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, the
following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes, if it appears
likely, in the opinion of the City Administrator, that the wastes can harm
either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the City Administrator will give consideration
to factors such as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree
of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors. The substances prohibited are:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F (65°C);



      (2)   Any water or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°
and 150°F (0º and 65°C);



      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor
three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the City Administrator;



      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;



      (5)   Any water or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper,
zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to the degree that any material received in
the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the City Administrator for the materials;



      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste-
or odor-producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the City Administrator as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for discharge to the receiving waters;



      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the City Administrator in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (8)   Any waters of wastes having a pH in excess of (9.5);



      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime
residues), or of dissolved solids (such as but not limited to, sodium
chloride or sodium sulfate);



         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in quantities so as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works; and



         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting slugs as defined herein.



      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to the degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters;



      (11)   Any waters or wastes having any provisions of division
(A)(1)(a), (b), or (c) below shall be subject to the review of the City
Administrator:



         (a)   A five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million
by weight;



         (b)   Containing more than 350 parts per million by
weight of suspended solids; or



         (c)   Having an average daily flow greater than 2% of
the average sewage flow of the city.



      (12)   The owner shall provide, at his or her expense,
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:



         (a)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts
per million by weight;



         (b)   Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per
million by weight; or



         (c)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of
the waters or wastes.



   (B)   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for
the approval of the City Administrator, and no construction of facilities
shall be commenced until the approvals are obtained in writing.



(Prior Code, § 3-233)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.083  CITY ADMINISTRATOR OPTIONS FOR DISCHARGE.



   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in § 53.081 of this chapter, and
which, in the judgment  of the City Administrator, may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life to constitute a public nuisance, the
City Administrator may:



      (1)   Reject the wastes;



      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;



      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or



      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of § 53.086 of this chapter.



   (B)   If the City Administrator permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the City
Administrator, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, and laws.



(Prior Code, § 3-234)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.084  GRASS AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   (A)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the City Administrator, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units.



   (B)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the City Administrator, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.



(Prior Code, § 3-235)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.085  MAINTENANCE OF FLOW-EQUALIZING OR PRELIMINARY TREATMENT
FACILITIES.



   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.



(Prior Code, § 3-236)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.086  CONTROL MANHOLE AND SAMPLING.



   (A)   When required by the City Administrator, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
install a suitable control manhole together with the necessary meters and
other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling, and measurement of the wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the City Administrator. The manhole shall be installed by
the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as
to be safe and accessible at all times.



(Prior Code, § 3-237)



   (B)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter, shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of
all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are
determined from periodic grab samples.)



(Prior Code, § 3-238)



(Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.087  AUTHORITY TO GRANT EXCEPTIONS MAINTAINED.



   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern.



(Prior Code, § 3-239)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.088  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The City Administrator and other duly authorized employees of
the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The City Administrator, or his or her representatives, shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical,
oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways
or facilities for waste treatment.



(Prior Code, § 3-242)



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in § 53.089 below, the City Administrator or duly authorized
employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the
company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation,
except as may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain
safe conditions as required in § 53.084.



(Prior Code, § 3-243)



   (C)   The City Administrator and other duly authorized employees of
the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(Prior Code, § 3-244)



(Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.089  NOTICE OF ACCIDENTAL SPILLAGE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of any responsible person to notify the
City Administrator of any accidental spillage or discharge of chemical or
industrial waste of unusual strength or character into the public sewer
system. Notification will require a verbal report immediately, followed up
with a written report within 48 hours by the responsible person to the City
Administrator.



   (B)   The report shall include the type of spill and any type of
damage it might cause. The person shall be responsible for clean up or costs
of any spillage. One verbal and one written report of any spill shall be
sufficient to meet notification.



(Prior Code, § 3-240)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.090  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.



(Prior Code, § 3-241)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)  Penalty, see §
53.999



RATES AND FEES



§ 53.105  CLASSIFICATION PERMITTED.



   The City Council may classify for the purpose of rental fees the
customers of the City Sewer Department, provided that the classifications are
reasonable and do not discriminate unlawfully against any consumer or group
of consumers.



(Neb. RS 17-925.01)  (Prior Code, § 3-209)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.106  RATES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The City Council has the power and authority to fix the rates
to be charged for the usage of the city sewer line. All fees shall be on file
for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk. The Public Works
Division shall bill the customers and collect all money received by the city
on the account of the Sewer Department. The Division shall fully account for
and pay to the City Treasurer all revenue collected by it, taking as its
receipt therefor and duplicate, filing one with the City Clerk and keeping
the other on file in the Sewer Department official's records.



   (B)   The city shall, from time to time, recommend rates to be
charged to the customers of the city's Water and Sewer Departments. The
Council shall approve the rates recommended before the city shall put them
into effect. Upon approval of these rates by the City Council, the rates
shall be placed on file with the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 3-208)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 53.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1) Any person found to be violating any provision of this
chapter except § 53.087 shall be served by the city with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations.



      (2)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the city by reason of the violation.



(Prior Code, § 3-245)



   (B)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for
each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24
hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 3-1101)



(Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



CHAPTER 54:  ELECTRICITY



Section



   54.01   Ownership of system



   54.02   Consumer application



   54.03   Contracts



   54.04   Licensed electrician required



   54.05   Installation expense



   54.06   Meters



   54.07   Fees and collections



   54.08   Service deposit fund



   54.09   Restricted use



   54.10   Building moving



   54.11   Posting signs



   54.12   Access to equipment



   54.13   Destruction of property



   54.14   Antenna installations



   54.15   Load management policy defined



   54.16   Requirement and installation of load management device



   54.17   Return or reattachment of load management device



   54.18   Tampering with load management device unlawful



   54.19   Installation of electrical appliances; reporting requirements



   54.20   Policies and procedures



 



   54.99   Penalty



§ 54.01  OWNERSHIP OF SYSTEM.



   The city owns and operates the city electrical system through the
Electrical Foreperson, who is directly responsible to the City Administrator.
The City Council, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care,
management, and maintenance of the city electrical system may each year levy
a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the actual
valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate
limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the tax shall be known
as the Electrical Fund and shall remain in the custody of the City Treasurer.
The City Administrator shall have the direct management and control of the
city electrical system and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his or
her office. He or she shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations
for the safe and efficient management of the electrical system subject to the
supervision and review of the City Council. The City Council shall by
ordinance set the rates to be charged for services rendered and shall file
the same in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection at any
reasonable time.



(Neb. RS 17-902 through 17-904, 17-906, 17-909)  (Prior Code, § 3-301) 
(Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 54.02  CONSUMER APPLICATION.



   Every person or persons desiring electrical service must make
application therefor to the City Administrator. Any applicant may be required
to make a service deposit in the amount as has been set by the City Council
and on file at the office of the City Clerk. Electricity may not be supplied
to any house or building except upon the written order of the City
Administrator. The system shall not supply to any person outside the
corporate limits electrical service without special permission from the City
Council, provided that the entire cost of wire, installation, and other
expenses shall be paid by the consumer. Nothing herein shall be construed to
obligate the city to supply electrical service to nonresidents.



(Neb. RS 17-902, 19-2701)  (Prior Code, § 3-303)  (Ord. 800, passed
10-18-2005)



§ 54.03  CONTRACTS.



   (A)   The city, through its Electrical Department, shall furnish
electric current for light and power purposes to persons whose premises abut
on any supply wire of the distribution system and may furnish electric
current to the other persons within or without its corporate limits, as and
when, according to law, the City Council may see fit to do so. The rules,
regulations, and rates for electric service, hereinafter named, in this
chapter, shall be considered a part of every application hereafter made for
electric service and shall be considered a part of the contract between every
consumer now served by the Electrical Department. Without further formality,
the making of application on the part of any applicant, or the use or
consumption of electric energy by present customers, and the furnishing of
electric service to the applicant or customer shall constitute a contract
between applicant or customer and the city, to which both parties are bound.
If customer should violate any of the provisions of the contract or any
reasonable rules and regulations that the City Council may hereafter adopt,
the Electrical Foreperson, under the direction of the City Administrator, or
his or her agent, shall cut off or disconnect the electric service from the
building or place of the violation and no further connection of electric
service for the building or place shall again be made save or except by order
of the City Administrator or his or her agent.



(Prior Code, § 3-302)



   (B)   Contracts for electrical service are not transferable. Any
person wishing to change from one location to another shall make a new
application and sign a new contract. If any consumer shall sell, dispose, or
remove from the premise where service is furnished in his or her name, or if
the premise is destroyed by fire or other casualty, he or she shall at once
inform the City Administrator, who shall cause the electrical service to be
shut off from the premise. If the consumer should fail to give notice, he or
she shall be charged for all electricity used on the premise until the City
Administrator is otherwise advised of the circumstances.



(Neb. RS 17-902, 19-1404)



(Prior Code, § 3-304)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.04  LICENSED ELECTRICIAN REQUIRED.



   Under no circumstances shall connections be made between the wires of
the electrical distribution system of this city and the meter of the
consumer, except by an employee of the city or a licensed electrician
authorized to do so by the City Administrator. The consumer may have wiring
done by any competent licensed electrician from the meter to the points of
distribution. All wiring, equipment, and apparatus shall be installed
according to the Electrical Code duly adopted by the city. All installation
shall be done under the supervision and strictly in accordance with the
rules, regulations, and specifications for the installation prescribed by the
City Administrator and Building Inspector; provided, that the rules,
regulations, and specifications have been reviewed and approved by the City
Council.



(Neb. RS 17-902, 19-1404)  (Prior Code, § 3-305)  (Ord. 800, passed
10-18-2005)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.05  INSTALLATION EXPENSE.



   (A)   The city shall provide the wire to the building and shall
attach the overhead wiring to the mast provided by the building owner. City
will also provide to the customer a meter can and hub to be installed by the
customer as specified in § 150.006.



   (B)   For underground service line installations, the city shall
mount and connect the meter can with breakers, mast, and wiring from city
overhead distribution lines, and for underground city distribution lines, a
meter pedestal with a breaker. The customer shall be responsible for the
installation of the service line from the metering point to the building, and
the service line shall be installed as specified under § 150.006.



   (C)   Maintenance and replacement expense shall be apportioned in
the same manner.



(Neb. RS 17-902, 19-1404)  (Prior Code, § 3-306)  (Ord. 800, passed
10-18-2005)



§ 54.06  METERS.



   In the event a meter is broken or otherwise fails to register
accurately the use of electricity by any consumer, the six-month average of
the season one year previous to the breakage shall be used for billing
purposes.



(Neb. RS 19-1404)  (Prior Code, § 3-307)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 54.07  FEES AND COLLECTIONS.



   (A)   The City Council has the power and authority to fix the rates
to be paid by electrical consumers for the use of electricity from the
Electrical Department; to establish reasonable categories for differing
charges; and to provide for the collection of the fees charged. The rate
schedule set by the City Council shall be on file for public inspection at
the office of the City Clerk. The Public Works Division shall bill the
consumers and collect all money received by the city on the account of the
city electrical system. The Division shall faithfully account for and pay
over the same to the City Treasurer all revenue collected by it, taking its
receipt therefor in duplicate, filing one with the City Clerk and placing the
other on file in the electrical system's official records.



(Prior Code, § 3-308)



   (B)   The city shall, from time to time, recommend electrical rates
to be charged to the customers of the city's Electrical Department. The
Council shall approve the rates recommended before the city shall put them
into effect. Upon approval of these rates by the City Council, the rates
shall be placed on file with the City Clerk.



(Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 54.08  SERVICE DEPOSIT FUND.



   The service deposit required for utility service as provided in the
rate ordinances of the city shall be promptly paid upon demand by all
customers of the electrical system. From the deposit shall be deducted all
delinquent electrical charges. The service deposit shall be collected by the
City Clerk and immediately turned over to the City Treasurer who shall keep
the fees in a trust fund for the customers of the electrical system.



(Prior Code, § 3-309)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 54.09  RESTRICTED USE.



   The city electrical system does not guarantee the delivery of electric
current over the lines of the distribution system except when it has
sufficient power, current, equipment, and machinery to do so. The Electrical
Foreperson, under the direction of the City Administrator, has the power and
authority to disconnect or discontinue service for any good and sufficient
reason without liability. The city shall use due care and reasonable
diligence to provide and supply uninterrupted service to consumers, but shall
not be liable for damages resulting from interruption of service due to
causes over which the city has no control and the city expressly reserves the
right to discontinue or disconnect any consumer's service without preliminary
notice.



(Neb. RS 17-902, 19-1404)  (Prior Code, § 3-310)



§ 54.10  BUILDING MOVING.



   Should any house or building moving occur or be necessary and it
becomes necessary in the work to remove or disturb any of the property or
wires of the city electrical system, the same should not be done except upon
written permission received from the City Administrator, who shall then order
paid in advance the actual cost of moving the wires and the cost shall be
paid by the applicant prior to the moving of the building or house. All
expense of removing, changing, and replacing the wires or apparatus of the
electrical system shall be paid out of the deposit made prior to moving, and
any surplus remaining after all expenses are paid shall be returned to the
applicant; provided, that if in the course of moving the building or house it
becomes apparent that additional expense will be incurred, additional deposit
as deemed necessary may be demanded.



(Neb. RS 19-1404)  (Prior Code, § 3-311)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 54.11  POSTING SIGNS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, tack, or fasten to the
poles, structures, fixtures, or equipment of the city electrical system any
sign, poster, advertisement, or banner without written permission from the
City Administrator.



(Neb. RS 19-1404)  (Prior Code, § 3-312)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005) 
Penalty, § 54.99



§ 54.12  ACCESS TO EQUIPMENT.



   The customer shall, without expense to the city, permit access at all
reasonable hours to all equipment and facilities owned by the city and
located on the customer's premises. The customer shall permit the city to
trim or cause to be trimmed the limbs or tops of trees to the extent that the
trimming shall be necessary to avoid interference with city facilities.



(Prior Code, § 3-313)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 54.13  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break,
injure, or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment, or
appurtenance of the city electrical system.



(Neb. RS 28-512)  (Prior Code, § 3-314)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005) 
Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.14  ANTENNA INSTALLATIONS.



   (A)   All television and radio antenna system installations from and
after the effective date of this section shall be made in accordance with the
following rules and regulations:



      (1)   Outdoor antennas shall not exceed the maximum height of
30 feet above the roof support or 70 feet above a ground support. Special
permission may be granted by the City Council to exceed the above specified
height limitations.



      (2)   Every antenna system must be adequately grounded for
protection against a direct stroke of lightning, with an adequate ground wire.



      (3)   In no case shall an antenna system be installed nearer
to the street, sidewalk, a primary transmission line or a street series line,
than the height of the antenna plus ten feet unless approved by the City
Council, and no wires, cables, or guy wires shall cross or extend over any
part of any street, sidewalk, or lines.



      (4)   Whenever it is necessary to install antenna systems near
power lines, or where damage would be caused by its falling, special
permission must be first obtained from the City Council and a separate safety
wire must be attached to the antenna mast, and secured in a direction away
from the hazard.



      (5)   Telephone or light wires must be kept at least four feet
from transmission lines.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall be deemed as supplemental
to the Electrical and Building Codes of the city, and any other pertinent law
or ordinances of the city, and all work shall conform to these requirements.



(Prior Code, § 3-315)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 54.15  LOAD MANAGEMENT POLICY DEFINED.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city to mandate participation in load
management to lower the rate for electrical service to all citizens within
the city.



   (B)   The Electrical Department is authorized to provide incentive
rates or rebates for electrical customers who participate in load management
programs approved by the City Council.



   (C)   Load management, as used in this code, shall refer to
electrical customers who have installed a device to regulate power usage of
all the customer's electrical air conditioners, water heaters, and heat
pumps, meeting eligibility requirements as set forth from time to time by the
Electrical Department.



(Prior Code, § 3-316)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 54.16  REQUIREMENT AND INSTALLATION OF LOAD MANAGEMENT DEVICE.



   (A)   Any electrical device or appliance, specifically including air
conditioners, water heaters, and heat pumps, receiving power from the city's
electrical supply, which device or appliance is installed after the effective
date of this chapter, and which device or appliance meets the criteria set
forth in § 54.14 of this chapter shall be fitted with a load management
control device at the city's cost.



   (B)   Any business or individual who shall install the device or
appliance shall contact the city Electrical Department within ten days of
installation to arrange for the fitting of the appliance or device with a
load management control device.



(Prior Code, § 3-317)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 54.17  RETURN OR REATTACHMENT OF LOAD MANAGEMENT DEVICE.



   Any existing load management control device that is attached to an
appliance that has been sold or replaced must be returned to the city within
five working days or be reattached to the newly installed unit.



(Prior Code, § 3-319)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 54.18  TAMPERING WITH LOAD MANAGEMENT DEVICE UNLAWFUL.



   Any installed load management control device that has been disconnected
or modified in order to prohibit its intended use will be considered to be
deemed a violation of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-318)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.19  INSTALLATION OF ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES; REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any electrical customer who has installed any electrical
appliances, as defined in § 54.15(C), shall report all installations to the
Electrical Department within 30 days of installation. Any sale or
installation of an electrical device by a retail establishment with a place
of business in the city shall be reported to the city.



   (B)   The retailer selling the device hereafter shall provide the
following information within ten days of the sale:



      (1)   Date of sale;



      (2)   Type of appliance;



      (3)   Purchaser's name; and



      (4)   Purchaser's address.



(Prior Code, § 3-320)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 54.20  POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.



   The Electrical Department is authorized to develop policies and
procedures implementing the intent of this chapter and other ordinances of
the city concerning electrical supply. Upon the approval of the policy and
procedure by the City Council, the same shall be binding upon the city and
its electrical customers.



(Prior Code, § 3-321)  (Ord. 800, passed 10-18-2005)



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of the
failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 3-1101)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   TRAFFIC RULES





         71.   BICYCLES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL VEHICLES





         72.   PARKING AND STOPPING REGULATIONS





         73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES





         74.   PARKING SCHEDULES




CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Truck routes



   70.03   One-way streets, traffic lanes



   70.04   Arterial streets



   70.05   Crosswalks



   70.06   Authority to place signs and signals



   70.07   Flashing red lights



   70.08   Stopping at railroad tracks



   70.09   Police authority; refusal to obey



   70.10   Traffic citations



   70.11   Utility vehicles



   70.12   Prohibitions on operation of vehicles



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The
words and phrases used in this chapter, pertaining to motor vehicles and
traffic regulations, shall be construed as defined in Neb. RS Chapter 60,
Article 6, as now existing or hereafter amended. If not defined in the
designated statutes, the word or phrase shall have its common meaning.



(Neb. RS 60-606 through 60-676)  (Prior Code, § 5-101)



      ARTERIAL STREET.  Any of the following streets and any other
streets designated by resolution of the City Council:



         (a)   Highway 47, (also known as Lake Avenue) from the
southern corporate limits to the northern corporate limits; and



         (b)   Highway 30, (also known as 8th Street) from the
western corporate limits to the eastern corporate limits.



      BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The following named streets only:



         (a)   Lake Avenue between 8th and 11th Streets;



         (b)   Avenues D, F, and G between 8th and 10th Streets;



         (c)   8th Street between Avenues D and G;



         (d)   9th Street between Avenues D and G; and



         (e)   10th Street between Avenues D and G.



      EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTE.  The following streets and any other
streets designated by resolution of the City Council:



         (a)   All of Lake Avenue, Avenue D, and Avenue I; and



         (b)   20th Street from Lake Avenue to Avenue I.



      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.  All parts of the city not included in the
Business District.



(Prior Code, § 5-102)



§ 70.02  TRUCK ROUTES.



   The City Council may, by resolution, designate certain streets in the
city that trucks shall travel upon, and it shall be unlawful for persons
operating trucks to travel on other streets than those designated for trucks,
unless to pick up or deliver goods, wares, or merchandise, and in that event,
the operator of the truck shall return to the truck routes as soon as
possible in traveling through or about the city. The City Council shall cause
notices to be posted, or shall erect signs indicating the streets so
designated as truck routes.



(Neb. RS 60-681)  (Prior Code, § 5-201)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.03  ONE-WAY STREETS, TRAFFIC LANES.



   (A)   The City Council may, by resolution, provide for one-way
travel in any street or alley located in the city and shall provide for
appropriate signs and markings when the streets have been so designated by
resolution.



(Prior Code, § 5-202)



   (B)   The City Council may, by resolution, mark lanes for traffic on
street pavements at places as it may deem advisable.



(Prior Code, § 5-203)



(Neb. RS 60-680)



§ 70.04  ARTERIAL STREETS.



   The City Council may, by resolution, designate any street or portion
thereof as an arterial street, and shall provide for appropriate signs or
markings when the street has been so designated.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-204)



§ 70.05  CROSSWALKS.



   The City Council may, by resolution, establish and maintain, by
appropriate devices, markers, or lines upon the street, crosswalks, at
intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
street, and at other places as it may deem necessary.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-205)



§ 70.06  AUTHORITY TO PLACE SIGNS AND SIGNALS.



   The City Council may, by resolution, provide for the placing of stop
signs, or other signs, signals, standards, or mechanical devices in any
street or alley under the city's jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating
or prohibiting traffic thereon. The resolution shall describe the portion of
the street or alley wherein traffic is to be regulated or prohibited; the
regulation or prohibition; the location where the sign, signal, standard, or
mechanical device shall be placed; and the hours when the regulation or
prohibition shall be effective. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail,
neglect, or refuse to comply with the regulation or prohibition.



(Neb. RS 60-6,119 through 60-6,121, 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-206) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.07  FLASHING RED LIGHTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through an
intersection at which a traffic signal consisting of a flashing red light has
been erected, and is operating and visible, without first bringing the
vehicle to a complete stop before entering the intersection.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-301)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.08  STOPPING AT RAILROAD TRACKS.



   (A)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle which carries any of the
following, before crossing at a grade any track of a railroad on streets and
highways, shall stop the vehicle not more than 50 feet nor less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail or railroad, and while stopped, shall listen and look
in both directions along the track for an approaching train, and shall not
proceed until precaution has been taken to ascertain that the course is clear:



         (a)   Liquid petroleum and liquid petroleum products;



         (b)   Flammable, oxidizing, or corrosive liquids;



         (c)   Flammable, nonflammable, or poisonous compressed
gases;



         (d)   Volatile liquids or radioactive materials, whether
loaded or empty; or



         (e)   When carrying explosives, flammables or oxidizing
solids and solids which emits poisonous fumes as a cargo or any part of a
cargo;



      (2)   The requirements of division (A)(1) above shall not
apply when any of the following circumstances or conditions exist:



         (a)   A police officer or a crossing flagperson directs
traffic to proceed;



         (b)   An abandoned or exempted grade crossing which is
clearly marked as such by or with the consent of competent authority, when
the markings can be read from the driver's position; or



         (c)   Railroad tracks used exclusively for industrial
switching purposes within a business district.



(Prior Code, § 5-304)



   (B)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a
railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances set forth in this
division (B), the driver of the vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not
less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed
until he or she can do so safely.



      (2)   The requirements of this division shall apply when:



         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal
device gives warning of the immediate approach of  a railroad train;



         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagperson
gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad
train;



         (c)   A railroad train approaching within approximately
one-quarter mile of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from the
distance and the railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to the
crossings, is an immediate hazard; or



         (d)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible 
and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.



(Prior Code, § 5-305)



(Neb. RS 60-680) Penalty, § 10.99



§ 70.09  POLICE AUTHORITY; REFUSAL TO OBEY.



   (A)   The city police are hereby authorized, empowered, and ordered
to exercise all powers, and duties, with relation to the management of street
traffic and to direct, control, stop, restrict, regulate, and, when
necessary, temporarily divert, or exclude, in the interest of public safety,
health, and convenience, the movement of pedestrian, animal, and vehicular
traffic of every kind in streets, parks, and on bridges. The driver of any
vehicle shall stop upon the signal of any police officer.



(Neb. RS 60-683)  (Prior Code, § 5-307)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, or fail to
comply with, any lawful order, signal, or direction of a police officer.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-308)



   (C)   The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to make and enforce
temporary traffic regulations to cover emergencies.



(Neb. RS 81-2005)  (Prior Code, § 5-309)



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.10  TRAFFIC CITATIONS.



   (A)   When a citation is used by a peace officer, or when a citation
is used by an official or inspector pursuant to Neb. RS 18-1757, he or she
shall enter thereon all required information, including the name and address
of the cited person, the offense charged, and the time and place the person
cited is to appear in court. Unless the person cited requests an earlier
date, the time of appearance shall be at least three days after the issuance
of the citation. One copy of the citation shall be delivered to the person
cited, and a duplicate thereof shall be signed by the person, giving his or
her promise to appear at the time and place stated therein. The person
thereupon shall be released from custody. As soon as practicable, the copy
signed by the person shall be delivered to the prosecuting attorney.



   (B)   At least 24 hours before the time set for the appearance of
the cited person, either the prosecuting attorney, or other person authorized
by law to issue a complaint for the particular offense, shall issue and file
a complaint charging the person with an offense, or the person shall be
released from the obligation to appear as specified. A person cited pursuant
to Neb. RS 29-422 and 29-429 may waive his or her right to trial. The Supreme
Court may prescribe uniform rules for the waivers.



   (C)   Anyone may use a credit card authorized by the court in which
the person is cited as a means of payment of his or her fine and costs.



(Neb. RS 29-424)  (Prior Code, § 5-310)



§ 70.11  UTILITY VEHICLES.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, the term UTILITY VEHICLE shall
have the definition set forth in Neb. RS 60-6,355 (Cum. Supp. 2010).



   (B)   Any person having a valid Class O operator's license may
operate an utility vehicle on the streets and alleys of the city, between
sunrise and sunset.



   (C)   Any person operating a utility vehicle in the city shall
provide proof of insurance with coverage equal to that required by the State
of Nebraska for licensed motor vehicles to any peace officer within five days
of a request by such officer.



   (D)   All utility vehicles operated on the streets and alleys of the
city shall be equipped with a headlight and taillight. The headlight and
taillight of the vehicle shall be on and the vehicle shall be equipped with a
bicycle safety flag which extends not less than five feet above ground
attached to the rear of such vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be
triangular in shape with an area of not less than 30 square inches and shall
be day-glow in color.



   (E)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $200
for each violation.



(Ord. 863, passed 5-3-2011)



§ 70.12  PROHIBITIONS ON OPERATION OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   The city may by ordinance or resolution prohibit the operation
of vehicles upon any highway or impose restrictions as to the weight of
vehicles, for a total period not to exceed 180 days in any one calendar year,
when operated upon any highway under the jurisdiction of and for the
maintenance of which the city is responsible whenever any such highway by
reason of deterioration, rain, snow, or other climatic condition will be
seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles thereon is
prohibited or the permissible weight thereof reduced. The city shall erect or
cause to be erected and maintained signs designating the provisions of the
ordinance or resolution at each end of that portion of any highway affected
thereby, and the ordinance or resolution shall not be effective until such
signs are erected and maintained.



   (B)   The city may also, by ordinance or resolution, prohibit the
operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles or impose limitations as to
the weight thereof on designated highways, which prohibitions and limitations
shall be designated by appropriate signs placed on such highways.



(Neb. RS 60-681)  (Ord. 954, passed 9-19-2017)



CHAPTER 71:  BICYCLES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section



   71.01   Operation of bicycles and skateboards



§ 71.01  OPERATION OF BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS.



   (A)   No bicycle or skateboard shall be ridden faster than is
reasonable and proper, but every bicycle or skateboard shall be operated with
reasonable regard to the safety of the operator and any other persons upon
the streets and public highways.



   (B)   Persons riding bicycles or skateboards shall observe all
traffic signs and stop at all stop signs. Every person riding or propelling a
bicycle or skateboard upon any street or other public highway shall observe
all traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, and shall turn only at
intersections, signal for all turns, ride at the right hand side of the
street or highway, pass to the left when passing overtaken vehicles and
individuals that are slower moving, and shall pass vehicles to the right when
meeting.



   (C)   No person shall ride a bicycle or skateboard on the sidewalks
within the fire limits as defined in § 91.23.



(Neb. RS 60-680, 60-6,315, 60-6,317, 60-6,318)  (Prior Code, § 5-401) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING AND STOPPING REGULATIONS



Section



General Regulations



   72.001   Designation of parking areas; prohibited areas



   72.002   Parking in alleys



   72.003   Freight unloading



   72.004   Truck and trailer parking



   72.005   Fire hydrants, fire stations



   72.006   Intersections



   72.007   Curb; painting; color legend



   72.008   Repair of vehicle on streets or alleys prohibited



   72.009   Current license required



   72.010   Parking time limit



   72.011   Application to emergency vehicles



Snow Removal and Emergencies



   72.025   Removal and maintenance



   72.026   Declaration of emergency by Mayor; snow emergency routes



   72.027   Movement of snow from private property into streets
prohibited



   72.028   Stalled, stopped vehicle on emergency route prohibited



   72.029   Announcement of emergency; termination of emergency



   72.030   Temporary provisions controlling



   72.031   Removal of stalled, parked vehicles



Handicapped Parking Regulations



   72.045   Definitions



   72.046   Designation of on-street space; display of permit



   72.047   Designation of off-street space



   72.048   Personal permit; motor vehicle permit



   72.049   Prohibited issuance; duplicate permits



   72.050   Valid permit period; renewal



   72.051   Permit non-transferrable



   72.052   Removal of unauthorized vehicle



   72.053   Procedure for handicapped parking violation



Enforcement



   72.065   Removal of illegally parked vehicles



   72.066   Destruction of summons prohibited



   72.067   Bureau of Violations



   72.068   Private lot parking prohibited; exceptions; signage



 



   72.999   Penalty



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 72.001  DESIGNATION OF PARKING AREAS; PROHIBITED AREAS.



   (A)   The City Council may, by resolution, designate any street, or
portion thereof, where vehicles shall be parked parallel with and adjacent to
the curb or at an angle so as to have the right front wheel at the curb.



(Neb. RS 60-6,167, 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-501)



   (B)   The City Council may, by resolution, set aside any street,
alley, public way, or portion thereof where the parking of a particular kind
or class of vehicle shall be prohibited, or where the parking of any vehicle
shall be prohibited. No vehicle prohibited from parking thereon shall stand
or be parked adjacent to the curb of the street, alley, public way, or
portion thereof, longer than a period of time necessary to load and unload
freight or passengers.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-502)



Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.002  PARKING IN ALLEYS.



   No vehicle shall be parked in any alley, except for the purpose of
loading or unloading during the time necessary to load or unload, which shall
not exceed the maximum limit of one-half hour. Every vehicle while loading or
unloading in any alley shall be parked in the manner as will cause the least
obstruction possible to traffic in the alley.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-503)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.003  FREIGHT UNLOADING.



   Vehicles of an over-all length of less than 20 feet, including load,
while discharging or loading freight may back to the curb, but shall occupy
as little of the street as possible.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-504)



§ 72.004  TRUCK AND TRAILER PARKING.



   (A)   No semi-truck/tractor-trailer combination, licensed or
unlicensed, may be parked on any street at any time in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and
R-4 districts, except to load or unload.



   (B)   No unattached trailer or semi-trailer designed to be attached
to and propelled or drawn by mechanical power and used in the transportation
of passengers or property shall be parked on any street in the city with the
exception of the following:



      (1)   For any business located within the C-1 and C-2 zoning
districts a temporary trailer permit may be obtained for parking an
unattached trailer or semi-trailer in front of the business or property for a
limited time as provided for in division (B)(3) below;



      (2)   For any business providing goods or services to a
customer an unattached trailer may be parked within the R-1, R-2, R-3, and
R-4 zoning districts if in compliance with the following:



         (a)   A temporary trailer permit shall not be required
for an unattached trailer when are parked as follows:



            1.   If left unattached on the street from 8:00 AM
to 5:30 PM; and



            2.   Is parked daily at a property in which the
goods or services are being provided to said property for a period not to
exceed ten days.



         (b)   A temporary trailer permit shall be required as
provided for in division (B)(3) below for any trailer left unattached if:



            1.   The trailer is left unattached from the hours
of 5:31 PM to 7:59 AM, or



            2.   The trailer is parked daily for a period of
more than ten days in which goods or services are being provided to said
property.



      (3)   Temporary trailer permit for an unattached trailer:



         (a)   Temporary trailer permit fees shall be set by
resolution of the City Council under the fees resolution.



         (b)   The permit issued by the city shall contain at a
minimum the following provisions:



            1.   All permits will be issued by the Chief of
Police or his designee.



            2.   Permits shall be given for the following
periods:



               a.   Permits shall be given for the
following periods:



                  i.   Ten days from the date of
issuance;



                  ii.   Thirty days from the date of
issuance.



            3.   A permit may be re-applied for at the same
site upon expiration of the existing permit.



            4.   The trailer must have a flasher or reflector
on the outside corner facing traffic at all times. Where traffic may approach
from either side, the trailer must have a flasher or reflector on the outside
corner on both sides. Type I or Type II barricades may be used as an
alternate to flashers or reflectors. All flashers, reflectors and barricades
shall conform to the standards of the latest addition of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.



            5.   The trailer shall not block a public sidewalk
or be placed in a location that restricts the "sight lines" of an
intersection. Sight lines will be determined by the City Services Director at
the request of the Chief of Police or his designee.



   (C)   No semi-truck, truck or other motor vehicle, licensed or
unlicensed, or any power unit on any trailer designed to be attached to,
propelled or drawn by mechanical power may be parked on any street with a
power unit in operation at any time in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 district,
except to load or unload or for repair or service at a commercial repair
facility.



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no
semi-truck and trailer combination used in the transportation of passengers
or property, may be parked on any street designated by the City Council as an
emergency route within the corporate limits except for purposes of loading
and unloading and except for repair or service at a commercial repair
facility.



   (E)   The City Council shall have the power, by resolution, to allow
parking of semi-truck and trailer combinations in portions of districts R-1,
R-2, R-3, and R-4.



   (F)   No major recreational vehicles, and farm equipment and trucks
(over one-ton rated capacity) shall be parked or stored on any street in the
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and C-I Districts, except for loading and unloading.



   (G)   No recreational vehicle or camper shall be used for living,
sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot
or in any location not approved for the use.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-505) (Am. Ord. 893, passed 9-2-2014) 
Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.005  FIRE HYDRANTS, FIRE STATIONS.



   No vehicle shall be parked within 15 feet in either direction of any
fire hydrant nor within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station.
The curb space within the area of 15 feet in either direction of the fire
hydrant shall be painted red to indicate the prohibition.



(Neb. RS 60-6,166)  (Prior Code, § 5-506)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.006  INTERSECTIONS.



   Except in compliance with traffic control devices, no vehicle shall be
parked or left standing for any purpose, except momentarily to load or
discharge passengers, within 25 feet of the intersection or curb lines, or if
none, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines, nor where
the curb lines are painted red to indicate the prohibition.



(Neb. RS 60-6,166)  (Prior Code, § 5-507)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.007  CURB; PAINTING; COLOR LEGEND.



   (A)   No vehicle shall park on any street with its left side to the
curb, unless the street has been designated to be a one-way street by the
City Council. Vehicles must not be parked at any curb in such a position as
to prevent another vehicle already parked at the curb from moving away.



(Neb. RS 60-6,167)  (Prior Code, § 5-508)



   (B)   The following colors shall be used to entirely prohibit or
regulate parking upon the streets within the city.



      (1)   Red.  The use of red paint upon the curb of any street
shall indicate that parking and stopping of vehicles is entirely prohibited
within the area.



      (2)   Yellow or orange.  The use of yellow or orange paint
upon the curb of any street shall indicate that the space has been set aside
for a bus stop zone.



      (3)   White.  The use of white paint upon the curb of any
street shall indicate that the portion of the street has been restricted to
15-minute parking. White paint upon the surface of the street, at crosswalks,
shall indicate pedestrian lanes and the location of crosswalks.



      (4)   Green.  The use of green paint upon the curb of any
street shall indicate that the space has been set aside for a loading zone.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-509)



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the City Services Director to cause
the curb space to be painted and keep the same painted as provided in this
section. No person, firm, or corporation shall paint the curb of any street,
or in any manner set aside, or attempt to prevent the parking of vehicles in
any street, or part thereof, except at the places where the parking of
vehicles is prohibited by the provisions of this section. The marking or
designating of portions of streets or alleys where the parking of vehicles is
prohibited or limited shall be done only by the city through its proper
officers, at the direction of the City Council.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-510)



Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.008  REPAIR OF VEHICLE ON STREETS OR ALLEYS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall adjust or repair any automobile or motorcycle, or race
the motor of same, while standing on the public streets or alleys of this
city, excepting in case of breakdown or other emergency requiring same. No
person or employee connected with a garage or repair shop shall use
sidewalks, streets, or alleys in the vicinity of the garage or shop for the
purpose of working on automobiles or vehicles of any description.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-511)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.009  CURRENT LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to park, or place on the streets, alleys, or other
public property, any motor vehicle without first securing a current license
as provided by law, and no licensed motor vehicle shall be allowed to stand
for a longer period than 24 hours.



(Neb. RS 60-323)  (Prior Code, § 5-512)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.010  PARKING TIME LIMIT.



   (A)   The City Council may, by resolution, entirely prohibit, or fix
a time limit for, the parking and stopping of vehicles on any street,
streets, or district designated by the resolution, and the parking, or
stopping, of any vehicle in any street, streets, or district, for a period of
time longer than fixed in the resolution shall constitute a violation of this
section.



(Prior Code, § 5-513)



   (B)   The parking of a motor vehicle on a public street for over 24
consecutive hours is unlawful, except where a different maximum time limit is
posted.



(Prior Code, § 5-514)



(Neb. RS 60-680) Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.011  APPLICATION TO EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   The provisions of this chapter regulating the movement, parking, and
standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as
defined in this chapter, while the driver of the vehicle is operating the
same in an emergency in the necessary performance of public duties.



(Neb. RS 19-2301, 28-519)  (Prior Code, § 5-526)



SNOW REMOVAL AND EMERGENCIES



§ 72.025  REMOVAL AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park or stand any vehicle on any
street designated as an emergency snow route, as defined in § 70.01, within
six hours after a snowfall of four inches or more has occurred within a
12-hour period unless the snow has been removed within that time.



   (B)   The City Administrator may order any street or alley, or
portion thereof, vacated for weather emergencies or street maintenance.
Notice shall be given by personally notifying the owner or operator of a
vehicle parked on the street or alley, or by posting appropriate signs along
the streets or alleys. The signs shall be posted not less than four hours
prior to the time that the vacation order is to be effective.



   (C)   Any person parking a vehicle in violation of this section
shall be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter, and the vehicle
may be removed and parked, under the supervision of the City Police or City
Administrator, to a suitable nearby location without further notice to the
owner or operator of the vehicle.



(Neb. RS 17-557)  (Prior Code, § 5-515)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.026  DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY BY MAYOR; SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.



   Whenever the Mayor shall determine, on the basis of the falling snow,
sleet, or freezing rain, or on the basis of an official forecast by the
United States Weather Bureau, of snow, sleet, or freezing rain, that eminent
weather conditions will make it necessary that parking on snow emergency
routes, as designated by § 72.025, be prohibited or restricted from snow
plowing and other purposes, the Mayor may place into effect a parking
prohibition on all snow emergency routes by declaring that emergency
conditions exist. In the declaration of emergency conditions, the Mayor shall
state the time that the emergency shall become effective. From the time so
designated, all parking of vehicles on snow emergency routes, shall be, and
the same hereby is, prohibited. While the prohibition is in effect, no person
shall park, or allow to remain parked, any vehicle on any portion of a snow
emergency route. Once the emergency is in effect, the parking prohibition
imposed by this section shall remain in effect until terminated by
declaration of the Mayor. However, nothing in this section shall be construed
to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other
provision of law.



(Prior Code, § 5-515.02)  (Ord. 750, passed 1-16-2001)  Penalty, see §
72.999



§ 72.027  MOVEMENT OF SNOW FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY INTO STREETS PROHIBITED.



   Whenever a snow emergency has been declared, no person shall move the
snow from lots, driveways, or sidewalks, owned or controlled by them, onto
the streets after snow has been cleared from the streets by agents of the
city. Once a street has been cleared, it shall be unlawful for persons to
move snow into street traffic lanes or street parking lanes.



(Prior Code, § 5-515.04)  (Ord. 750, passed 1-16-2001)  Penalty, see §
72.999



§ 72.028  STALLED, STOPPED VEHICLE ON EMERGENCY ROUTE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Whenever an emergency has been declared, pursuant to §
72.026, no person operating a motor vehicle on a snow emergency route shall
allow the vehicle to become stalled or stuck so that it remains in the
position longer than momentarily.



   (B)   No person operating a motor vehicle on a snow emergency route
during the declaration of emergency snow conditions shall allow the vehicle
to become stalled because the motor fuel supply is exhausted or the battery
has become inoperative.



   (C)   Whenever a motor vehicle becomes stalled for any reason,
whether or not in violation of this chapter, on any snow emergency route on
which there is a parking prohibition in effect, the person operating the
vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off
the roadway of the snow emergency route. No person shall abandon or leave his
or her vehicle in the roadway of a snow emergency route, except for the
purpose of securing assistance for removal.



(Prior Code, § 5-515.05)  (Ord. 750, passed 1-16-2001)  Penalty, see §
72.999



§ 72.029  ANNOUNCEMENT OF EMERGENCY; TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.



   (A)   The Mayor shall cause each declaration of a snow emergency
which shall be made by him or her, pursuant to this chapter, to be publicly
announced by means of broadcasting or telecast from broadcasting stations
with a normal operating range covering the city, and he or she may, in
addition, cause the declaration to be announced in newspapers of general
circulation within the city when feasible. Each announcement shall describe
the action taken by the Mayor, including the time the emergency became or
will become effective. The announcement shall specify the streets or areas
affected. The Mayor shall make, or cause to be made, a record of each time
and date when an emergency declaration is announced to the public by issuing
an executive order as soon after the declaration of any emergency as is
feasible.



   (B)   Whenever the Mayor shall find that some or all of the
conditions which gave rise to a parking prohibition placed in effect pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter no longer exist, he or she shall declare
the prohibition terminated, in whole or in part, effective immediately upon
the announcement or at a later specified time.



(Prior Code, § 5-515.06)  (Ord. 750, passed 1-16-2001)



§ 72.030  TEMPORARY PROVISIONS CONTROLLING.



   Any provision of this subchapter which becomes effective by declaration
of the Mayor upon the occurrence of a snow emergency, while temporarily in
effect, takes precedence over other conflicting provisions of law, except
that it shall not take precedence over provisions of law relating to traffic
accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency
traffic directions by a police officer.



(Prior Code, § 5-515.07)  (Ord. 750, passed 1-16-2001)



§ 72.031  REMOVAL OF STALLED, PARKED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to
remove, or cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street to another place or
location on a street, or to a lot, garage, storage yard, or other similar
facility designated by the Police Department when:



      (1)   The vehicle is parked on a snow emergency route on which
a parking prohibition is in effect;



      (2)   The vehicle is stalled on a snow emergency route on
which there is a parking prohibition in effect and the person who is
operating the vehicle does not appear to be removing it in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter; and/or



      (3)   The vehicle is parked on any street in violation of any
parking prohibition or provision of law contained in the chapter.



   (B)   The vehicle removal may be made by towing to a private lot,
garage, storage yard, or other similar facility. Any stored vehicle shall not
be released from storage except upon payment by the owner of the vehicle to
the person or persons in charge of the lot, garage, storage yard, or other
similar facility of the cost of towing, which fee shall not in any event
exceed $25. The cost of storage shall not exceed $4 for each 24-hour period,
or fraction thereof, during which time the vehicle remains stored. A receipt
for the fees shall be issued to the owner of the vehicle.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the person or persons in charge of the
lot, garage, storage yard, or other similar facility designated by the Police
Department for storage to keep a record of the name of the owner of all
vehicles towed in under these provisions, together with the license plate
number or VIN of each vehicle, and the nature and circumstances of such, and
the amount of fees collected hereunder, and to deliver a report of each day's
transactions to the Chief of Police not later than one day following the day
for which the report is made.



(Prior Code, § 5-515.08)  (Ord. 750, passed 1-16-2001)



HANDICAPPED PARKING REGULATIONS



§ 72.045  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESS AISLE.  A space adjacent to a handicapped parking space or
passenger loading zone which is constructed and designed in compliance with
the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§
12101 et seq., and the federal rules and regulations adopted and promulgated
in response to the act.



(Neb. RS 18-1736)



   HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON.  Any individual with a severe visual
or physical impairment which limits personal mobility and results in an
inability to travel unassisted more than 200 feet without the use of a
wheelchair, crutch, walker, or prosthetic, orthotic, or other assistant
device, any individual whose personal mobility is limited as a result of
respiratory problems, any individual who has a cardiac condition to the
extent that his or her functional limitations are classified in severity as
being Class III or Class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart
Association, and any individual who has permanently lost all or substantially
all the use of one or more limbs.



   HANDICAPPED PARKING INFRACTION.  Violation of any section of this
subchapter regulating:



      (1)   The use of parking spaces, including access aisles,
designated for use by handicapped or disabled persons;



      (2)   The unauthorized possession, use, or display of
handicapped or disabled parking permits; or



      (3)   The obstruction of any wheelchair ramps constructed or
created in accordance and in conformity with the Federal Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990.



(Neb. RS 18-1741.01)



   TEMPORARILY HANDICAPPED or DISABLED PERSON.  Any handicapped or
disabled person whose personal mobility is expected to be limited in the
manner for no longer than one year.



(Neb. RS 18-1738)



(Prior Code, § 5-518)



§ 72.046  DESIGNATION OF ON-STREET SPACE; DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   (A)   (1)   The City Council may designate parking spaces,
including access aisles, for the exclusive use of:



         (a)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor
vehicles display the distinguishing license plates issued to handicapped or
disabled persons pursuant to Neb. RS 60-3,113;



         (b)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor
vehicles display a distinguishing license plate issued to a handicapped or
disabled person by another state;



         (c)   Other handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the city, whose
motor vehicles display the permit specified in Neb. RS 18-1739; and



         (d)   Other motor vehicles, as certified by the city,
which display the permit.



      (2)   All permits shall be displayed by hanging the permit
from the motor vehicle's rearview mirror so as to be clearly visible through
the front windshield. The permit shall be displayed on the dashboard only
when there is no rearview mirror.



   (B)   If the City Council so designates a parking space or access
aisle, it shall be indicated by posting aboveground and immediately adjacent
to and visible from each space or access aisle a sign as described in Neb. RS
18-1737. In addition to the sign, the space or access aisle may also be
indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the
street adjacent to the space or access aisle.



(Neb. RS 18-1736)  (Prior Code, § 5-516)



§ 72.047  DESIGNATION OF OFF-STREET SPACE.



   (A)   The city and any person in lawful possession of any off-street
parking facility may designate stalls or spaces, including access aisles, in
the facility owned or operated by the city or person for the exclusive use of:



      (1)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles
display the distinguishing license plates issued to individuals pursuant to
Neb. RS 60-113;



      (2)   Other handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the city, whose motor
vehicles display the permit specified in Neb. RS 18-1739; and



      (3)   Other motor vehicles, as certified by the city, which
display the permit.



   (B)   The designation shall be made by posting aboveground and
immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space, including
access aisles, a sign which is in conformance with the requirements in Neb.
RS 18-1737.



(Neb. RS 18-1737)  (Prior Code, § 5-517)



§ 72.048  PERSONAL PERMIT; MOTOR VEHICLE PERMIT.



   (A)   (1)   The City Clerk may take an application, on a form
provided by the Department of Motor Vehicles, from a handicapped or disabled
person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person, or his or her parent,
legal guardian, or foster parent, for a permit which will entitle the holder
thereof, or a person driving a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting
the holder, to park in those spaces or access aisles provided for by this
subchapter, when the holder of the permit will enter or exit the motor
vehicle while it is parked in the spaces or access aisles. For purposes of
this section, the handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped
or disabled person shall be considered the holder of the permit.



      (2)   A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a
permit shall complete an application, shall provide proof of identity, and
shall submit a completed medical form containing the statutory criteria for
qualification and signed by a physician, physician assistant, or advanced
practice registered nurse, certifying that the person who will be the holder
meets the definition of handicapped or disabled person or temporarily
handicapped or disabled person. No applicant shall be required to provide his
or her social security number. In the case of a temporarily handicapped or
disabled person, the certifying physician, physician assistant, or advanced
practice registered nurse shall indicate the estimated date of recovery or
that the temporary handicap or disability will continue for a period of six
months, whichever is less.



      (3)   A person may hold only one permit under this section and
may hold either a permit under this section or a permit under division (B)
below, but not both.



      (4)   A copy of the completed application form shall be given
to each applicant. The City Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor
Vehicles the name, address, and license number of all persons applying for a
permit pursuant to this section.



      (5)   An application for the renewal of a permit under this
section may be filed within 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit.
The existing permit shall be invalid upon receipt of the new permit.



(Neb. RS 18-1738)



      (6)   The City Clerk shall not accept the application for a
permit of any person making application contrary to the provisions of Neb. RS
18-1738.02.



(Neb. RS 18-1738.02)  (Prior Code, § 5-519)



   (B)   (1)   The City Clerk may take an application from any
person for a motor vehicle permit which will entitle the holder thereof or a
person driving the motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting handicapped
or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons to park in
those spaces or access aisles provided for by this subchapter if the motor
vehicle is used primarily for the transportation of handicapped or disabled
persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons. The parking permit
shall be used only when the motor vehicle for which it was issued is being
used for the transportation of a handicapped or disabled person or
temporarily handicapped or disabled person and the person will enter or exit
the motor vehicle while it is parked in the designated spaces or access
aisles.



      (2)   A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a
permit pursuant to this section shall apply for a permit for each motor
vehicle used for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, shall complete the forms as
provided to the City Clerk by the Department of Motor Vehicles, and shall
demonstrate to the City Clerk that each motor vehicle is used primarily for
the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons. A copy of the completed application form
shall be given to each applicant.



      (3)   No more than one permit shall be issued for each motor
vehicle. A person may hold either a permit under this division or a permit
under division (A) above, but not both.



      (4)   An application for the renewal of a permit under this
section may be filed within 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit.
The existing permit shall be invalid upon receipt of the new permit.



      (5)   The City Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor
Vehicles the name, address, and license number of all persons applying for a
permit pursuant to this section.



(Neb. RS 18-1738.01)



      (6)   The City Clerk shall not accept the application for a
permit of any person making application contrary to Neb. RS 18-1738.02.



(Neb. RS 18-1738.02)  (Prior Code, § 5-520)



§ 72.049  PROHIBITED ISSUANCE; DUPLICATE PERMITS.



   (A)   No permit shall be issued to any person or for any motor
vehicle if any parking permit has been issued to the person or for the motor
vehicle, and the permit  has been suspended pursuant to § 72.999. At the
expiration of the suspension, a permit may be renewed in the manner provided
for renewal in this subchapter.



   (B)   A duplicate permit may be provided without cost if the
original permit is destroyed, lost, or stolen. The duplicate permit shall be
issued in the same manner as the original permit, except that a newly
completed medical form need not be provided if a completed medical form
submitted at the time of the most recent application for a permit or its
renewal is on file with the City Clerk or the Department of Motor Vehicles. A
duplicate permit shall be valid for the remainder of the period for which the
original permit was issued.



(Neb. RS 18-1739)  (Prior Code, § 5-521)



§ 72.050  VALID PERMIT PERIOD; RENEWAL.



   (A)   Permanently issued permits for handicapped or disabled parking
authorized under this subchapter issued prior to August 1, 2005, shall be
valid for a period ending on September 30 of the third year after the date of
issuance, and shall expire on that date. Permanently issued permits issued on
or after August 1, 2005 shall be valid for a period ending on the last day of
the month of the applicant's birthday in the third year after issuance, and
shall expire on that day.



   (B)   All permits authorized under this subchapter for temporarily
handicapped or disabled parking shall be issued for a period ending not more
than six months after the date of issuance, but may be renewed one time for a
period not to exceed six months. For the renewal period, there shall be
submitted an additional application with proof of a handicap or disability.



(Neb. RS 18-1740)  (Prior Code, § 5-522)



§ 72.051  PERMIT NON-TRANSFERRABLE.



   (A)   Permits issued under this subchapter shall not be transferable
and shall be used only by the party to whom issued or for the motor vehicle
for which issued and only for the purpose for which it is issued. No person
shall alter or reproduce in any manner a permit issued pursuant to this
subchapter. No person shall knowingly hold more than one permit or knowingly
provide false information on an application for a permit.



   (B)   No person who is not the holder of a handicapped or disabled
parking permit issued to him or her as a handicapped or disabled person shall
display a handicapped or disabled parking permit and park in a space or
access aisle designated for the exclusive use of a handicapped or disabled
person.



   (C)   No person who is the holder of a handicapped or disabled
parking permit issued for the use of the person when transporting a
handicapped or disabled person shall display his or her handicapped or
disabled parking permit and park in a space or access aisle designated for
the exclusive use of a handicapped or disabled person unless a handicapped or
disabled person is actually in the vehicle displaying the permit at the time
it is parked, has left the vehicle while it was parked, and will return to
the vehicle before it leaves the designated space or access aisle.



   (D)   No person who is not the holder of a handicapped or disabled
parking permit issued for use when a vehicle is transporting a handicapped or
disabled person shall display a handicapped or disabled parking permit and
park in a space or access aisle designated for the exclusive use of a
handicapped or disabled person unless a handicapped or disabled person is
actually in the vehicle displaying the permit at the time it is parked, has
left the vehicle while it was parked, and will return to the vehicle before
it leaves the designated space or access aisle.



(Neb. RS 18-1741)  (Prior Code, § 5-523)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.052  REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE.



   (A)   The owner or person in lawful possession of an offstreet
parking facility, after notifying the city police, and the city, if it
provides onstreet parking or owns, operates, or provides an offstreet parking
facility, may cause the removal from a stall or space, including access
aisles, designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the
transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped
or disabled persons, of any vehicle not displaying the proper permit or the
distinguishing license plates specified in this subchapter if there is posted
aboveground and immediately adjacent to and visible from the stall or space,
including access aisles, a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the
area so designated as a tow-in zone.



   (B)   A person who parks a vehicle in any onstreet parking space or
access aisle which has been designated exclusively for handicapped or
disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons or motor
vehicles for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, or in any exclusively designated
parking space or access aisle in any offstreet parking facility, without
properly displaying the proper permit or when the handicapped or disabled
person to whom or for whom, as the case may be, the license plate or permit
is issued will not enter or exit the vehicle while it is parked in the
designated space or access aisle shall be guilty of a handicapped parking
infraction, and shall be subject to the penalties and procedures set forth in
§ 72.999. The display on a motor vehicle of a distinguishing license plate
or permit issued to a handicapped or disabled person by and under the duly
constituted authority of another state shall constitute a full and complete
defense in any action for a handicapped parking infraction. If the identity
of the person who parked the vehicle in violation of this section cannot be
readily determined, the owner or person in whose name the vehicle is
registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the violation and shall
be guilty and subject to the penalties and procedures described in § 72.999.



   (C)   In the case of a privately owned offstreet parking facility,
the city shall not require the owner or person in lawful possession of the
facility to inform the city of a violation of this section prior to the city
issuing the violator a handicapped parking infraction citation.



(Neb. RS 18-1737)  (Prior Code, § 5-524)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.053  PROCEDURE FOR HANDICAPPED PARKING VIOLATION.



   (A)   For any offense classified as a handicapped parking
infraction, a handicapped parking citation may be issued by any peace
officer, or by any person designated by ordinance by the City Council to
exercise the authority to issue a citation for any handicapped parking
infraction.



   (B)   When a handicapped parking citation is issued for a
handicapped parking infraction, the person issuing the handicapped parking
citation shall enter thereon all required information, including the name and
address of the cited person, or, if not known, the license number and
description of the offending motor vehicle, the offense charged, and the time
and place the person cited is to appear in court. Unless the person cited
requests an earlier date, the time of appearance shall be at least three days
after the issuance of the handicapped parking citation. One copy of the
handicapped parking citation shall be delivered to the person cited or
attached to the offending motor vehicle.



   (C)   At least 24 hours before the time set for the appearance of
the cited person, either the City Attorney or other person authorized by law
to issue a complaint for the particular offense shall issue and file a
complaint  charging the person with a handicapped parking infraction or the
person shall be released from the obligation to appear as specified.



   (D)   The trial of any person for a handicapped parking infraction
shall be by the court without a jury. A person cited for a handicapped
parking violation may waive his or her right to trial.



(Neb. RS 18-1741.01, 18-1741.04, 18-1741.06)  (Prior Code, § 5-525)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 72.065  REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Whenever any police officer shall find a vehicle standing upon
a street or alley in violation of any of the provisions of the chapter, the
individual may remove or have the vehicle removed, or require the driver or
other person in charge of the vehicle to move the vehicle, to a position off
the roadway of the street or alley or from the street or alley.



   (B)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession
of any vehicle towed or stored shall be charged with the reasonable cost of
towing and storage fees. Any towing or storage fee shall be a lien upon the
vehicle prior to all other claims. Any person towing or storing a vehicle
shall be entitled to retain possession of the vehicle until the charges are
paid. The lien provided for in this section shall not apply to the contents
of any vehicles.



(Neb. RS 60-6,165, 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-527)



§ 72.066  DESTRUCTION OF SUMMONS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to tear up, or destroy, a parking
tag placed upon any vehicle by the city police, or to disregard the summons
contained on the tag, and fail to appear in court as directed by the tag.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-528)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.067  BUREAU OF VIOLATIONS.



   There is hereby created the Bureau of Violations within the powers and
duties of the office of the City Clerk. A copy of each citation issued for
non-moving traffic violations shall be deposited with the City Clerk, whose
duty it shall be to collect all fines and to maintain appropriate and
accurate records of all fines paid to him or her. Fines shall be payable at
the office of the Clerk. The fines shall be in the amount of $10 for each
violation if paid within 30 days from the date of issuance. Should any fine
not be paid within the 30-day period, the Clerk shall ask the City Attorney
to file a complaint in the appropriate court. The fine for any violation
after 30 days or after judgment is entered against the violator shall be $20
plus costs. All money collected by the City Clerk under this section shall be
transferred to the school district in which the city lies.



(Neb. RS 18-1729)  (Prior Code, § 5-529)



§ 72.068  PRIVATE LOT PARKING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS; SIGNAGE.



   (A)   Any person parking a motor vehicle in a properly posted,
restricted parking lot without the consent of the owner or tenant authorized
to give permission shall be guilty of an infraction, and the vehicle shall be
subject to being towed away at the request of the lot owner or tenant. Any
person found guilty under this section shall be subject to the penalties
provided for infractions. If the identity of the operator of a motor vehicle
in violation of this section cannot be determined, the owner or person in
whose name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible
for the infraction. When any law enforcement officer observes or is advised
that a motor vehicle may be in violation of this section, he or she shall
make a determination as to whether a violation has in fact occurred, and if
so, shall personally serve or attach to the motor vehicle a citation directed
to the owner or operator of the vehicle, which shall set forth the nature of
the violation. Any person who refuses to sign the citation or otherwise
comply with the command of the citation shall be punished as provided by Neb.
RS 29-426.



   (B)   Signs designating a restricted parking lot shall be readily
visible and shall state the purpose or purposes for parking on the restricted
parking lot, state the hours for restricted parking, and state who to contact
for information regarding a towed vehicle.



(Neb. RS 60-2401, 60-2402)  (Prior Code, § 5-530)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of § 72.051 shall constitute a handicapped
parking infraction and shall be cause for suspension of the permit for a
period of six months and imposition of the penalty provided for in division
(B) below. In addition, the trial court shall impose a fine of not more than
$250 which may be waived by the court if, at the time of sentencing, all
handicapped parking permits issued to or in the possession of the offender
are returned to the court. At the expiration of the six-month period, a
suspended permit may be renewed in the manner provided for renewal in this
chapter.



(Prior Code, §  5-523)



   (B)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for
each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24
hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, §  5-601)



CHAPTER 73:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   U-turns



   II.   Speed limits



   III.   School speed zones



SCHEDULE I.  U-TURNS.



   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction,
except at a street intersection. No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed
in the opposite direction at any intersection where a sign is posted
indicating that U-turns are prohibited, or anywhere on that portion of State
Highway 47 (also known as Lake Avenue) or U.S. Highway 30 which lies within
the corporate limits.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-302)



SCHEDULE II.  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, alley,
or other place at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and prudent
under the conditions, but in no event shall the speed of a vehicle exceed the
following:



 


Location

 

Speed Limit






U.S. Highway #30 from 800 feet west of 2nd Avenue to the west end of the
bridge over the tail race

 

45 mph




U.S. Highway #30 from the west end of the bridge over the tail race to a
point 200 feet east of the  east line of Avenue I

 

35 mph




U.S. Highway #30 from a point 200 feet east of the east line of Avenue I to
700 feet east of Avenue L

 

45 mph




U.S. Highway #30 from a point 700 feet east of Avenue L to 2,100 feet east of
Avenue L

 

60 mph




State Highway #47 from the north end of the bridge over the north channel of
the Platte River to a point 1,000 feet south thereof

 

45 mph




State Highway #47 from the north end of the bridge over the north channel of
the Platte River to the south line of U.S. Highway #30

 

35 mph




State Highway #47 (Ave. G) from the south line of U.S. Highway #30 to the
north line of 11th Street

 

25 mph




State Highway #47 (11th Street) from the west side of Lake Avenue to the east
side of Avenue G

 

25 mph




State Highway #47 (Lake Avenue) from the north line of 11th Street to the
north line of 20th Street

 

30 mph




State Highway #47 (Lake Avenue) from the north line of 20th Street to the
south line of Highland Drive

 

35 mph




State Highway #47 (Lake Avenue) from the south line of Highland Drive to the
north line of 27th Street

 

45 mph




27th Street from the east line of Avenue G to the east line of Avenue M

 

35 mph




Avenue M from the south line of 17th Street to the north line of 27th Street

 

35 mph




Avenue L from the north line of 8th Street (Highway 30) to the south line of
12th Street

 

35 mph




Cottonwood Drive from the south line of 8th Street to the south end of the
bridge over the north channel of the Platte River

 

35 mph




4th Street from the east side of State Highway #47 to the west side of
Cottonwood Drive

 

35 mph




4th Street from the west side of Lake Avenue to the west corporate limits

 

35 mph




School speed zones as designated in Ch. 73, Schedule III

 

15 mph




All roads within the boundaries of the city parks

 

10 mph




All other streets and highways within the corporate limits

 

25 mph





 



   (B)   Where a different maximum speed is set by ordinance,
appropriate signs shall be posted.



(Neb. RS 39-662, 39-663)  (Prior Code, § 5-303)  (Am. Ord. 958, passed
9-19-2017)



SCHEDULE III.  SCHOOL SPEED ZONES.



   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at the following locations at a
rate of speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions,
but in no event shall the speed of a vehicle exceed 25 miles per hour.  In
addition, the speed limit shall be limited to 15 miles per hour from the
hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. during those days
when the Gothenburg City Schools are in regular session; and in addition, at
any and all times when any flashing yellow lights are turned on for any
activity that may require a reduction in speed.  The school speed zones
apply to the following locations:



 

Avenue I from 12th Street to the alley between 16th and 17th Streets


Avenue H between 12th Street and 13th Street



13th Street between Avenue H and Avenue I



Avenue G from 12th Street to 16th Street



 



(Ord. 958, passed 9-19-2017)



CHAPTER 74:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Snow emergency routes



SCHEDULE I.  SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.



   (A)   (1)   The following streets are declared to be snow
emergency routes within the city. The Mayor (or someone designated by the
Mayor, but always referred to herein as the Mayor) shall, at the Mayor's
discretion, place appropriate signs or other traffic control devices
indicating the existence of snow emergency routes. A designation of any
street, avenue, road, or highway, or portion thereof, as a snow emergency
route shall in no way affect any previous designation of that street, avenue,
road, or highway for any other purposes, but shall be in addition thereto.



      (2)   The following street or highways are designated as
emergency snow arterial streets.



         (a)   Highway 30 from east city limit to west city limit;



         (b)   Highway 47 from north city limit to south city
limit;



         (c)   Highway 47 to Highway 30 Bypass (Avenue D from
Highway 30 to 11th Street; then from Avenue D to Lake Avenue on 11th Street);



         (d)   20th Street from Avenue A to Avenue M;



         (e)   Avenue I from 12th Street to 20th Street;



         (f)   Avenue G from 11th Street to 12th Street;



         (g)   12th Street from Avenue G to Avenue I;



         (h)   27th Street from Lake Avenue to Avenue M;



         (i)   Avenue M from 12th Street to 27th Street;



         (j)   Avenue L from Highway 30 to 12th Street; and



(Prior Code, § 5-515.01)  (Ord. 750, passed 1-16-2001)



   (B)   Upon declaration of snow emergency, the declaration may
include, or may later be expanded to include, a prohibition of parking on
downtown commercial areas. The declaration shall include a statement of the
hours during which parking shall be prohibited for the purpose of snow
removal from the downtown commercial area. The prohibition shall not extend
beyond the time reasonably required for the snow removal. The areas included
are:



      (1)   9th Street from Avenue D to Avenue F;



      (2)   10th Street from Ave. D to Ave. F;



      (3)   Lake Avenue from Highway 30 to 11th Street; and



      (4)   Avenue F from Highway 30 to 11th Street.



(Prior Code, § 5-515.03)



(Ord. 750, passed 1-16-2001)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ANIMALS





         91.   FIRES; FIRE PREVENTION; POISONOUS AND FLAMMABLE
GASES





         92.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION





         94.   PARKS AND RECREATION





         95.   CEMETERIES





         96.   ABANDONED VEHICLES




CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   90.001   Definitions



   90.002   Transient owner exemption



Licenses



   90.015   License required



   90.016   Dog license tags



   90.017   Wrongful licensing



   90.018   Unlawful removal of dog license tag



Animal Control



   90.030   Running at large



   90.031   Dangerous animals; prohibited animals in residential areas



   90.032   Authority to kill animal when capture is impossible



   90.033   Interference with performance of official police duties



   90.034   Unlawful to kill, injure, or poison animals



   90.035   Unlawful to keep noisy, offensive animals



   90.036   Unlawful to encourage or participate in dog fighting



   90.037   Liability of owner for damage caused by animal



   90.038   Impoundment; animal shelter



   90.039   Legal destruction of animal



   90.040   Disposition of impounded animals



   90.041   Adoption procedure



   90.042   Dyeing prohibited



   90.043   Defecation in park prohibited



   90.044   Animal enclosures



Rabies Control



   90.055   Suspicion of rabies



   90.056   Confinement cost



   90.057   Rabies testing cost



Abandonment, Neglect, and Cruelty



   90.070   Authority of law enforcement



   90.071   Prohibited acts with equines and bovines



 



   90.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.001  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   (B)   Hereinafter in this chapter, dogs, cats, and exotic pets shall
be referred to as animals, unless stated otherwise.



(Neb. RS 17-526)  (Prior Code, § 6-101)



      ABANDON.  To leave any animal in one's care, whether as owner or
custodian, for any length of time without making effective provision for its
food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal's health.



(Neb. RS 28-1008)  (Prior Code, § 6-202)



      ANIMAL.  Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom. The term
does not include an uncaptured wild creature or a livestock animal as defined
in this section.



(Neb. RS 28-1008)  (Prior Code, § 6-202)



      BOVINE.  A cow, an ox, or a bison.



(Neb. RS 28-1008)  (Prior Code, § 6-202)



      CAT.  Male and female cats of the age of four months or more.



(Neb. RS 17-526)  (Prior Code, § 6-101)



      CRUELLY MISTREAT.  Knowingly and intentionally kill, maim,
disfigure, torture, beat, mutilate, burn, scald, or otherwise inflict harm
upon any animal.



(Neb. RS 28-1008)  (Prior Code, § 6-202)



      CRUELLY NEGLECT.  Fail to provide any animal in one's care,
whether as owner or custodian, with food, water, or other care as is
reasonably necessary for the animal's health.



(Neb. RS 28-1008)  (Prior Code, § 6-202)



      DOG.  Both male and female dogs of the age of four months or
more.



(Neb. RS 17-526)  (Prior Code, § 6-101)



      EXOTIC PET. Any male or female mammal, normally wild or
non-domesticated, that is being maintained in a household within the
corporate limits of the city.



(Neb. RS 17-526)  (Prior Code, § 6-101)



      HUMANE KILLING.  Destruction of an animal by a method which
causes the animal a minimum of pain and suffering.



(Neb. RS 28-1008)  (Prior Code, § 6-202)



      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  Any member of the Nebraska State
Patrol, any county or deputy sheriff, any member of the police force of the
city or any other city or village, or any other public official authorized by
the city or any other city or village to enforce state or local animal
control laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances. LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER also
includes a special investigator appointed as a deputy state sheriff as
authorized pursuant to Neb. RS 81-201 while acting within the authority of
the Director of Agriculture.



(Neb. RS 28-1008)  (Prior Code, § 6-202)



      LIVESTOCK ANIMAL.  Any bovine, equine, swine, sheep, goats,
domesticated cervine animals, ratite birds, or poultry.



(Neb. RS 28-1008)



      OWNER or CUSTODIAN.  Any person owning, keeping, possessing,
harboring, or knowingly permitting an animal to remain on or about any
premises owned or occupied by such person.



      POLICE ANIMAL. A horse or dog owned or controlled by the state or
any county, city, or village for the purpose of assisting a law enforcement
officer in the performance of his or her official enforcement duties.



(Neb. RS 54-606, 71-4401)  (Prior Code, § 6-106)



      VACCINATION FOR RABIES.  The inoculation of an animal with a
rabies vaccine licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture. The
vaccination must be performed by a duly licensed veterinarian.



(Prior Code, § 6-102)



(Am. Ord. 956, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 90.002  TRANSIENT OWNER EXEMPTION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any animal belonging
to any person on a sojourn, or for bench or show purposes in the city, or for
other purposes, provided the animal remains near its owner or keeper, his or
her motor vehicle, other animals, or affects and complies with the
requirements of this chapter.



(Neb. RS 17-547)  (Prior Code, § 6-123)



LICENSES



§ 90.015  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Any person who shall own, keep, or harbor an animal over the age of
four months within the city shall, within 30 days after acquisition of the
animal, acquire a license for each animal annually by or before January 1 of
each year. The tax shall be delinquent from and after January 31; provided,
the possessor of any animal brought into or harbored within the corporate
limits subsequent to January 1 of any year, shall be liable for the payment
of the animal tax levied herein, and the tax shall be delinquent if not paid
within 30 days thereafter. Licenses shall be issued by the City Police
Department upon the payment of a license fee of $5 for each animal. The
license shall not be transferable and no refund will be allowed in case of
death, sale, or other disposition of the licensed animal. The owner shall
state, at the time the application is made and upon printed forms provided
for the purpose, his or her name and address, and the name, breed, color, and
sex of each animal owned and kept by him or her. A certificate that the
animal has had a rabies shot, effective for the ensuing year of the license,
shall be presented when the license is applied for, and no license or tag
shall be issued until the certificate is shown.



(Neb. RS 17-526, 54-603, 71-4412)  (Prior Code, § 6-103)



§ 90.016  DOG LICENSE TAGS.



   Upon the payment of the license fee, the City Police Department shall
issue to the owner of a dog a license certificate and a metallic tag for each
dog licensed. The metallic tags shall be properly attached to the collar or
harness of all dogs so licensed and shall entitle the owner to keep or harbor
the dog until December 31 following the licensing. In the event that a
license tag is lost, and upon satisfactory evidence that the original plate
or tag was issued in accordance with the provisions herein, the City Police
Department shall issue a duplicate or new tag for the balance of the year for
which the license tax has been paid, and shall charge and collect a fee of $1
for each duplicate or new tag issued. All license fees and collections shall
be immediately credited to the General Fund. It shall be the duty of the City
Police Department to issue tags of a suitable design that are different in
appearance each year.



(Neb. RS 17-526, 54-603)  (Prior Code, § 6-104)



§ 90.017  WRONGFUL LICENSING.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of any dog to
permit or allow the dog to wear any license, metallic tag, or other city
identification than that issued by the City Police Department for dogs.



(Neb. RS 17-526, 54-603)  (Prior Code, § 6-105)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.018  UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF DOG LICENSE TAG.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, or cause to be removed,
the collar, harness, or metallic tag from any licensed dog without the
consent of the owner, keeper, or possessor thereof.



(Neb. RS 17-526)  (Prior Code, § 6-115)  Penalty, see § 90.999



ANIMAL CONTROL



§ 90.030  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow the
animal to run at large at any time within the corporate limits of the city.
It shall be the duty of the city police to cause any animal found to be
running at large within the city to be taken up and impounded. RUNNING AT
LARGE shall mean any animal found off the premise of the owner, and not under
control of the owner or a responsible person.



(Prior Code, § 6-107)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of any
animal, or any person having the charge, custody, or control thereof, to
permit a horse, mule, cow, sheep, goat, swine, or other animal to be driven
or run at large on any of the public ways and property, or upon the property
of another, or to be tethered or staked out in a manner so as to allow the
animal to reach or pass into any public way.



(Prior Code, § 6-201)



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow poultry,
chickens, turkeys, geese, or any other fowls to run at large within the
corporate limits, except in enclosed places on private property.



(Prior Code, § 6-206)



(Neb. RS 17-547) Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.031  DANGEROUS ANIMALS; PROHIBITED ANIMALS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   (A)   Definitions.  Unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the definitions in this division apply throughout this section.



      DANGEROUS DOG or OTHER DANGEROUS ANIMAL.  Any dog or animal
that, according to the records of the appropriate authority, has:



         (a)   Inflicted severe injury on a human being without
provocation on public or private property;



         (b)   Killed a domestic animal without provocation while
off of the owner's property; or



         (c)   Been previously found to be potentially dangerous,
the owner having received notice of the finding, and the dog or other animal
again aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans or
domestic animals.



      OWNER.  Any person possessing, harboring, keeping, having an
interest in or having control or custody of an animal.



      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.  Any dog that, when unprovoked
inflicts bites on a human or a domestic animal either on public or private
property, or chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any
public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or any
dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to
cause injury or to otherwise threaten the safety of humans or domestic
animals.



      PROPER ENCLOSURE OF A POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.  That, while on
owner's property, a potentially dangerous dog shall be securely confined
indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to
prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from
escaping. The pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top,
shall be securely embedded into the ground and shall also provide protection
from the elements for the dog.



      SEVERE INJURY.  Any physical injury that results in broken bones
or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.



   (B)   Determination that dog is potentially dangerous dog.  If it
is determined by a police officer, after investigation, that a dog is a
potentially dangerous dog, the police officer shall notify in writing the
owner of the dog that it has been declared a potentially dangerous dog. If
the owner of the dog disagrees with the police officer's determination, the
owner shall have the right to appeal the matter to the City Council. The
appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within ten days of receiving the
written notification, and the Council shall hold its hearing within 30 days
of the filing. The hearing shall be conducted by the Mayor, or his or her
designated agent, The hearing shall be informal in nature, and the rules of
evidence shall not apply, however the City Council shall consider only
credible and relevant evidence. The owner and police officer shall have the
opportunity to present evidence and be heard on this matter. The
determination that a dog is a potentially dangerous dog shall be made by the
concurrence of a majority of all members elected to the Council. During the
procedure described in this division, a dog declared as potentially dangerous
may be impounded pursuant to § 90.038 at the owner's expense or, if the
officer is assured by the owner's signed agreement of proper confinement and
safeguards, and that the dog has a current rabies vaccination, the dog may be
released to its owner pending a final determination.



   (C)   Potentially dangerous dog ownership limit.  No person shall
own, keep or harbor more than one potentially dangerous dog per residence.



   (D)   Registration of potentially dangerous dog.



      (1)   The owner of a dog which has been declared as a
potentially dangerous dog shall immediately apply for a certificate of
registration from the Police Department. The owner of the potentially
dangerous dog must be 21 years of age and show proof of rabies vaccination at
time of registration. The owner of any potentially dangerous dog shall
register the animal with the Police Department immediately. The registration
shall include the fee as set under division (H) and shall be accompanied by
the following information:



         (a)   The name of the current owner of the dog;



         (b)   The address where the animal is harbored;



         (c)   A description of the animal, including name,
breed, sex and coloring as well as a colored photograph;



         (d)   The current rabies tag number for the dog;



         (e)   Microchip manufacturer and microchip number;



         (f)   Provide proof of general liability insurance
covering injury or damage caused by the dog;



         (g)   Sufficient evidence of proper enclosure to confine
a potentially dangerous dog; and



         (h)   Posting of the premises with a sign conspicuously
displaying a warning and language informing children of the presence of a
dangerous dog.



      (2)   A decision by the Chief of Police not to issue the
certificate of registration may be reviewed as provided for in division (B)
of this section.



   (E)   Potentially dangerous dogs; spaying and neutering required. 
Any animal determined to be potentially dangerous shall be spayed or neutered
by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense no less than 30 days after
the determination is entered by the by the Chief of Police with written proof
of spaying or neutering being provided to the Police Department within 72
hours of the procedure being completed.



   (F)   Microchip identification.  Any dog deemed potentially
dangerous shall be implanted with microchip identification by a licensed
veterinarian at the owner's expense no less than 30 days after the
determination is entered by the Chief of Police with the microchip
identification number provided to the Police Department within 72 hours of
procedure being completed.



   (G)   Sale and/or ownership transfer of potentially dangerous dog;
change of owner residence.  Any owner or custodian of a potentially
dangerous dog shall have a continuing obligation to provide updated
registration information to the Police Department within 30 days of the owner
changing residence or the sale or transfer of the dog. The information
provided to the Police Department must include the name of the new owner of
the dog if sold or transferred and the address where the dog will be harbored.



   (H)   Annual registration and fees.  The owner of any potentially
dangerous dog shall annually register the dog with the Police Department and
pay an annual registration fee as set by City Council.



   (I)   Annual publication of potentially dangerous dogs.  At least
once per calendar year, the Police Department shall publish in the local
newspaper a list of dogs deemed potentially dangerous, providing the name of
the owner, the address where the dog is harbored and a description of the dog
including the name and breed and a colored photograph.



   (J)   Restraint of potentially dangerous dogs.  It is unlawful for
an owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside the
proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial
chain or leash and under physical restraint of a responsible person. The
muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any
person or animal.



   (K)   Dangerous animals prohibited.  The owning, allowing, keeping
or harboring of a dangerous dog or other dangerous animal within the
corporate limits of the city is hereby prohibited and unlawful.



   (L)   Liability insurance required.  The owner of the dog shall be
required to maintain general liability insurance covering property damage and
bodily injury caused by the dog, with a combined single limit of $300,000 per
occurrence, and shall be required to show proof of the insurance at the time
of the annual registration.



   (M)    Certain animals prohibited in residential areas.



      (1)   Within any residential area (for purposes of this
division defined as any area not zoned for commercial agricultural or
industrial purposes), the keeping, harboring or selling of any poisonous or
venomous animal or any warm-blooded carnivorous or omnivorous animal,
including but not limited to nonhuman primates, raccoons, skunks, foxes,
leopards, panthers, tigers and lions, but excluding fowl, dogs, house cats,
ferrets, and small rodents of varieties commonly kept as household pets such
as rats, mice, gerbils, guinea pigs, and hamsters, is hereby prohibited.



      (2)   Non-poisonous snakes shall be kept in locked
escape-proof cages except when being handled. No snake shall be permitted by
the owner, keeper, or handler to escape from a cage or while being handled.



   (N)   Exceptions.  Dogs shall not be declared dangerous if the
threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the
owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or has
in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted
the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.



   (O)   Impoundment of dangerous animals or potentially dangerous
dogs.  Any potentially dangerous dog which is the following, or any
dangerous dog or any dangerous animal shall be immediately confiscated by a
police officer and placed in quarantine, at the owner's cost, until ordered
by the court to either return the dog to the owner or humanely kill it. The
option of releasing the animal to the owner in lieu of impoundment, as
provided in § 90.038, shall not be available when the dog or animal is being
confiscated and impounded pursuant to this section.



      (1)   Not validly registered under this section;



      (2)   Not maintained in the proper enclosure;



      (3)   Outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside of the
proper enclosure and not under physical restraint of the responsible person;
or



      (4)   Not covered by liability insurance coverage or a surety
bond as required by this section.



   (P)   Violations; penalty; destruction of dangerous animals or
potentially dangerous dogs.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this
section, and the violation shall be punished as provided for in § 90.999(B).



      (2)   If the court finds that a dog is a potentially dangerous
dog as defined in this section, the court may, in addition to the usual
judgment of conviction, order that the dog be humanely killed.



      (3)   Upon a finding by the court that a dog is a dangerous
dog, as defined in this section, or other dangerous animal, the court shall,
in addition to the usual judgment of conviction, order that the dog or other
animal be humanely killed.



Penalty, see § 90.999



Statutory reference:



   Dangerous dogs, see Neb. R.S. 54-617—54-624



§ 90.032  AUTHORITY TO KILL ANIMAL WHEN CAPTURE IS IMPOSSIBLE.



   The city police shall have the authority to kill any animals showing
vicious tendencies or characteristics of rabies which make capture impossible
because of the danger involved.



(Neb. RS 54-605)  (Prior Code, § 6-108)



§ 90.033  INTERFERENCE WITH PERFORMANCE OF OFFICIAL POLICE DUTIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, delay, or interfere with
any city police officer who is performing any duty enjoined upon him or her
by the provisions of this chapter, or to break open, or in any manner
directly or indirectly aid, counsel, or advise the breaking open of the
animal shelter, any ambulance wagon, or other vehicle used for the collecting
or conveying of animals to the shelter.



(Neb. RS 28-906)  (Prior Code, § 6-110)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.034  UNLAWFUL TO KILL , INJURE, OR POISON ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful to kill, or to administer, or cause to be
administered, poison of any sort to an animal, or in any manner to injure,
maim, or destroy, or in any manner attempt to injure, maim, or destroy any
animal that is the property of another person, or to place any poison or
poisoned food where the same is accessible to an animal; provided, that this
section shall not apply to city police officers acting within their power and
duty.



(Prior Code, § 6-111)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.035  UNLAWFUL TO KEEP NOISY, OFFENSIVE ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any animal,
fowl, or any other creature, which by loud, continued, or frequent barking,
howling, yelping, crowing, or utterance of any other sound, shall annoy or
disturb any neighborhood or person, or which habitually barks, howls, yelps,
crows or utters any annoying sound, or chases pedestrians, drivers, or owners
of horses or vehicles while they are on any public sidewalks, streets, or
alleys in the city. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to
apply to the city animal shelter.



(Neb. RS 17-526)  (Prior Code, § 6-112)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.036  UNLAWFUL TO ENCOURAGE OR PARTICIPATE IN DOG FIGHTING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, by agreement or otherwise, to set
dogs to fighting, or by any gesture or word, to encourage the same to fight.



(Neb. RS 17-526)  (Prior Code, § 6-113)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.037  LIABILITY OF OWNER FOR DAMAGE CAUSED BY ANIMAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow an animal owned, kept, or
harbored by him or her, or under his or her charge or control, to injure or
destroy any real or personal property of any description belonging to another
person. The owner or possessor of any animal, in addition to the usual
judgment upon conviction, may be made to be liable to the persons so injured
in an amount equal to the value of the damage so sustained.



(Neb. RS 54-601, 54-602)  (Prior Code, § 6-114)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.038  IMPOUNDMENT; ANIMAL SHELTER.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the city police to capture, secure,
and remove in a humane manner to the designated city animal shelter any
animal violating any of the provisions of this chapter. The animals so
impounded shall be treated in a humane manner and shall be provided with a
sufficient supply of food and fresh water each day. Notice of impoundment of
all animals, including any significant marks of identification, shall be
posted at the animal shelter as public notification of impoundment. If the
animal is not claimed the animal becomes the property of the city. All
animals which have not been claimed, redeemed, or released shall be destroyed
and disposed of in accordance with applicable rules and regulations
pertaining to the same,



(Neb. RS 17-548, 71-4408)



   (B)   The animal shelter shall be safe, suitable, and conveniently
located for impounding, keeping and destruction of animals. The shelter shall
be sanitary, ventilated and lighted. The shelter must be licensed by the
state under the Nebraska Commercial Dog and Cat Operator Inspection Act.



(Neb RS 17-548, 54-625 to 54-636)



§ 90.039  LEGAL DESTRUCTION OF ANIMAL.



   Any person who owns, harbors, or in any way sustains and animal that he
or she wishes to be destroyed may place the same with a licensed veterinarian
to be destroyed and disposed of in accordance with applicable rules and
regulations pertaining to the same. The destruction and disposal shall be at
the owner's expense.



§ 90.040  DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Holding period.  Impounded animals which are not claimed by
their owner shall be kept for a minimum of 72 hours, except when an animal
arrives at the shelter in so sick or injured condition that, in the judgment
of the police officer or a licensed veterinarian, human compassion requires
that the suffering be promptly ended. In that instance the time period shall
not apply and the animal will be humanely killed to prevent needless
suffering.



   (B)   Disposition of animal after expiration of holding period. 
Whenever any animal shall remain in the animal shelter or other place of
impoundment for a period longer than 72 hours from the impounding of the
animal (except those animals impounded for disease control observation, in
which case the period shall begin upon the expiration of the applicable
observation period), the animal shall be disposed of in a humane manner by a
veterinarian, except as set forth in division (D) of this section.



   (C)   Unlawful disposal.  No police officer shall dispose of any
captured or impounded animal except through the procedures provided for by
this chapter. No police officer shall hold a commercial animal establishment
permit.



   (D)   Adoption.  The city may, in lieu of having an unclaimed
animal killed as provided in this section, the animal may be held for a
period of up to 72 additional hours for the purposes of adoption, at the
discretion of the animal shelter staff and Chief of Police give the animal
into the custody of any adult requesting adoption of a specific animal as a
pet after viewing it, providing that the person agrees that he or she will
humanely care for the animal and will not permit its use for breeding, guard,
laboratory, experimental or illegal purposes. If the animal is not adopted or
is deemed to be unadoptable the animal shall be disposed of in a humane
manner by a veterinarian.



   (E)   Impoundment fee and boarding fee.  An impoundment fee shall
be charged when any animal is picked up by an officer of the city, or an
agent thereof, and transported to the animal shelter. The fee for the care of
any dog or cat during the period of impoundment shall be at a rate for each
day that the dog or cat is impounded; the fee for the care during the period
of impoundment shall be at a rate for each day.



§ 90.041  ADOPTION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   In accordance with § 90.040(D), it is the city's policy to
encourage and promote the adoption of unclaimed impounded animals. Upon
selection of a dog or cat for adoption, but prior to delivery of custody of
the animal, the animal shelter shall complete the following requirements.



      (1)   Collect an adoption fee and issue a receipt for the fee.
The adoption fee for a dog or cat shall be in accordance with the current fee
schedule.



      (2)   Per state statute all adopted dogs and cats must be
spayed or neutered. The provision may be made by causing the dog or cat to be
spayed or neutered by the veterinarian at the animal shelter prior to
release, where in such case a spay or neutering fee will be collected. The
spay and neutering fee shall be in accordance with the latest approved fee
schedule, or entering into a written agreement with the adopter of the dog or
cat, guaranteeing that spaying or neutering will be performed by a licensed
veterinarian in compliance with an agreement which shall contain the
following information:



         (a)   The date of the agreement;



         (b)   The name, address, and signature of the releasing
entity and the adopter;



         (c)   A description of the dog or cat to be adopted or
purchased;



         (d)   A statement, in conspicuous bold print, that
spaying or neutering of the dog or cat is required pursuant to this section;
and



         (e)   Agree to provide written proof of such spaying or
neutering to the Police Department with in ten days of the adoption.



      (3)   A rabies vaccination will be given to all dogs and cats
and a rabies vaccination fee will be collected. The rabies vaccination fee
shall be in accordance with the latest fee schedule.



      (4)   If the dog or cat is not of sufficient age to be spayed
or neutered, the person adopting the dog or cat must agree in writing to have
the dog or cat spayed or neutered within ten days of the dog or cat reaching
the age of six months and agree to provide written proof of such spaying or
neutering to the Police Department within ten days of the spaying or
neutering.



      (5)   If the dog or cat is not of sufficient age to be
vaccinated for rabies, the person adopting the dog or cat must agree in
writing to have the dog or cat vaccinated for rabies within ten days of the
dog or cat reaching the age of three months and agree to provide written
proof of the rabies vaccination to the Police Department within ten days of
the rabies vaccination.



   (B)   Failure to spay or neuter or vaccinate for rabies pursuant to
the requirements of this section shall constitute a violation. And upon
conviction the court shall, in addition to the fine, direct that the animal
be spayed or neutered and/or vaccinated for rabies.



   (C)   The owner of any animal which is impounded and if not claimed
is adopted or destroyed under this chapter shall be held responsible for
payment of the boarding fees, impoundment fees, the expense incident to the
impoundment for observation or the cost of euthanization. Failure to pay the
fee or expense to the city shall constitute an offense.



(Neb RS 54-638)



Penalty, see § 90.999 (B)



§ 90.042  DYEING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to, within the city, dye or
artificially color any rabbit, baby chick, duckling, other fowl, or animals.



(Neb. RS 17-526)  (Prior Code, § 6-122)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.043  DEFECATION IN PARK PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner, or anyone having custody, control,
or supervision of any dog, cat, or other animal, to allow the animal to
defecate in or on any park owned by the city, except in designated areas. Any
person violating this section shall be fined in an amount as prescribed in §
90.999, and shall be responsible for the cost of clean up.



(Neb. RS 17-526)  (Prior Code, § 6-124)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.044  ANIMAL ENCLOSURES.



   All pens, cages, sheds, yards, or any other area or enclosure for the
confinement or animals and fowls not specifically barred within the corporate
limits shall be kept in a clean and orderly manner so as not to become a
menace or nuisance to the neighborhood in which the enclosure is located.



(Neb. RS 17-526)  (Prior Code, § 6-205)  Penalty, see § 90.999



RABIES CONTROL



§ 90.055  SUSPICION OF RABIES.



   (A)   (1)   Any animal which is owned by a person and has bitten
any person or caused an abrasion of the skin of any person shall be seized by
the rabies control authority for a period of not less than ten days if:



         (a)   The animal is suspected of having rabies,
regardless of the species and whether or not the animal has been vaccinated;



         (b)   The animal is not vaccinated and is a dog, cat, or
another animal of a species determined by the Department of Health and Human
Services to be a rabid species; or



         (c)   The animal is of a species which has been
determined by the Department of Health and Human Services to be a rabid
species not amenable to rabies protection by immunization, whether or not the
animal has been vaccinated.



      (2)   If, after observation and examination by a veterinarian,
at the end of the ten-day period, the animal shows no clinical signs of
rabies, the animal may be released to its owner.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) below, whenever
any person has been bitten or has an abrasion of the skin caused by an animal
owned by another person, which animal has been vaccinated in accordance with
state law, or if an injury to a person is caused by an owned dog, cat, or
other animal determined by the Department of Health and Human Services to be
a rabid species amenable to rabies protection by immunization which has been
vaccinated, the animal shall be confined by the owner or other responsible
person as required by the rabies control authority for a period of at least
ten days and shall be observed and examined by a veterinarian at the end of
the ten-day period. If no clinical signs of rabies are found by the
veterinarian, the animal may be released from confinement.



      (2)   A vaccinated animal owned by a law enforcement or
governmental military agency which bites or causes an abrasion of the skin of
any person during training or the performance of the animal's duties may be
confined as provided in division (B)(1) above. The agency shall maintain
ownership of and shall control and supervise the actions of the animal for a
period of 15 days following the injury. If, during the period, the death of
the animal occurs for any reason, a veterinarian shall, within 24 hours of
the death, examine the tissues of the animal for clinical signs of rabies.



   (C)   Any dog, cat, or other animal of a rabid species which has
bitten a person or caused an abrasion of the skin of a person and which is
unowned or the ownership of which cannot be determined within 72 hours of the
time of the bite or abrasion shall be immediately subject to any tests which
the Department of Health and Human Services believes are necessary to
determine whether the animal is afflicted with rabies. The 72-hour period
shall include holidays and weekends and shall not be extended for any reason.
The tests required by this division may include tests which require the
animal to be destroyed.



(Neb. RS 71-4406)  (Prior Code, § 6-118)



§ 90.056  CONFINEMENT COST.



   If the ownership of any animal which has bitten a person can be
established, the owner shall be liable for the cost of confining it for the
length of time as is necessary to establish whether the animal is rabid. If
the ownership of the animal cannot be determined, the cost of confining an
animal who is only suspected of having rabies shall be paid by the city.



(Neb. RS 17-526)  (Prior Code, § 6-119)



§ 90.057  RABIES TESTING COST.



   All costs incurred in the collection, submission, and sending to the
Department of Health, of heads of animals that have or are suspected of dying
from rabies, shall  be borne by the owner of the animal if the ownership
thereof can be established. If ownership of the animal cannot be determined,
the cost of sending the head of an animal which has not bitten any person and
is only suspected of having rabies, shall be paid by the city.



(Neb. RS 17-526)  (Prior Code, § 6-120)



ABANDONMENT, NEGLECT, AND CRUELTY



§ 90.070  AUTHORITY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   A law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an
animal has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly mistreated
may seek a warrant authorizing entry upon private property to inspect, care
for, or impound the animal.



   (B)   A law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an
animal has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly mistreated
may issue a citation to the owner or custodian as prescribed in Neb, RS
29-422 to 29-429.



   (C)   Any law enforcement officer acting under this section shall
not be liable for damage to property if such damage is not the result of the
officer's negligence.



(Neb. RS 28-1012)  (Prior Code, § 6-203)  (Am. Ord. 956, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 90.071  PROHIBITED ACTS WITH EQUINES AND BOVINES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall intentionally trip or cause to fall,
or lasso or rope the legs of, any equine by any means for the purpose of
entertainment, sport, practice, or contest.



      (2)   The intentional tripping or causing to fall, or lassoing
or roping the legs of, any equine by any means for the purpose of
entertainment, sport, practice, or contest shall not be considered a commonly
accepted practice occurring in conjunction with sanctioned rodeos, animal
racing, or pulling contests.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall intentionally trip, cause to fall, or
drag any bovine by its tail by any means for the purpose of entertainment,
sport, practice, or contest.



      (2)   The intentional tripping, causing to fall, or dragging
of any bovine by its tail by any means for the purpose of entertainment,
sport, practice, or contest shall not be considered a commonly accepted
practice occurring in conjunction with sanctioned rodeos, animal racing, or
pulling contests.



(Neb. RS 28-1009.02, 28-1009.03, 28-1013.01, 28-1013.02)  (Prior Code, §
6-204.01)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   A person who intentionally, knowingly or recklessly
abandons, cruelly neglects, or cruelly mistreats an animal is guilty of an
offense.



(Prior Code, § 6-204)



      (2)   A person commits harassment of a police animal if he or
she knowingly and intentionally teases or harasses a police animal in order
to distract, agitate, or harm the police animal for the purpose of preventing
such animal from performing its legitimate official duties.



(Neb. RS 28-1009)



   (B)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for
each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24
hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior code, § 6-401)



   (C)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the
manner provided by law. Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722)  (Prior Code, § 6-402)  (Am. Ord. 956, passed
9-19-2017)



CHAPTER 91:  FIRES; FIRE PREVENTION; POISONOUS AND FLAMMABLE GASES



Section



Fires



   91.01   Fire Chief authority for preservation of property



   91.02   Interference with performance of duties unlawful



   91.03   Disorderly spectator unlawful



   91.04   Unauthorized use of fire equipment unlawful



   91.05   Obstruction of hydrant unlawful



   91.06   Refusal to provide requested assistance unlawful



   91.07   Unlawful to drive over fire hose



   91.08   Vehicular traffic regulations during fire



   91.09   False alarm unlawful



Fire Prevention



   91.20   Fire Prevention Code adopted by reference



   91.21   Life Safety Code adopted by reference



   91.22   Fire Code enforcement



   91.23   Fire limits



   91.24   Fires regulated; open burning ban; exception



Poisonous and Flammable Gases



   91.35   Storage and registration



 



   91.99   Penalty



FIRES



§ 91.01  FIRE CHIEF AUTHORITY FOR PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.



   The Fire Chief, or any officer in charge of the Fire Department, shall
have the authority and power to cause the removal of property whenever it
shall become necessary for the preservation of more valuable property, the
protection of human life, or to prevent the spreading of fire to adjoining
property. The Fire Chief may direct the city firefighters to remove any
building, structure, or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any
fire. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to blow up, or cause to be
blown up, with explosives any building or structure during the progress of a
fire for the purpose of checking the progress of the same.



(Prior Code, § 7-101)



§ 91.02  INTERFERENCE WITH PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hinder or obstruct
the City Fire Chief or the members of the Fire Department in the performance
of their duty.



(Neb. RS 28-908)  (Prior Code, § 7-104)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  DISORDERLY SPECTATOR UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, during the time of a fire and for
a period of 36 hours after its extinguishment, to hinder, resist, or refuse
to obey the City Fire Chief, or to act in a noisy or disorderly manner. The
Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power and authority during
the time to arrest or command any person to assist them in the performance of
their official duties.



(Neb. RS 28-908)  (Prior Code, § 7-102)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person except the Fire Chief and the
members of the City Fire Department to molest, destroy, handle or in any
other way to interfere with the use and storage of any of the fire trucks and
other apparatus belonging to the city.



(Neb. RS 28-519)  (Prior Code, § 7-103)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  OBSTRUCTION OF HYDRANT UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the use of a fire
hydrant, or have or place any material within 15 feet of the hydrant. Any
vehicle or material found as an obstruction may be immediately removed by the
Fire Chief or any member of the Fire Department, at the risk, cost, and
expense of the  owner or claimant.



(Neb. RS 60-6,166)  (Prior Code, § 7-105)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  REFUSAL TO PROVIDE REQUESTED ASSISTANCE UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, after the command of the
Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, to aid in extinguishing a fire or to
assist in the removal and protection of property.



(Neb. RS 28-908)  (Prior Code, § 7-106)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.07  UNLAWFUL TO DRIVE OVER FIRE HOSE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the Fire
Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, to drive any vehicle over unprotected hose of
the Fire Department.



(Neb. RS 60-6,184)  (Prior Code, § 7-107)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.08  VEHICULAR TRAFFIC REGULATIONS DURING FIRE.



   No vehicle, except by the specific direction of the Fire Chief or
Assistant Fire Chief, shall follow, approach, or park closer than 500 feet to
any fire vehicle, or to any fire hydrant to which a hose is connected.
Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to vehicles carrying doctors,
members of the Fire Department, or emergency vehicles.



(Neb. RS  60-6,183)  (Prior Code, § 7-108)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.09  FALSE ALARM UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without good
and reasonable cause raise any false alarm of fire.



(Neb. RS 28-907, 35-520)  (Prior Code, § 7-109)  Penalty, see § 91.99



FIRE PREVENTION



§ 91.20  FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
safe fire prevention and control, the National Fire Protection Association
Uniform Fire Code, 2003 Edition, as recommended and published by the National
Fire Protection Association, and printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though
printed in full herein insofar as the Code does not conflict with the
statutes of the state. One copy of the Uniform Fire Code is on file at the
office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The provisions of the Fire Code shall be controlling
throughout the city and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.



(Neb. RS 18-132, 19-902, 19-922, 81-502)  (Prior Code, § 7-201)  (Ord.
719, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 814, passed 3-6-2007)



§ 91.21  LIFE SAFETY CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
safe fire prevention and control, the National Fire Protection Association
Life Safety Code, 2000 Edition, as recommended and published by the National
Fire Protection Association, and printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though
printed in full herein insofar as the Code does not conflict with the
statutes of the state. One copy of the Life Safety Code is on file at the
office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The provisions of the Life Safety Code shall be controlling
throughout the city and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 7-201.1)  (Ord. 815, passed 3-6-2007)



§ 91.22  FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of all city officials to enforce the incorporated
fire code provisions, and all infractions shall be immediately brought to the
attention of the Fire Chief.



(Prior Code, § 7-202)



§ 91.23  FIRE LIMITS.



   The following described territory in the city shall be and constitute
the fire limits:



      All of blocks numbered 3, 4, 5, and 6, of the original town, now
City of Gothenburg, Nebraska, and all the blocks numbered 9, 12, 16, and the
south one-half of blocks 10, 11, 17, 23 and 24 in the First Addition to the
City of Gothenburg, Nebraska.



(Neb. RS 17-550)  (Prior Code, § 7-203)  (Am. Ord. 922, passed 10-6-2015)



§ 91.24  FIRES REGULATED; OPEN BURNING BAN; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   It shall be lawful to build or set out fires outside of the
fire limits; provided, that the person building the fires shall have the
substance to be burned in a fireproof trash burner or incinerator with a
metal fireproof screen of not more than one-inch mesh. The incinerator shall
be built in such a way as to not permit the escape of burning paper or other
substance. Open fires and discharge of fireworks shall be prohibited within
the fire limits.



(Prior Code, § 7-204)



   (B)   (1)   There shall be an open burning ban on all bonfires,
outdoor rubbish fires, and fires for the purpose of clearing land.



      (2)   The Fire Chief  may waive an open burning ban under
division (B)(1) of this section for an area under the municipal Fire
Department's jurisdiction by issuing an open burning permit to a person
requesting permission to conduct open burning.  The permit issued by the
Fire Chief to a person desiring to conduct open burning shall be in writing,
signed by the Fire Chief, and on a form provided by the State Fire Marshal.



      (3)   The Fire Chief may waive the open burning ban in the
municipal Fire Department's jurisdiction when conditions are acceptable to
the Chief.  Anyone intending to burn in that jurisdiction when the open
burning ban has been waived shall notify the Fire Chief of his or her
intention to burn prior to starting the burn.



      (4)   The Fire Chief may adopt standards listing the
conditions acceptable for issuing a permit to conduct open burning under
division (B)(2) of this section.



      (5)   The Fire Department may charge a fee not to exceed $10
for each such permit issued.  This fee shall be remitted to the governing
body for inclusion in the general funds allocated to the Fire Department. 
These funds shall not reduce the tax requirements for the Fire Department. 
No such fee shall be collected from any state or political subdivision to
which such a permit is issued to conduct open burning under division (B)(2)
of this section in the course of that state's or political subdivision's
official duties.



(Neb. RS 81-520.01)  (Prior Code, § 7-205) (Am. Ord. 923, passed 10-6-2015)



POISONOUS AND FLAMMABLE GASES



§ 91.35  STORAGE AND REGISTRATION.



   In addition to notifying the City Fire Department, pursuant to Neb. RS
28-1233(3), any person desiring to store or keep for any period of time any
form of poisonous or flammable gases or liquefied petroleum gases within the
city shall register the information with the City Clerk 24 hours prior to the
storage. The transfer of gases to another person within the city shall
require the person receiving the gases to register the transfer and the new
location of the gases with the City Clerk. The transfer of gases to a new
location by the owner shall require registration of the new location with the
City Clerk. This section shall not apply to the storage of five gallons or
less of gasoline.



(Neb. RS 17-549, 17-556, 28-1229, 28-1233)  (Prior Code, § 7-301)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of the
failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 7-401)



CHAPTER 92:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



Sidewalks



   92.01   Kept clean of snow, ice, debris



   92.02   Repair



   92.03   Construction by owner



   92.04   Construction by city



   92.05   Regulation of obstructions



Streets



   92.15   Crossings



   92.16   Opening, widening, improving, or vacating



   92.17   Excavation



   92.18   Driving stakes



   92.19   Mixing concrete; harmful liquids



   92.20   Operation of heavy equipment



   92.21   Eaves and gutter spouts



   92.22   Pipe lines and wires



   92.23   Construction assessment



   92.24   Cutting curb



   92.25   Prohibited fences



 



   92.99   Penalty



SIDEWALKS



§ 92.01  KEPT CLEAN OF SNOW, ICE, DEBRIS.



   It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot or lots, or the owner
of any vacant lot or lots within the corporate limits, to allow snow, sleet,
mud, ice, or other substance to accumulate on the sidewalks, or to permit any
snow, sleet, ice, mud, or other substance to remain upon the sidewalk. All
sidewalks within the business district shall be cleaned within five hours
after the cessation of a storm, unless the storm or fall of snow shall have
taken place during the night, in which case the sidewalk shall be cleaned
before 8:30 a.m. the following day; provided, sidewalks within the
residential areas of the city shall be cleaned within 24 hours after the
cessation of the storm.



(Neb. RS 17-557)  (Prior Code, § 8-201)



§ 92.02  REPAIR.



   (A)   The Mayor and City Council may construct and repair sidewalks,
or cause the construction and repair of sidewalks in the manner as the Mayor
and City Council deems necessary, and assess the expense thereof on the
property in front of which the construction or repairs are made, after having
given notice:



      (1)   By publication in one issue of a legal newspaper of
general circulation in the city; and



      (2)   By either causing a written notice to be served upon the
occupant in possession of the property involved, or to be posted upon the
premises ten days prior to the commencement of the repair or construction.



(Neb. RS 17-522)



   (B)   The notice shall:



      (1)   State that the City Council has ordered repair of the
sidewalk;



      (2)   Contain the city's estimate of the cost of the repair;



      (3)   Notify the property owner that he or she may, within ten
days after the date of publication of the notice, notify the city that he or
she will repair the sidewalk within 30 days after the date of publication; and



      (4)   Notify the property owner that if he or she fails to so
notify the city within the ten days or, having so notified the city, fails to
repair the sidewalk within the 30 days, the city will cause the sidewalk to
be repaired and the expense thereof to be assessed against the property.



   (C)   (1)   Before the city imposes any special assessments for
sidewalk repair, a copy of the notice that is required to be published shall
be mailed to the last-known address of all nonresident property owners as
shown on the current tax rolls at the time the notice is first published.



(Neb. RS 13-310)



      (2)   The City Clerk shall mail the notice by certified mail
with return receipt requested.



(Neb. RS 13-312)



      (3)   For purposes of this division, NONRESIDENT PROPERTY
OWNER means any person or corporation whose residence and mailing address as
shown on the current tax rolls is outside the boundaries of the county in
which the property subject to assessment is located and who is a record owner
of the property.



(Neb. RS 13-314)



   (D)   All sidewalks shall be repaired in conformity with the plans
and specifications as may be approved by the City Council.



   (E)   Assessments made under this section shall be made and assessed
in the manner provided in Neb. RS 17-524.



(Prior Code, § 8-203)



§ 92.03  CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER.



   (A)   Any person desiring to construct, or cause to be constructed,
any sidewalk shall do so only as herein provided. It shall be unlawful for
any person to construct any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit.



   (B)   The owner shall make application in writing for a permit, and
file the application in the office of the City Clerk. The permit shall give a
description of the lot or piece of land along which the sidewalk is to be
constructed. The City Administrator shall issue the desired permit unless
good cause shall appear why the permit should be denied; provided, if it is
desired to construct the sidewalk at any other than the regularly prescribed
location, grade, or elevation, the City Administrator shall submit the
application to the City Council who shall determine whether the permit should
be granted or denied. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, or
cause to be constructed the sidewalk at any other location, grade, or
elevation than so designated by the city. All sidewalks shall be built and
constructed on the established grade or elevation, and according to the
specifications established by the Planning Commission, and if there is no
established grade, then on the grade or elevation indicated by the City
Administrator.



(Prior Code, § 8-204)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  CONSTRUCTION BY CITY.



   (A)   The City Council may, by resolution, order the construction of
a sidewalk on any lot or piece of ground within the city. Notice of the City
Council's intention to construct the sidewalk shall be given by the City
Clerk by publication of notice one time in a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the city.



   (B)   A copy of the notice shall be personally served upon the
occupant in possession of the property, or, when personal service is not
possible, the notice shall be posted upon the premise ten days prior to the
commencement of construction. The notice required in this section shall be
prepared by the City Attorney in accordance with the provisions of this
section. The service shall include a form of return evidencing personal
service or posting as herein required.



   (C)   (1)   The notice shall notify the owner of the premise of
the passage of the resolution ordering him or her to construct or cause to be
constructed a sidewalk within 90 days after the date of publication and
further, that if he or she fails to construct the sidewalk or cause the same
to be done within the time allowed, the city will cause the sidewalk to be
constructed and the cost thereof shall be levied and assessed as a special
tax against the premise; provided, the notice shall contain the official
estimate of the cost of the construction and no special assessment in excess
of this estimate shall be assessed against the property.



      (2)   All sidewalks shall be constructed according to the
specifications established by the Planning Commission. In the event the
property owner is a nonresident of the county in which the property lies, the
city shall, before levying any special assessment against that property, send
a copy of any notice required by law to be published by means of certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the nonresident
property owner. The last known address shall be that address listed on the
current tax rolls at the time the required notice was first published.



(Neb. RS 17-522, 17-523)  (Prior Code, § 8-205)



§ 92.05  REGULATION OF OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   The city may remove all obstructions from the sidewalks,
curbstones, gutters, and crosswalks at the expense of the person placing them
there or at the expense of the city and require and regulate the planting and
protection of shade trees in and along the streets and the trimming and
removing of such trees.



   (B)   The city may regulate the building of bulkheads, cellar and
basement ways, stairways, railways, windows, doorways, awnings, hitching
posts and rails, lampposts, awning posts, all other structures projecting
upon or over and adjoining, and all other excavations through and under the
sidewalks in the city.



(Ord. 951, passed 9-19-2017)



STREETS



§ 92.15  CROSSINGS.



   The City Council may order and cause to be constructed, under the
supervision of the City Administrator, street, avenue, and alley crossings as
the City Council shall deem necessary. When a petition for the construction
of any crossings is filed by an interested resident in the office of the City
Clerk, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the Street
Superintendent who shall investigate and make his or her recommendation to
the City Council. Action by the City Council on the application, whether the
application is approved or rejected, shall be considered final.



(Prior Code, § 8-302)



§ 92.16  OPENING, WIDENING, IMPROVING, OR VACATING.



   (A)   (1)   The city shall have power to open, widen, or
otherwise improve or vacate any street, avenue, alley, or lane within the
limits of the city, and also to create, open, and improve any new street,
avenue, alley, or lane. All damages sustained by the citizens of the city, or
by the owners of the property therein, shall be ascertained in that manner as
shall be provided by ordinance.



      (2)   Whenever any street or alley is vacated, the same shall
revert to the owners of the abutting real estate, one-half on each side
thereof, and become a part of that property, unless the city reserves title
in the ordinance vacating the street or alley. If title is retained by the
city, the property may be sold, conveyed, exchanged, or leased upon terms and
conditions as shall be deemed in the best interests of the city.



      (3)   When a portion of a street, avenue, alley, or lane is
vacated only on one side of the center thereof, the title to the land shall
vest in the owner of the abutting property and become a part of that
property, unless the city reserves title in the ordinance vacating the street
or alley. If title is retained by the city, the property may be sold,
conveyed, exchanged, or leased upon terms and conditions as shall be deemed
in the best interests of the city.



      (4)   When the city vacates all or any portion of a street,
avenue, alley, or lane, the city shall, within 30 days after the effective
date of the vacation, file a certified copy of the vacating ordinance with
the Register of Deeds for the county in which the vacated property is
located, to be indexed against all affected lots.



      (5)   The title to property vacated pursuant to this section
shall be subject to the following:



         (a)   There is reserved to the city the right to
maintain, operate, repair, and renew public utilities existing at the time
title to the property is vacated there; and



         (b)   There is reserved to the city, any public
utilities, and any cable television systems the right to maintain, repair,
renew, and operate water mains, gas mains, pole lines, conduits, electrical
transmission lines, sound and signal transmission lines, and other similar
services and equipment and appurtenances, including lateral connections or
branch lines, on or below the surface of the ground, that are existing as
valid easements at the time title to the property is vacated for the purposes
of serving the  general public or the abutting properties and to enter upon
the premises to accomplish the purposes at any and all reasonable times.



(Neb. RS 17-558)



   (B)   The city shall have power to create, open, widen, or extend
any street, avenue, alley, off-street parking area, or other public way, or
annul, vacate, or discontinue the same.



(Neb. RS 17-559)



(Prior Code, § 8-303)



§ 92.17  EXCAVATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make an excavation in any street
or streets for any purpose whatsoever unless a written permit is issued by
the City Services Director authorizing the excavations.



(Neb. RS 17-567)  (Prior Code, § 8-304)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.18  DRIVING STAKES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any peg or stake of any
kind into the pavement in any street or alley without first procuring the
written consent of the City Services Director.



(Prior Code, § 8-305)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.19  MIXING CONCRETE; HARMFUL LIQUIDS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to mix any concrete or
plastering material directly on the street pavement for any reason whatsoever.



(Prior Code, § 8-306)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to leak
in the gutter of any street, waste gasoline, kerosene, or high lubricating
oils, which damage or act as a solvent upon the streets.



(Prior Code, § 8-307)



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.20  OPERATION OF HEAVY EQUIPMENT.



   It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or person to move or
operate heavy equipment across any curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk,
crosswalk, or crossing on any unpaved street without first having protected
the curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalks, crosswalk, or crossing with
heavy plank sufficient in strength to warrant against the breaking or
damaging of the curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, or
crossing. Hereafter, it shall be unlawful to run, drive, move, operate, or
convey over or across any paved street a vehicle, machine, or implement with
sharp discs or sharp wheels that bear upon the pavement; with wheels having
cutting edges; with wheels having lugs, any protruding parts, or bolts
thereon that extend beyond a plain tire so as to cut, mark, mar, indent, or
otherwise injure or damage any pavement, gutter, or curb; provided, where
heavy vehicles, structures, and machines move along paved or unpaved streets,
the city police are hereby authorized and empowered to choose the route over
which the moving of the vehicles, structures, or machines will be permitted
and allowed. Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to pneumatic
tires with metal or metal-type studs not exceeding five-sixteenths of an inch
in diameter inclusive of the stud-casting with an average protrusion beyond
the tread surface of not more than seven sixty-fourths of an inch between
October 1 and April 15; provided, that school buses and emergency vehicles
shall be permitted to use metal or metal-type studs all year; it shall be
permissible to use farm machinery with tires having protuberances which will
not injure the streets. It shall be permissible to use a rubber tired crane
with a fixed load when the vehicle will be transported on a state highway or
on any road within the corporate limits of the city, the city which the crane
is intended to be transported has authorized a one-day permit for the
transportation of the crane and specified the route to be used and the hours
during which the crane can be transported, the vehicle is escorted by another
vehicle or vehicles assigned by the city, and the vehicle's gross weight does
not exceed the limits set out in Neb. RS 60-6,294, and it shall be
permissible to use tire chains of reasonable proportions upon any vehicle
when required for safety because of snow, ice, or other condition tending to
cause a vehicle to slide or skid.



(Neb. RS 60-6,250)  (Prior Code, § 8-309)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.21  EAVES AND GUTTER SPOUTS.



   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any
dwelling house or business building within the limits of the city where the
dwelling or building abuts on any sidewalk or street without providing proper
guttering and eave spouts to receive the waste waters that collect on the
sidewalks and streets. All eave spouts erected on any dwelling house or
business building shall be constructed to drain into the alleys, or shall be
buried beneath the sidewalks and drain into the streets where it is found to
be impossible to drain eave spouts into the alley.



(Prior Code, § 8-308)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.22  PIPE LINES AND WIRES.



   Poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, and other appurtenances of public
service companies shall be located, or erected over, upon, or under, the
streets, alleys, and common grounds of the city. Application for location of
the above shall be made to the City Council in writing. Approval by that body
shall be issued in writing. Any public service company granted a right-of-way
for the erection and maintenance of poles, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines,
and wires shall at all times erect and locate their poles, wires, gas mains,
pipe lines, and other appurtenances at the places and in the manner as shall
be designated by the City Council. The poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines,
and other appurtenances, shall be removed or relocated by the companies at
their own expense when requested to do so by the City Council. Any relocation
shall be ordered by resolution of the City Council and the City Clerk shall
notify any and all companies affected. The companies shall, within 24 hours
after receiving notice, at their own expense, cause the poles, wires, gas
mains, pipe lines, or other appurtenances to be removed. The City Council
shall designate another location as closely as possible where the poles,
wires, gas mains, pipe lines, or other appurtenances, may be reset or placed.
All poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, or other appurtenances, shall be
reset, placed, or erected in a manner that they will not interfere with the
water system, sewerage system, poles, wires, and mains of any public utility,
adjacent buildings, or with travel on the public ways and property. Whenever
possible, all pole lines, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, or appurtenances
shall be confined to the alleys of the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-310)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.23  CONSTRUCTION ASSESSMENT.



   To defray the costs and expenses of street improvements, as may be
authorized by law, the City Council shall have power and authority to levy
and collect special taxes and assessments upon the lots and pieces of ground
adjacent to, abutting upon, or especially benefitting from, the street,
avenue, alley, or sidewalk in whole or in part opened, widened, curbed,
curbed and guttered, graded, paved, repaired, graveled, macadamized, parked,
extended, constructed, or otherwise improved or repaired. The City Council
sitting as the Board of Equalization shall review all improvements in
accordance with the procedure provided by law. All special assessments shall
be made by the City Council at a regular or special meeting by resolution,
taking into account the benefits derived or injuries sustained in consequence
of the improvements and the amount charged against same. The vote shall be
recorded in the minutes. Notice of the time of holding the meeting and the
purpose for which it is to be held shall be published in some legal newspaper
published, or of general circulation, in the city at least four weeks before
the same shall be held. In lieu of the aforementioned notice, personal
service may be had upon the persons owning or occupying the property to be
assessed. The assessments shall be known as "special assessments for
improvements," and with the cost of notice shall be levied and collected as a
special tax in addition to the taxes for general revenue purposes, subject to
the same penalties and collected in like manner as other city taxes, and
shall be certified to the County Clerk by the City Clerk forthwith after the
date of levy, for collection by the Treasurer of the County unless otherwise
specified. After it shall become delinquent, the assessment shall draw
interest at the legal interest rate per annum. In the event the property
owner is a nonresident of the county in which the property lies, the city
shall, before levying any special assessment against that property, send a
copy of any notice required by law to be published by means of certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the nonresident
property owner. The last known address shall be that address listed on the
current tax rolls at the time the required notice was first published.



(Neb. RS 17-511, 17-524, 19-2428 through 19-2431, 45-104.01)  (Prior Code,
§ 8-311)



§ 92.24  CUTTING CURB.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut into any paving, curb, or
sidewalk for the purpose of constructing a driveway or any other purpose
whatsoever without first having obtained a written permit from the City
Administrator therefor. Before any person shall obtain a permit, he or she
shall inform the City Clerk of the place where the cutting is to be done, and
it shall be the City Services Director's duty to inspect the place of entry
into the paving, sidewalk, or curb, before the same is cut. When cutting into
any paving, it shall be the duty of the party to cut the paving under rules
and regulations as may be prescribed by the City Council or the City
Administrator. When the applicant is ready to close the opening made, he or
she shall inform the City Services Director, who shall supervise and inspect
the materials used and the work done in closing the opening. It shall be
discretionary with the City Administrator to order the City Services Director
to do the work of cutting and closing the paving and charge the costs thereof
to the party who obtained the permit. The City Administrator may consent to
the work of cutting and closing the paving to be done by the party holding
the permit. Before any permit is issued by the City Administrator, the
applicant for the permit shall deposit with the City Treasurer a sum set by
resolution of the City Administrator for all paving, curb, or sidewalk to be
cut. The sum shall be set on a per square foot cost of construction basis.
The deposit shall be retained by the city for the purpose of replacing the
paving, curb, or sidewalk, in the event the work is done by the city. In the
event the city elects to require the applicant to replace the paving, curb,
or sidewalk, the deposit shall be retained by the city until the work is
completed to the satisfaction of the City Administrator. In addition to
making the deposit above set forth, the applicant shall, before any permit is
issued, execute a bond to the city with a good and sufficient surety or
sureties to be approved by the City Administrator in a sum set by resolution
of the City Council.



(Neb. RS 17-567)  (Prior Code, § 8-401)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.25  PROHIBITED FENCES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, or cause to be erected,
and maintain any barbed wire or electric fence within the corporate limits,
where the fence abuts a public sidewalk, street, or alley.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 28-1321, 39-705)  (Prior Code, § 6-307)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or incorporated
by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A new violation
shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of the failure to
comply.



(Prior Code, § 6-401)



   (B)   Whenever a nuisance exists, as defined in § 93.15, the city
may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the manner
provided by law. Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance
exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an
order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722)  (Prior Code, § 6-402)



   (C)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of §§ 92.01 through 92.04, and §§ 92.15 through 92.25, set
forth at full length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed
guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100 for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been
committed every 24 hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 8-501)



CHAPTER 93:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section



General Provisions



   93.01   Regulations



   93.02   Enforcement Official



   93.03   County Health Board



Nuisances



   93.15   Defined



   93.16   Unlawful to maintain nuisance



   93.17   Dead, diseased trees



   93.18   Appliance in yard



   93.19   Abatement



   93.20   Authority to enforce



Weeds, Litter, and Stagnant Water



   93.35   General provisions



 



   93.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.01  REGULATIONS.



   For the purpose of promoting the health and safety of the residents of
the city, the Board of Health shall, from time to time, adopt rules and
regulations relative thereto, and shall make inspections, prescribe
penalties, and make reports as may be necessary toward that purpose.



(Neb. RS 17-121)  (Prior Code, § 4-101)



§ 93.02  ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.



   The City Police Chief, as the Quarantine Officer, shall be the Chief
Health Officer of the city. It shall be his or her duty to notify the City
Council and the Board of Health of health nuisances within the city and its
zoning jurisdiction.



(Neb. RS 17-121)  (Prior Code, § 4-102)



§ 93.03  COUNTY HEALTH BOARD.



   It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to work closely with the
County Health Board in protecting the health and welfare of the residents of
the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-103)



NUISANCES



§ 93.15  DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NUISANCE.



      (1)   Doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty,
or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act,
omission, condition, or thing either:



         (a)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
or safety of others;



         (b)   Offends decency;



         (c)   Is offensive to the senses;



         (d)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to
obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway,
square, street, or highway in the city;



         (e)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life
or the use of property; or



         (f)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the
property of others.



(Neb. RS 18-1720)  (Prior Code, § 4-301)



      (2)   The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving, or
permitting of any of the following specific acts, omissions, places,
conditions, and things are hereby declared to be NUISANCES:



         (a)   Any odorous, putrid, unsound or unwholesome grain,
meat, hides, skins, feathers, vegetable matter, or the whole or any part of
any dead animal, fish, or fowl;



         (b)   Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits or like
places which are not securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul
or malodorous;



         (c)   Filthy, littered, or trash-covered cellars,
houseyards, barnyards, stable-yards, factory-yards, mill yards, vacant areas
in rear of stores, granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or premises;



         (d)   Animal manure in any quantity which is not
securely protected from flies and the elements, or which is kept or handled
in violation of any ordinance of the city;



         (e)   Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage,
butcher's trimmings and offal, parts of fish or any waste vegetable or animal
matter in any quantity; provided, nothing herein contained shall prevent the
temporary retention of waste in receptacles in a manner provided by the
Health Officer of the city, nor the dumping of non-putrefying waste in a
place and manner approved by the Health Officer;



         (f)   Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small
pieces of scrap iron, wire metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or
cement, broken crockery, broken glass, broken plaster, and all trash or
abandoned material, unless the same be kept in covered bins or galvanized
iron receptacles;



         (g)   Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of barrels,
boxes, crates, packing crates, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay,
straw or other packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or
other metal not neatly piled, old automobiles or parts thereof, or any other
waste materials when any of the articles or materials create a condition in
which flies or rats may breed or multiply, or which may be a fire danger, or
which are so unsightly as to depreciate property values in the vicinity
thereof;



         (h)   Any unsightly building, billboard, or other
structure, or any old, abandoned or partially destroyed building or
structure, or any building or structure commenced and left unfinished, which
buildings, billboards or other structures are either a fire hazard, a menace
to the public health or safety, or are so unsightly as to depreciate the
value of property in the vicinity thereof;



         (i)   All places used or maintained as junk yards, or
dumping grounds, or for the wrecking and dissembling of automobiles, trucks,
tractors, or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of
worn-out, wrecked, or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery
of any kind, or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of
any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other
persons, which places are kept or maintained so as to essentially interfere
with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others, or which are so
unsightly as to tend to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof;



         (j)   Stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot
or piece of ground;



         (k)   Stockyards, granaries, mills, pig pens, cattle
pens, chicken pens or any other place, building, or enclosure, in which
animals or fowls of any kind are confined or on which are stored tankage or
any other animal or vegetable matter, or on which any animal or vegetable
matter including grain is being processed, when the places in which the
animals are confined, or the premises on which the vegetable or animal matter
is located, are maintained and kept in a manner that foul and noxious odors
are permitted to emanate therefrom, to the annoyance of inhabitants of the
city, or are maintained and kept in such a manner as to be injurious to the
public health: or



         (l)   All other things specifically designated as
nuisances elsewhere in this code of ordinances.



(Neb. RS 18-1720)  (Prior Code, § 4-302)



§ 93.16  UNLAWFUL TO MAINTAIN NUISANCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, keep up, or continue and
maintain any nuisance to the injury of any part of the citizens of the city.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 28-1321)  (Prior Code, § 6-306)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.17  DEAD, DISEASED TREES.



   (A)   (1)   It is hereby declared a nuisance for a property owner
to permit, allow, or maintain any dead or diseased trees within the
right-of-way of streets within the corporate limits of the city or within its
one-mile zoning jurisdiction.



      (2)   Notice to abate and remove such nuisance and notice of
the right to a hearing and the manner in which it may be requested shall be
given to each owner or owner's duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if
any. The city shall establish the method of notice by ordinance. If notice is
given by first-class mail, such mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its
importance. Within five days after receipt of such notice, the owner or
occupant of the lot or piece of ground may request a hearing with the city to
appeal the decision to abate or remove the nuisance by filing a written
appeal with the office of the City Clerk. A hearing on the appeal shall be
held within 14 days after the filing of the appeal and shall be conducted by
an elected or appointed officer as designated in the ordinance. The hearing
officer shall render a decision on the appeal within five business days after
the conclusion of the hearing. If the appeal fails, the city may have the
work done to abate and remove the dead or diseased trees. If the owner or
occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing with the
city within five days after receipt of such notice or fails to comply with
the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the city may have such work done.
The city may levy and assess all or any portion of the costs and expenses of
the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefitted as a special
assessment.



   (B)   It is hereby declared a nuisance for a property owner to
permit, allow, or maintain any dead or diseased trees on private property
within the corporate limits of the city or within its one-mile zoning
jurisdiction. The provisions in division (A)(2) shall apply to such
nuisances. For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section,
the city police shall have the authority to enter upon private property to
inspect the trees thereon.



(Neb. RS 17-555)  (Prior Code, § 4-304)  (Am. Ord. 953, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 93.18  APPLIANCE IN YARD.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a refrigerator, icebox,
freezer, or any other dangerous appliance to be in the open and accessible to
children whether on private or public property, unless he or she shall first
remove all doors and make the same reasonably safe.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 28-1321)  (Prior Code, § 6-308)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.19  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of real estate
in the city to keep the real estate free of public nuisances. Upon
determination by the Board of Health that the owner or occupant has failed to
keep the real estate free of public nuisances, a notice to abate and remove
the nuisance and notice of the right to a hearing shall be delivered to the
owner or occupant of such real estate. Such hearing shall be before the City
Administrator who is hereby designated the hearing officer for such hearing.
A request for hearing to appeal the decision of the Board of Health shall be
in writing and delivered or mailed to the City Clerk, Such notice shall be
given to the owner or occupant, or the owner's or occupant's duly authorized
agent, by personal service or certified mail. The notice shall describe the
condition as found by the Board of Health and state that the condition has
been declared a public nuisance, and that the condition must be remedied at
once. Within five days after the receipt of the notice, if the owner or
occupant of real estate does not request a hearing or fails to comply with
the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the city shall have the work
done, and



      (1)   May levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work
upon the real estate so benefitted in the same manner as other special taxes
for improvements are levied and assessed; or



      (2)   Recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the
work upon the lot and the adjoin streets and alleys.



   (B)   If the owner or occupant requests in writing a hearing with
the City Clerk, the hearing officer shall fix a time and place at which a
hearing will be held. Notice of the hearing shall be given by personal
service or certified mail, and require the owner or occupant to appear before
the hearing officer to show cause why the condition should not be found to be
a public nuisance and remedied. The notice shall be given not less than seven
nor more than 14 days before the time of the hearing. Upon the date fixed for
the hearing, and pursuant to the notice, the hearing officer shall hear all
objections made by the owner or occupant and shall hear evidence submitted by
the Board of Health. If the appeal fails the hearing officer shall order and
direct the owner or occupant to remedy the public nuisance at once. The
hearing officer shall render a decision on the appeal within five business
days after the conclusion of the hearing. Should the owner or occupant refuse
or neglect abate the nuisance the city shall proceed to cause the abatement
of the described public nuisance. The owner of the real estate shall be pay
for all costs incurred by the city for such abatement. If unpaid for two
months after such work is done the city:



      (1)   May levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work
upon the real estate so benefitted in the same manner as other special taxes
for improvements are levied and assessed; or



      (2)   Recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the
work upon the lot and the adjoin streets and alleys.



(Neb. RS 18-1720)  (Prior Code, § 4-303)  (Am. Ord. 889, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 93.20  AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE.



   The Mayor and Chief of Police of the city are directed to enforce this
code of ordinances against all nuisances. The jurisdiction of the Mayor,
Chief of Police, and court shall extend to, and the territorial application
of this subchapter shall include, all territory adjacent to the limits of the
city within one mile thereof and all territory within the corporate limits.



(Neb. RS 18-1720)  (Prior Code, § 4-305)



WEEDS, LITTER, AND STAGNANT WATER



§ 93.35  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Lots or pieces of ground within the city or within its
one-mile zoning jurisdiction shall be drained or filled so as to prevent
stagnant water or any other nuisance accumulating thereon.



   (B)   The owner or occupant of any lot or piece of ground within the
city or within its one-mile zoning jurisdiction shall keep the lot or piece
of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys free of any growth of 12
inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation.



   (C)   The throwing, depositing, or accumulation of litter on any lot
or piece of ground within the city or within its one-mile zoning jurisdiction
is prohibited.



   (D)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance to permit or maintain
any growth of 12 inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless
vegetation on any lot or piece of ground within the city or within its
one-mile zoning jurisdiction or on the adjoining streets or alleys or to
litter or cause litter to be deposited or remain thereon except in proper
receptacles.



   (E)   Any owner or occupant of a lot or piece of ground shall, upon
conviction of violating this section, be guilty of an offense.



   (F)   (1)   Notice to abate and remove such nuisance shall be
given to each owner or owner's duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if
any. The city shall establish the method of notice by ordinance. If notice is
given by first-class mail, such mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its
importance. Within five days after receipt of such notice, the owner or
occupant of the lot or piece of ground may request a hearing with the city to
appeal the decision to abate or remove a nuisance by filing a written appeal
with the office of the City Clerk. A hearing on the appeal shall be held
within 14 days after the filing of the appeal and shall be conducted by an
elected or appointed officer as designated in the ordinance. The hearing
officer shall render a decision on the appeal within five business days after
the conclusion of the hearing. If the appeal fails, the city may have such
work done. Within five days after receipt of such notice, if the owner or
occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing with the
city or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the
city may have such work done.



      (2)   The costs and expenses of any such work shall be paid by
the owner. If unpaid for two months after such work is done, the city may
either:



         (a)   Levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work
upon the lot or piece of ground so benefitted as a special assessment in the
same manner as other special assessments for improvements are levied and
assessed; or



         (b)   Recover in a civil action the costs and expenses
of the work upon the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and
alleys.



   (G)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      LITTER. Includes but is not limited to:



         (a)   Trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, paper, rags, and
ashes;



         (b)   Wood, plaster, cement, brick, or stone building
rubble;



         (c)   Grass, leaves, and worthless vegetation except
when used as ground mulch or in a compost pile;



         (d)   Offal and dead animals; and



         (e)   Any machine or machines, vehicle or vehicles, or
parts of a machine or vehicle which have lost their identity, character,
utility, or serviceability as such through deterioration, dismantling, or the
ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to perform their intended
functions, or are cast off, discarded, or thrown away or left as waste,
wreckage, or junk.



      WEEDS. Include, but are not limited to: bindweed (Convolvulus
arvensis), puncture vine (Tribulus terrestris), leafy spurge (Euphorbia
esula), Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), perennial peppergrass (Lepidium
draba), Russian knapweed (Centaurea picris), Johnson grass (Sorghum
halepense), nodding or musk thistle, quack grass (Agropyron repens),
perennial sow thistle (Sonchus arvensis), horse nettle (Solanum carolinense),
bull thistle (Cirsium lanceolatum), buckthorn (Rhamnus sp.) (tourn), hemp
plant (Cannabis sativa), and ragweed (Ambrosiaceae).



(Neb. RS 17-563)  (Prior Code, § 6-309)  (Am. Ord. 955, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of §§ 93.01 through 93.03, and 93.15
through 93.20, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A new violation
shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of the failure to
comply.



(Prior Code, § 4-501)



   (B)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this code of
ordinances, the city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the
same, in the manner provided by law. Whenever, in any action, it is
established that a nuisance exists, the court may together with the fine or
penalty imposed, enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the
case.



(Prior Code, § 4-502)



   (C)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of § 93.35, set forth at full length
herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and
upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a Class V misdemeanor. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of the
failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 6-401)



   (D)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the
manner provided by law. Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722)  (Prior Code, § 6-402)  (Am. Ord. 889, passed
5-6-2014)



CHAPTER 94:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



Parks



   94.01   Operation and funding



   94.02   Injury to property



   94.03   Lake Helen recreation area vessels



   94.04   Abandonment and feeding of domesticated and wild ducks and
geese



   94.05   Possession or use of live baitfish in city parks



Swimming Pool



   94.15   Operation and funding



   94.16   Admission charge



   94.17   Rentals



   94.18   Rules and regulations



Public Library



   94.30   Operation and funding



   94.31   Sale, exchange, or disposal of books



   94.32   Rules and regulations



   94.33   Replacement of damaged or lost books



   94.34   Unauthorized removal of book



   94.35   Money collected



 



   94.99   Penalty



PARKS



§ 94.01  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and operates the city parks and other recreational areas
through the City Council. The City Council, for the purpose of defraying the
cost of the care, management, and maintenance of the city park, may each year
levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the
actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the
corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the tax shall
be known as the Park Fund, and shall remain in the custody of the City
Treasurer. The City Council shall have the authority to adopt rules and
regulations for the efficient management of the city parks and other
recreational areas of the city.



(Neb. RS 17-948 through 17-952)  (Prior Code, § 3-701)



§ 94.02  INJURY TO PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or willfully cut
down, injure, or destroy any tree, plant, or shrub. It shall be unlawful for
any person to injure or destroy any sodded or planted area, or injure or
destroy any building, structure, equipment, fence, bench, table, or any other
property of the city parks and recreational areas. No person shall commit any
waste on or litter the city parks or other public grounds.



(Prior Code, § 3-702)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.03  LAKE HELEN RECREATION AREA VESSELS.



   (A)   All vessels used on either lake of the Lake Helen recreation
area shall at all times comply with the rules and regulations for vessels set
forth in the Nebraska Administrative Code, Title 163, Chapter 3.



   (B)   All vessels used on either lake of the Lake Helen recreation
area shall be operated in such a manner as to not produce a wake, as defined
in the Nebraska Administrative Code, Title 163, Chapter 3.



(Prior Code, § 3-703)  (Ord. 688, passed 1-20-1998; Am. Ord. 874, passed
5-15-2012)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  ABANDONMENT AND FEEDING OF DOMESTICATED AND WILD DUCKS AND GEESE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Abandon any duck, goose or other animal at any park of
the city; and



      (2)   Feed any duck or goose, leave or deposit any substance
that may be consumed by any duck or goose, whether wild or domestic, in any
park of the city.



   (B)   The park superintendent is hereby directed to post signs at
least three locations in the Lake Helen Park advising the public that it
illegal to abandon or feed ducks and geese.



(Ord. 848, passed 6-2-2009)



§ 94.05  POSSESSION OR USE OF LIVE BAITFISH IN CITY PARKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Use live baitfish while fishing on any waterbody in any
city park; and



      (2)   That while fishing at a waterbody in a city park, to
have in possession any live fish other than those taken from that waterbody.



   (B)   A violation of this section shall be punished as provided in
§ 94.99.



(Ord. 919, passed 6-2-2015)



SWIMMING POOL



§ 94.15  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and manages the city swimming pool. The City Council, for
the purpose of defraying the cost of the management, maintenance, and
improvements of the swimming pool, may each year levy a tax not exceeding the
maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the actual valuation of all real
estate and personal property within the city that is subject to taxation. The
Recreation Committee shall pass rules and regulations for the operation of
the swimming pool as may be proper for its efficient operation. The City
Administrator, shall have the power and authority to hire and supervise the
swimming pool Manager, and such employees as he or she may deem necessary.
All actions by the Recreation Committee shall be under the supervision and
control of the City Council.



(Neb. RS 17-948, 17-951, 17-952)  (Prior Code, § 3-801)



§ 94.16  ADMISSION CHARGE.



   The City Council may, for the purpose of defraying the expenses
involved in maintaining, improving, managing, and beautifying the swimming
pool, make a reasonable admission charge. The charges shall be on file at the
office of the City Clerk and shall also be posted in a conspicuous place at
the city swimming pool for public inspection. The rates may be structured for
classes of persons in a reasonable manner; provided, that nothing herein
shall be construed to permit or allow discrimination on the basis of race,
creed, color, or national origin in the classification of persons for
admission charges.



(Neb. RS 17-949)  (Prior Code, § 3-802)



§ 94.17  RENTALS.



   The Mayor shall have the authority to rent the city swimming pool to
organizations and other persons as they may in their discretion see fit,
subject to the review of the City Council. The Recreation Committee shall
prescribe rules and regulations for the rentals and shall require an
appropriate number of qualified lifeguards to be in attendance during the
rental period. The fees and other costs shall be on file at the office of the
City Clerk and posted in a conspicuous place at the city swimming pool.



(Neb. RS 17-949)  (Prior Code, § 3-803)



§ 94.18  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Recreation Committee shall have the power and authority to enact
bylaws, rules, and regulations for the protection of those using the swimming
pool and for the efficient management thereof. It may provide suitable
penalties for the violation of such bylaws, rules, and regulations subject to
the review and supervision of the City Council.



(Neb. RS 17-949)  (Prior Code, § 3-804)



PUBLIC LIBRARY



§ 94.30  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and manages the city library through the Library Board.
The City Council, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the management,
purchases, improvements, and maintenance of the library, may each year levy a
tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the actual
valuation of all real estate and personal property within the city that is
subject to taxation. The revenue from the tax shall be known as the Library
Fund and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests, or
other valuable income-producing personal property and real estate from any
source for the purpose of endowing the city library. The Library Fund shall
at all times be in the custody of the City Treasurer. The Board shall have
the power and authority to appoint the librarian and to hire other employees
as they may deem necessary, and may pass other rules and regulations for the
operation of the library as may be proper for its efficient operation. All
actions by the Board shall be under the supervision and control of the City
Council.



(Neb. RS 51-201, 51-202, 51-211)  (Prior Code, § 3-901)



§ 94.31  SALE, EXCHANGE, OR DISPOSAL OF BOOKS.



   The Library Board may authorize the sale, exchange, or disposal of any
surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete, or duplicate books in the library.
Records shall be kept of any surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete, or
duplicate books so disposed.



(Neb. RS 51-207)  (Prior Code, § 3-902)



§ 94.32  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Library Board shall establish rules and regulations for the
governing of the city library for the preservation and efficient management
thereof. They shall fix and impose by general rules, penalties, and
forfeitures for injury to the library grounds, rooms, books, or other
property, or for failure to return a book. All fees, penalties, and
forfeitures may be collected in civil action in the event of failure,
neglect, or refusal to pay the assessments.



(Neb. RS  51-205, 51-214)  (Prior Code, § 3-903)



§ 94.33  REPLACEMENT OF DAMAGED OR LOST BOOKS.



   Any person who injures or fails to return any book taken from the
library shall forfeit and pay to the library not less than the value of the
book, in addition to any replacement costs and penalty which the Library
Board may assess.



(Neb. RS 51-211)  (Prior Code, § 3-904)



§ 94.34  UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF BOOK.



   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the regulations
made by the Library Board to take a book from the library, without the
consent of the librarian, or an authorized employee of the library. Any
person removing a book from the library without properly checking it out
shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense.



(Neb. RS 51-211)  (Prior Code, § 3-905)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.35  MONEY COLLECTED.



   Any money collected by the library shall be turned over monthly by the
librarian to the City Treasurer, along with a report of the sources of the
revenue.



(Neb. RS 51-209)  (Prior Code, § 3-906)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of the
failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 3-1101)



CHAPTER 95:  CEMETERIES



Section



   95.01   Operation and funding



   95.02   Sexton



   95.03   Lot conveyance



   95.04   Burial permit



   95.05   Destruction of property



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and manages the city cemetery through the Cemetery Board.
The City Council, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care,
management, maintenance, and beautification of the cemetery, may each year
levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the
actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the city
that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the tax shall be known as the
Cemetery Fund, and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance,
bequests, money, stocks, bonds, or other valuable income-producing personal
property and real estate from any source for the purpose of endowing the
cemetery. The Cemetery Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the City
Treasurer. The Board shall have the power and authority to pass rules and
regulations for the operation of the cemetery as may be proper for its
efficient operation. All actions by the Board shall be under the supervision
and control of the City Council.



(Neb. RS 12-301 through 12-403)  (Prior Code, § 3-1001)



§ 95.02  SEXTON.



   The Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council, shall have the
authority to appoint a Sexton who shall perform duties and make reports as
the Cemetery Board shall direct. It shall be the duty of the Sexton, upon
receiving a burial permit, to locate and direct the party named in the permit
to the lot mentioned therein, and to dig and excavate, or cause the same to
be dug or excavated, in compliance with the rules and regulations of the
Cemetery Board.



(Prior Code, § 3-1002)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 12-403



§ 95.03  LOT CONVEYANCE.



   The City Council may convey cemetery lots by certificate signed by the
Mayor, and countersigned by the City Clerk under the city seal specifying
that the person to whom the same is issued is the owner of the lot described
therein by number for the purpose of interment. The certificate shall give a
right in fee simple to the proprietor, his or her heirs, and assigns. The
certificate shall then be recorded in the office of the County Clerk.



(Neb. RS 17-941)  (Prior Code, § 3-1003)



§ 95.04  BURIAL PERMIT.



   (A)   (1)   All persons desiring to bury a deceased person shall
first be required to file a completed death certificate with the Registrar of
the county before any body may be buried in the city cemetery. If it is
impossible to complete the certificate of death within the legal period of
time prescribed by state law, the funeral director shall notify the Registrar
and obtain his or her written approval before the deceased person may be
buried in the city cemetery. The burial permit so issued by the Registrar
shall then be filed with the City Clerk.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the Sexton, or other person, to
allow the interment of a body without first receiving the permit. The burial
permit shall then be countersigned and dated by the Sexton. The interment of
any body shall be performed under the direct supervision of a licensed
funeral director. The applicant shall also file with the burial permit an
application containing the name, age, sex, race, and cause of death of the
deceased person for the records of the Cemetery Board.



   (B)   Upon completion of the requirements herein, the Cemetery Board
or its designated agent shall then issue a city burial permit which shall
entitle the applicant to bury a deceased person in the city cemetery. In the
event that the removal of the body of any deceased person is requested, the
Cemetery Board or its designated agent shall issue no permit until the
applicant shall have first complied with the laws of the state with respect
to disinterment.



(Neb. RS 71-605)  (Prior Code, § 3-1004)



§ 95.05  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   Any person who shall willfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure, or
remove any tomb, monument, or gravestone placed in the cemetery, or any
fence, railing, or other work for the protection or ornamentation of the
cemetery, or who shall willfully destroy, cut, break, or injure any tree,
shrub, or plant, shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense.



(Neb. RS 28-512)  (Prior Code, § 3-1005)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of the
failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 3-1101)



CHAPTER 96:  ABANDONED VEHICLES




Section



   96.01   Abandoned automobiles



   96.02   Reserved



   96.03   Reserved



   96.04   Reserved



   96.05   Custody for law enforcement purposes



   96.06   Sale proceeds



   96.07   Liability for abandoned vehicle costs, damage



   96.08   Unlicensed or inoperable vehicle



§ 96.01  ABANDONED AUTOMOBILES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ABANDONED VEHICLE.



         (a)   A motor vehicle is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:



            1.   If left unattended, with no license plates or
valid In Transit stickers issued pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Registration
Act affixed thereto, for more than six hours on any public property;



            2.   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on
any public property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally
permitted;



            3.   If left unattended for more than 48 hours,
after the parking of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of
any public property on which parking is legally permitted;



            4.   If left unattended for more than seven days
on private property if left initially without permission of the owner, or
after permission of the owner is terminated;



            5.   If left for more than 30 days in the custody
of a city law enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the
last-registered owner under division (D) of this section; or



            6.   If removed from private property by the city
pursuant to a city ordinance or this code.



         (b)   An all-terrain vehicle or minibike is ABANDONED:



            1.   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on
any public property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally
permitted;



            2.   If left unattended for more than 48 hours,
after the parking of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of
any public property on which parking is legally permitted;



            3.   If left unattended for more than seven days
on private property if left initially without permission of the owner, or
after permission of the owner is terminated;



            4.   If left for more than 30 days in the custody
of a city law enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the
last-registered owner under division (D) of this section; or



            5.   If removed from private property by the city
pursuant to a city ordinance or this code.



         (c)   A MOBILE HOME is an abandoned vehicle if left in
place on private property for more than 30 days after a local governmental
unit, pursuant to an ordinance or resolution, has sent a certified letter to
each of the last-registered owners and posted a notice on the mobile home,
stating that the mobile home is subject to sale or auction or vesting of
title as set forth in Neb. RS 60-1903.



         (d)   No motor vehicle subject to forfeiture under Neb.
RS 28-431 shall be an ABANDONED VEHICLE under this section.



      MOBILE HOME. A movable or portable dwelling constructed to be
towed on its own chassis, connected to utilities, and designed with or
without a permanent foundation for year-round living. It may consist of one
or more units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for
additional capacity, or of two or more units, separately towable but designed
to be joined into one integral unit, and shall include a manufactured home as
defined in Neb. RS 71-4603. Mobile home does not include a mobile home or
manufactured home for which an affidavit of affixture has been recorded
pursuant to Neb. RS 60-169.



      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any privately owned property which is not
included within the definition of public property.



      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley,
or park or other state, county, or city-owned property.



(Neb. RS 60-1901)



   (B)   If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no
license plates of the current year or valid In Transit stickers issued
pursuant to Neb. RS 60-376 affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into
consideration the condition of the vehicle, of $250 or less, title shall
immediately vest in the city. Any certificate of title issued under this
division to the city shall be issued at no cost to the city.



(Neb. RS 60-1902)



   (C)   (1)   Except for vehicles governed by division (B) of this
section, the city shall make an inquiry concerning the last-registered owner
of such vehicle as follows:



         (a)   Abandoned  vehicle with  license plates 
affixed,    to the jurisdiction which issued such license plates; or



         (b)   Abandoned vehicle with no license plates affixed,
to the Department of Motor Vehicles.



      (2)   The city shall notify the last-registered owner, if any,
that the vehicle in question has been determined to be an abandoned vehicle
and that, if unclaimed, either:



         (a)   It will be sold or will be offered at public
auction after five days from the date such notice was mailed; or



         (b)   Title will vest in the city 30 days after the date
such notice was mailed.



      (3)   If the agency described in division (C)(1)(a) or (b) of
this section also notifies the city that a lien or mortgage exists, such
notice shall also be sent to the lienholder or mortgagee. Any person claiming
such vehicle shall be required to pay the cost of removal and storage of such
vehicle.



      (4)   Title to an abandoned vehicle, if unclaimed, shall vest
in the city:



         (a)   Five days after the date the notice is mailed if
the vehicle will be sold or offered at public auction under division
(C)(2)(a) of this section;



         (b)   Thirty days after the date the notice is mailed if
the city will retain the vehicle; or



         (c)   If the last-registered owner cannot be
ascertained, when notice of such fact is received.



      (5)   After title to the abandoned vehicle vests pursuant to
division (C)(4) of this section, the city may retain for use, sell, or
auction the abandoned vehicle. If the city has determined that the vehicle
should be retained for use, the city shall, at the same time that the notice,
if any, is mailed , publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the
jurisdiction an announcement that the city intends to retain the abandoned
vehicle for its use and that title will vest in the city 30 days after the
publication.



(Neb. RS 60-1903)



   (D)   (1)   If a city law enforcement agency has custody of a
motor vehicle for investigatory purposes and bas no further need to keep it
in custody, it shall send a certified letter to each of the last-registered
owners stating that the vehicle is in the custody of the law enforcement
agency, that the vehicle is no longer needed for law enforcement purposes,
and that after 30 days the agency will dispose of the vehicle.



      (2)   This division shall not apply to motor vehicles subject
to forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431.



      (3)   No storage fees shall be assessed against the registered
owner of a motor vehicle held in custody for investigatory purposes under
this division (D) unless the registered owner or the person in possession of
the vehicle when it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or
misdemeanor related to the offense for which the law enforcement agency took
the vehicle into custody. If a registered owner or the person in possession
of the vehicle when it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or
misdemeanor but is not convicted, the registered owner shall be entitled to a
refund of the storage fees.



(Neb. RS 60-1903.01)



   (E)   If a state agency caused an abandoned vehicle described in
division (A)(a)(5) or (A)(b)(4) of this section to be removed from public
property in this city, the state agency shall be entitled to custody of the
vehicle. If a state agency caused an abandoned vehicle described in division
(A)(a)(l), (2), (3), or (4) or (A)(b)(l), (2), or (3) of this section to be
removed from public property in this city, the state agency shall deliver the
vehicle to the city which shall have custody.



(Neb. RS 60-1904)



   (F)   Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle in the
city's custody less any expenses incurred by the city shall be held by the
city without interest, for the benefit of the owner or lienholders of such
vehicles for a period of two years. If not claimed within such two-year
period, the proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of the city.



(Neb. RS 60-1905)



   (G)   Neither the owner, lessee, nor occupant of the premises from
which any abandoned vehicle is removed, nor the city, shall be liable for any
loss or damage to such vehicle which occurs during its removal or while in
the possession of the city or its contractual agent or as a result of any
subsequent disposition.



(Neb. RS 60-1906)



   (H)   No person shall cause any vehicle to be an abandoned vehicle
as described in division (A)(a)(1), (2), (3), or (4) or (A)(b)(1), (2), or
(3) of this section.



(Neb. RS 60-1907)



   (I)   No person other than one authorized by the city or appropriate
state agency shall destroy, deface, or remove any part of a vehicle which is
left unattended on a highway or other public place without license plates
affixed or which is abandoned. Anyone violating this division shall be guilty
of an offense.



(Neb. RS 60-1908)



   (J)   The last-registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be
liable to the city for the costs of removal and storage of such vehicle.



(Neb. RS 60-1909)



   (K)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of an offense.



(Neb. RS 60-1911)



(Prior Code, § 6-315)  (Am. Ord. 915, passed 3-17-2015)



§ 96.02  RESERVED.



§ 96.03  RESERVED.



§ 96.04  RESERVED.



§ 96.05  CUSTODY FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES.



   (A)   If the city law enforcement agency has custody of a motor
vehicle for investigatory purposes and has no further need to keep it in
custody, it shall send a certified letter to each of the last registered
owners stating that the vehicle is in the custody of the agency, that the
vehicle is no longer needed for law enforcement purposes, and that after 30
days the agency will dispose of the vehicle.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to motor vehicles subject to
forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431.



   (C)   No storage fees shall be assessed against the registered owner
of a motor vehicle held in custody for investigatory purposes under this
section unless the registered owner or the person in possession of the
vehicle when it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor
related to the offense for which the law enforcement agency took the vehicle
into custody. If a registered owner or the person in possession of the
vehicle when it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor
but is not convicted, the registered owner shall be entitled to a refund of
the storage fees.



(Neb. RS 60-1903.01)  (Prior Code, § 6-315)



§ 96.06  SALE PROCEEDS.



   Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle, less any expenses
incurred by the city, shall be held by the city without interest, for the
benefit of the owner or lienholders of the vehicle, for a period of two
years. If not claimed within that two-year period, the proceeds shall be paid
into the General Fund of the city.



(Neb. RS 60-1905)  (Prior Code, § 6-315)



§ 96.07  LIABILITY FOR ABANDONED VEHICLE COSTS, DAMAGE.



   (A)   Neither the owner, lessee, nor occupant of the premises from
which any abandoned vehicle is removed, nor the city, shall be liable for any
loss or damage to the vehicle which occurs during its removal or while in the
possession of the city or its contractual agent or as a result of any
subsequent disposition.



(Neb. RS 60-1906)



   (B)   The last registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be
liable to the city for the costs of removal and storage of the vehicle.



(Neb. RS 60-1909)



(Prior Code, § 6-315)



§ 96.08  UNLICENSED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person in charge or control of any property within the
city, other than city property, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee,
or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, inoperable, wrecked,
junked, or discarded vehicle to remain on that property longer than 30 days.



   (B)   No unlicensed vehicle shall be permitted to remain on any
private or public property for any length of time, provided that this
division shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   A vehicle bearing a valid In Transit sticker;



      (2)   A vehicle in an enclosed building;



      (3)   A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
operated in a lawful place and manner when the vehicle is necessary to the
lawful operation of the business; or



      (4)   A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city.



   (C)   Any vehicle allowed to remain on property in violation of this
section shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated, and any person
violating this section shall be guilty of an offense.



(Neb. RS 60-376)  (Prior Code, § 6-316)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS





         111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES





         112.   PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS





         113.   MOBILE HOME PARKS




CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   Occupation tax levied



   110.02   Collection date



   110.03   Occupation tax certificate



   110.04   Tobacco and cigarettes



 



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  OCCUPATION TAX LEVIED.



   (A)   For the purpose of raising revenue, an occupation tax is
hereby levied on the following businesses:



 

Class
 
Description
 
Tax Amount


Class A
 
Retailer of beer only for consumption on the premises, regardless of
alcoholic content, per year
 
$100


Class B
 
Retailer of beer only for consumption off the premises, regardless of
alcoholic content, per year
 
$100


Class D
 
Retailer of alcoholic liquors, including beer, regardless of alcoholic
content, for consumption off the premises, sales in the original packages
only, per year
 
$200


Class I
 
Owner of bottle club license under the State Liquor Control Act, per year
 
$250



 



   (B)   In addition to the foregoing costs, the licensee shall
reimburse the city for actual publication costs associated with licensing and
relicensing.



(Prior Code, § 10-501)  (Ord. 798, passed 10-4-2005)



§ 110.02  COLLECTION DATE.



   All occupation taxes shall be due and payable on May 1 of each year,
except in the event that the tax is levied daily, and upon the payment
thereof by any person or persons to the City Clerk, the Clerk shall give a
receipt, properly dated, and specifying the person paying the tax, and the
amount paid; provided, occupation taxes collected from Class C liquor
licensees shall be due and payable on November 1. The revenue collected shall
then be immediately deposited into the General Fund by the City Treasurer.
The City Treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all revenue turned over
to him or her. All forms and receipts herein mentioned shall be issued in
duplicate. One copy shall then be kept by each party in the transaction.



(Neb. RS 17-525)  (Prior Code, § 10-502)



§ 110.03  OCCUPATION TAX CERTIFICATE.



   The receipt issued after the payment of any occupation tax shall be the
occupation tax certificate. The certificate shall specify the amount of the
tax and the name of the person and business that paid the tax. The occupation
tax certificate shall then be displayed in a prominent place, or carried in a
way as to be easily accessible while business is being conducted.



(Neb. RS 17-525)  (Prior Code, § 10-503)



§ 110.04  TOBACCO AND CIGARETTES.



   (A)   License to sell; issuance. Licenses for the sale of cigars,
tobacco, cigarettes, cigarette material, vapor products, or alternative
nicotine products to persons over the age of 18 years shall be issued to
individuals, partnerships, limited liability companies, and corporations by
the City Clerk upon application duly made as provided in this chapter.



(Neb. RS 28-1421)



   (B)   License application. Every person, partnership, limited
liability company, or corporation desiring a license under Neb. RS 28-1420 to
28-1429 shall file with the City Clerk a written application stating the name
of the person, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation for
whom the license is desired and the exact location of the place of business
and shall deposit with the application the amount of the license fee provided
in this chapter. If the applicant is an individual, the application shall
include the applicant's social security number.



(Neb. RS 28-1422)



   (C)   License term; fees.



      (1)   The term for which a license shall run shall be from the
date of filing the application and paying the license fee to and including
December 31 of the calendar year in which application for the license is made.



      (2)   The license fee for any person, partnership, limited
liability company, or corporation selling at retail shall be $10.



      (3)   Any person, partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation selling annually in the aggregate more than 150,000 cigars,
packages of cigarettes, and packages of tobacco in any form, at wholesale,
shall pay a license fee of $100, and if such combined annual sales amount to
less than 150,000 cigars, packages of cigarettes, and packages of tobacco,
the annual license fee shall be $15. No wholesaler's license shall be issued
in any year on a less basis than $100 per annum unless the applicant shall
file with the application a statement duly sworn to by himself or herself, or
if applicant is a partnership, by a member of the firm, or if a limited
liability company, by a member or manager of the company, or if a
corporation, by an officer or manager thereof, that in the past such
wholesaler's combined sales of cigars, packages of cigarettes, and packages
of tobacco in every form have not exceeded in the aggregate 150,000 annually
and that such sales will not exceed such aggregate amount for the current
year for which the license is to issue. Any person swearing falsely in such
affidavit shall be guilty of an offense, and such wholesaler's license shall
be revoked until the full license fee of $100 is paid.



      (4)   If application for license is made after July 1 of any
calendar year, the fee shall be one-half of the fee provided in this section.



(Neb. RS 28-1423)



   (D)   Rights of licensee.



      (1)   The license, provided for in this chapter, when issued,
shall authorize the sale of cigars, tobacco, cigarettes, cigarette material,
vapor products, or alternative nicotine products by the licensee and
employees, to persons over the age of 18 years, at the place of business
described in the license for the term therein authorized, unless the license
is forfeited as a result of court action as provided in Neb. RS 28-1425.



(Neb. RS 28-1424)



      (2)   If the license is revoked and forfeited pursuant to Neb.
RS 28-1425, all rights under the license shall at once cease and terminate.



(Neb. RS 28-1425)



   (E)   Disposition of fees.All money collected as license fees under
the provisions of this chapter shall be paid over by the City Clerk to the
treasurer of the school fund for the city.



(Neb. RS 28-1426)



   (F)   Transfer of license. In case of the sale of a business where
the owner has a license hereunder, the City Clerk may authorize such license
to be transferred to the purchaser. In case of a change of location by any
licensee hereunder, the Clerk may transfer such license to the new location.



(Neb. RS 28-1428)



   (G)   Reissuance of revoked and forfeited license.  In the event
that the license of a licensee hereunder shall be revoked and forfeited as
provided in Neb. RS 28-1425, no new license shall be issued to such licensee
until the expiration of one year from the date of such revocation and
forfeiture.



(Neb. RS 28-1429)



(Ord. 914, passed 3-17-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Licenses required, see Neb. RS 28-1420



   Minors, see § 131.05



   Prohibited sales, see Neb. RS 28-1421



   Sale to person under 18 prohibited; penalties, see Neb. RS 28-1425



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   If any person, company, or corporation fails or neglects to
pay the occupation taxes as provided herein on the day it becomes due and
payable, the city shall then proceed by civil suit to collect the amount due.
All delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month until
paid.



(Neb. RS 17-525)  (Prior Code, § 10-504)



   (B)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for
each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24
hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 10-701)



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



General Provisions



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Sale or gift to minor or mentally incompetent person
prohibited



   111.03   Consumption in public places or places open to the public;
restrictions



   111.04   Removal of intoxicated persons from public or quasi-public
property



Licenses Required



   111.20   Manufacture, sale, delivery, and possession; general
prohibitions; exceptions



   111.21   Acquisition and possession; restrictions



   111.22   Licensee requirements



   111.23   Licenses; city powers and duties



   111.24   Licensed premises; inspections



   111.25   License renewal; city powers and duties



   111.26   Catering licenses



   111.27   Display of license



   111.28   Owner of premises or agent; liability



   111.29   Licensee; liability for acts of officer, agent, or employee



   111.30   Citizen complaints



Retail Establishments



   111.45   Location



   111.46   Access to dwellings



   111.47   Sanitary conditions



   111.48   Hours of sale



   111.49   Credit sales prohibited



   111.50   Reserved



   111.51   Original package required



   111.52   Minor's presence restricted



   111.53   Keg sales; requirements; prohibited acts



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the definitions found in Neb. RS
53-103.01 through 53-103.42 shall be used.



§ 111.02  SALE OR GIFT TO MINOR OR MENTALLY INCOMPETENT PERSON PROHIBITED.



   No person shall sell, furnish, give away, dispose of, exchange, or
deliver, or permit the sale, gift, or procuring of any alcoholic liquors, to
or for any minor or to any person who is mentally incompetent.



(Neb. RS 53-180)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-135



§ 111.03  CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES OR PLACES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC;
RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Except when the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission has issued
a license as provided in Neb. RS 53-186(2) or as provided in Neb. RS
60-6,211.08, it is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon
property owned or controlled by the state or any governmental subdivision
thereof unless authorized by the governing bodies having jurisdiction over
such property.



(Neb. RS 53-186)



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing, or
conducting any dance hall, restaurant, café, or club or any place open to
the general public to permit or allow any person to consume alcoholic liquor
upon the premises except as permitted by a license issued for such premises
pursuant to the Nebraska Liquor Control Act.  It is unlawful for any person
to consume alcoholic liquor in any dance hall, restaurant, café, or club or
any place open to the general public except as permitted by a license issued
for such premises pursuant to the Act.  This division does not apply to a
retail licensee while lawfully engaged in the catering of alcoholic beverages
or to limousines or buses operated under Neb. RS 60-6,211.08.



(Neb. RS 53-186.01)



§ 111.04  REMOVAL OF INTOXICATED PERSONS FROM PUBLIC OR QUASI-PUBLIC
PROPERTY.



   (A)   Any law enforcement officer with the power to arrest for
traffic violations may take a person who is intoxicated and in the judgment
of the officer dangerous to himself, herself or others, or who is otherwise
incapacitated, from any public or quasi-public property.  An officer
removing an intoxicated person from public or quasi-public property shall
make a reasonable effort to take the intoxicated person to his or her home or
to place the person in any hospital, clinic, alcoholism center, or with a
medical doctor as may be necessary to preserve life or to prevent injury. 
The effort at placement shall be deemed reasonable if the officer contacts
the facilities or doctor which have previously represented a willingness to
accept and treat the individuals and which regularly do accept the
individuals.  If these efforts are unsuccessful or are not feasible, the
officer may then place the intoxicated person in civil protective custody,
except that civil protective custody shall be used only as long as is
necessary to preserve life or to prevent injury, and under no circumstances
longer than 24 hours.



   (B)   The placement of the person in civil protective custody shall
be recorded at the facility or jail at which he or she is delivered and
communicated to his or her family or next of kin, if they can be located, or
to the person designated by the person taken into civil protective custody.



   (C)   The law enforcement officer who acts in compliance with this
section shall be deemed to be acting in the course of his or her official
duty and shall not be criminally or civilly liable for these actions.



   (D)   The taking of an individual into civil protective custody
under this section shall not be considered an arrest.  No entry or other
record shall be made to indicate that the person has been arrested or charged
with a crime.



   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Any public right-of-way, street, highway,
alley, park, or other state, county, or city-owned property.



      QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Private or publicly owned property
utilized for proprietary or business uses which invites patronage by the
public or which invites public ingress and egress.



(Neb. RS 53-1,121)  Penalty, see § 10.99



LICENSES REQUIRED



§ 111.20  MANUFACTURE, SALE, DELIVERY, AND POSSESSION; GENERAL
PROHIBITIONS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall manufacture, bottle, blend, sell, barter,
transport, deliver, furnish, or possess any alcoholic liquor for beverage
purposes except as specifically provided in this chapter and the Nebraska
Liquor Control Act.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent:



      (1)   The possession of alcoholic liquor legally obtained as
provided in this chapter or the Act for the personal use of the possessor and
his or her family or guests;



      (2)   The making of wine, cider, or other alcoholic liquor by
a person from fruits, vegetables, or grains, or the product thereof, by
simple fermentation and without distillation, if made solely for the use of
the maker and his or her family and guests;



      (3)   Any duly licensed practicing physician or dentist from
possessing or using alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of his or her
profession, any hospital or other institution caring for the sick and
diseased persons from possessing and using alcoholic liquor for the treatment
of bona fide patients of that hospital or other institution, or any drug
store employing a licensed pharmacist from possessing or using alcoholic
liquor in the compounding of prescriptions of licensed physicians;



      (4)   The possession and dispensation of alcoholic liquor by
an authorized representative of any religion on the premises of a place of
worship, for the purpose of conducting any bona fide religious rite, ritual,
or ceremony;



      (5)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from carrying
alcoholic liquor from licensed establishments when they are accompanied by a
person not a minor;



      (6)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from handling
alcoholic liquor containers and alcoholic liquor in the course of their
employment;



      (7)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from removing and
disposing of alcoholic liquor containers for the convenience of the employer
and customers in the course of their employment;



      (8)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from completing a
transaction for the sale of alcoholic liquor in the course of their
employment if they are not handling or serving alcoholic liquor; or the
course of their employment.



(Neb. RS 53-168.06)  (Am. Ord. 943, passed 9-19-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.21  ACQUISITION AND POSSESSION; RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, receive,
acquire, accept, or possess any alcoholic liquor acquired from any other
person other than one duly licensed to handle alcoholic liquor under this
chapter and the Nebraska Liquor Control Act unless within specific exemptions
or exceptions provided in this chapter or the Act.



(Neb.  RS 53-175)



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this, section, it
shall be unlawful for any person to transport, import, bring, ship, or cause
to be transported, imported, brought, or shipped into this state for the
personal use of the possessor, his or her family, or guests a quantity of
alcoholic liquor in excess of nine liters in anyone calendar month.



      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does  not  apply 
to  a  person importing alcoholic liquor from a holder of a retail direct
sales shipping license or its equivalent, which alcoholic liquor is for
personal use or for use by such person's  family  or  guests,  if  the 
total amount imported by such person in any one calendar year does not exceed
108 liters.



(Neb. RS 53-194.03)  (Am. Ord. 946, passed 9-19-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.22  LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No license shall be issued to:



      (1)   A person who is not a resident of this state, except in
case of railroad, airline, or boat licenses;



      (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in
the community in which he or she resides;



      (3)   A person who is not a resident of this state and legally
able to work in this state;



      (4)   A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty
to a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United
States;



      (5)   A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty
to any Class I misdemeanor pursuant Neb. RS Chapter 28, art. 3, 4, 7, 8,
10,11, or 12, or any similar offense under a prior criminal statute or in
another state, except that any additional requirements imposed by this
division on May 18, 1983, shall not prevent any person holding a license on
that date from retaining or renewing that license if the conviction or plea
occurred prior to May 18, 1983;



      (6)   A person whose license issued under the Nebraska Liquor
Control Act has been revoked for cause;



      (7)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of
any license issued under the Act would not be eligible for that license upon
initial application;



      (8)   A partnership, unless one of the partners is a resident
of this state and unless all the members of that partnership are otherwise
qualified to obtain a license;



      (9)   A limited liability company, unless one of the members
is a resident of this state and unless all the members of that company are
otherwise qualified to obtain a license;



      (10)   A corporation, if any officer or director of the
corporation or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25% of the
stock of that corporation would be ineligible to receive a license under this
section for any reason other than the reasons stated in divisions (A)(1) and
(A)(3) of this section, or if a manager of a corporate licensee would be
ineligible to receive a license under this section for any reason. This
division shall not apply to railroad licenses;



      (11)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a
manager or agent, unless that manager or agent possesses the same
qualifications required of the licensee;



      (12)   A person who does not own the premises for which a
license is sought or does not have a lease or combination of leases on the
premises for the full period for which the license is to be issued;



      (13)   Except as provided in this division, an applicant whose
spouse is ineligible under this section to receive and hold a liquor license.
Such an applicant shall become eligible for a liquor license only if the
Nebraska Liquor Control Commission finds from the evidence that the public
interest will not be infringed upon if the license is granted. It shall be
prima facie evidence that when a spouse is ineligible to receive a liquor
license, the applicant is also ineligible to receive a liquor license. This
prima facie evidence shall be overcome if it is shown to the satisfaction of
the Commission:



         (a)   The licensed business will be the sole property of
the applicant; and



         (b)   The licensed premises will be properly operated.



      (14)   A person seeking a license for premises which do not
meet standards for fire safety as established by the State Fire Marshal;



      (15)   A law enforcement officer, except that this division
shall not prohibit a law enforcement officer from holding membership in any
nonprofit organization holding a liquor license or from participating in any
manner in the management or administration of a nonprofit organization; or



      (16)   A person less than 21 years of age.



   (B)   When a trustee is the licensee, the beneficiary or
beneficiaries of the trust shall comply with the requirements of this
section, but nothing in this section shall prohibit any such beneficiary from
being a minor or person who is mentally incompetent.



(Neb. RS 53-125)  (Am. Ord. 945, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 111.23  LICENSES; CITY POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The City of Gothenburg is authorized to regulate by ordinance,
not inconsistent with the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, the business of all
retail, craft brewery, and microdistillery licensees carried on within the
corporate limits of the city).



(Neb.RS 53-134.03)



   (B)   During the period of 45 days after the date of receipt by mail
or electronic delivery from the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission notice and
a copy of an application for a new license to sell alcoholic liquor at
retail, a craft brewery license, or a microdistillery license, the City
Council may make and submit to the Commission recommendations relative to the
granting or refusal to grant the license to the applicant.



(Neb. RS 53-131)



   (C)   The City Council, with respect to licenses within the
corporate limits of the city, has the following powers, functions, and duties
with respect to retail, craft brewery, and microdistillery licenses:



      (1)   To cancel or revoke for cause retail, craft brewery, or
microdistillery licenses to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor issued to
persons for premises within its jurisdiction, subject to the right of appeal
to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission;



      (2)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to
enter at any time upon any premises licensed under the Nebraska Liquor
Control Act to determine whether any provision of the Act, any rule or
regulation adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance,
resolution, rule, or regulation adopted by the City Council has been or is
being violated, and at that time examine the premises of the licensee in
connection with such determination. Any law enforcement officer who
determines that any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and
promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution, rule, or
regulation adopted by the local governing body has been or is being violated
shall report such violation in writing to the Executive Director of the
Commission:



         (a)   Within 30 days after determining that such
violation has occurred;



         (b)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of an ongoing
police investigation; or



         (c)   Within 30 days after the verdict in a prosecution
related to such an ongoing police investigation if the prosecuting attorney
determines that reporting such violation prior to the verdict would
jeopardize such prosecution, whichever is later;



      (3)   To receive a signed complaint from any citizen within
its jurisdiction that any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation
adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution,
rule, or regulation relating to alcoholic liquor has been or is being
violated and to act upon these complaints in the manner provided in the Act;



      (4)   To receive retail, craft brewery, and microdistillery
license fees as provided in Neb. RS 53-124 and 53-124.01 and pay the same,
after the license has been delivered to the applicant, to the City Treasurer;



      (5)   To examine or cause to be examined any applicant or any
retail, craft brewery, or microdistillery licensee upon whom notice of
cancellation or revocation has been served as provided in the Act, to examine
or cause to be examined the books and records of any applicant or licensee,
and to hear testimony and to take proof for its information in the
performance of its duties. For purposes of obtaining any of the information
desired, the City Council may authorize its agent or attorney to act on its
behalf;



      (6)   To cancel or revoke on its own motion any license if,
upon the same notice and hearing as provided in § 111.30, it determines that
the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the Nebraska Liquor
Control Act or any valid and subsisting ordinance, resolution, rule, or
regulation duly enacted, adopted, and promulgated relating to alcoholic
liquor. The order of cancellation or revocation may be appealed to the
Commission within 30 days after the date of the order by filing a notice of
appeal with the Commission. The Commission shall handle the appeal in the
manner provided for hearing on an application in Neb. RS 53-133; and



      (7)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy
of application as provided in Neb. RS 53-131, to fix a time and place for a
hearing at which the City Council shall receive evidence, either orally or by
affidavit from the applicant and any other person, bearing upon the propriety
of the issuance of a license. Notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be published in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the
city, one time not less than seven and not more than 14 days before the time
of the hearing. The notice shall include, but not be limited to, a statement
that all persons desiring to give evidence before the City Council in support
of or in protest against the issuance of the license may do so at the time of
the hearing. The hearing shall be held not more than 45 days after the date
of receipt of the notice from the Commission, and after the hearing the City
Council shall cause to be recorded in the minute record of its proceedings a
resolution recommending either issuance or refusal of the license. The City
Clerk shall mail to the Commission by first class mail, postage prepaid, a
copy of the resolution which shall state the cost of the published notice,
except that failure to comply with this provision shall not void any license
issued by the Commission. If the Commission refuses to issue such a license,
the cost of publication of notice shall be paid by the Commission from the
security for costs.



(Neb. RS 53-134)



   (D)   (1)   When the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission mails or
delivers to the City Clerk a retail, craft brewery, or microdistillery
license issued or renewed by the Commission, the Clerk shall deliver the
license to the licensee upon receipt from the licensee of proof of payment of:



         (a)   The license fee if by the terms of Neb. RS 53-124
the fee is payable to the City Treasurer;



         (b)   Any fee for publication of notice of hearing
before the City Council upon the application for the license;



         (c)   The fee for publication of notice of renewal, if
applicable, as provided in Neb. RS 53-135.01; and



         (d)   Occupation taxes, if any, imposed by the city,
except that Class J retail licensees shall not be subject to occupation taxes.



      (2)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to the
contrary, the city shall not impose an occupation tax on the business of any
person, firm, or corporation licensed under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act
and doing business within the corporate limits of the city in any sum which
exceeds two times the amount  of the license fee required  to be paid under
the Act to obtain that license.



(Neb. RS 53-132)  (Am. Ord. 944, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 111.24  LICENSED PREMISES; INSPECTIONS.



   The City Council shall cause frequent inspection to be made on the
premises of all retail licensees. If it is found that any licensee is
violating any provision of this chapter, the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, or
the rules and regulations of the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission, or is
failing to observe in good faith the purposes of this chapter or the Act, the
license may be suspended, canceled, or revoked after the licensee is given an
opportunity to be heard in his or her defense.



(Neb. RS 53-116.01)



§ 111.25  LICENSE RENEWAL; CITY POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   A retail license issued by the Nebraska Liquor Control
Commission and outstanding may be automatically renewed by the Commission in
the absence of a written request by the City Council to require the licensee
to submit an application for renewal. Any licensed retail premises located in
an area which is annexed to the city shall file a formal application for a
license, and while the application is pending, the licensee may continue all
license privileges until the original license expires or is canceled or
revoked. If that license expires within 60 days following the annexation date
of the area, the license may be renewed by order of the Commission for not
more than one year.



(Neb. RS 53-135)



   (B)   The City Clerk shall cause to be published in a legal
newspaper in or of general circulation in the city, one time between January
10 and January 30 of each year, individual notice in the form prescribed by
law of the right of automatic renewal of each retail liquor and beer license
within the city, except that notice of the right of automatic renewal of
Class C licenses shall be published between the dates of July 10 and July 30
of each year. If written protests to the issuance of automatic renewal of a
license are filed in the office of the City Clerk by three or more residents
of the city on or before February 10, or August 10 for Class C licenses, the
City Council shall hold a hearing to determine whether continuation of the
license should be allowed. Upon the conclusion of any hearing required by
this section, the City Council may request a licensee to submit an
application as provided in Neb. RS 53-135.



(Neb. RS 53-135.01)



§ 111.26  CATERING LICENSES.



   (A)   The holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail
issued under Neb. RS 53-124, a craft brewery license, a microdistillery
license, or a farm winery license  may obtain an annual catering license by
filing an application and license fee with the Nebraska Liquor Control
Commission.



   (B)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and a copy of
the application as provided in Neb. RS 53-124.12, the City Council shall
process the application in the same manner as provided in § 111.23.



   (C)   The City Council, with respect to catering licensees within
its corporate limits, may cancel a catering license for cause for the
remainder of the period for which that catering license is issued. Any person
whose catering license is canceled may appeal to the District Court.



   (D)   The City Council may impose an occupation tax on the business
of a catering licensee doing business within the liquor license jurisdiction
of the City Council. The tax may not exceed double the license fee for a
catering license.



(Neb. RS 53-124.12)



§ 111.27  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Every licensee under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act shall cause his or
her license to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the
licensed premises.



(Neb. RS 53-148)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.28  OWNER OF PREMISES OR AGENT; LIABILITY.



   If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from whom the
licensee derives the right to possession of the premises, or the agent of
that owner or person, knowingly permits the licensee to use the licensed
premises in violation of the terms of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or any
city ordinance, that owner, agent, or other person shall be deemed guilty of
a violation of the Act or ordinance to the same extent as the licensee and be
subject to the same punishment.



(Neb. RS 53-1,101)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.29  LICENSEE; LIABILITY FOR ACTS OF OFFICER, AGENT, OR EMPLOYEE.



   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or any city
ordinance by any officer, director, manager, or other agent or employee of
any licensee, if the act is committed or omission is made with the
authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and
held to be the act of the employer or licensee, and the employer or licensee
shall be punishable in the same manner as if the act or omission had been
done or omitted by the licensee personally.



(Neb. RS 53-1,102)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.30  CITIZEN COMPLAINTS.



   Any five residents of the city shall have the right to file a complaint
with the City Council stating that any retail licensee subject to the
jurisdiction of the City Council has been or is violating any provision of
the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or the rules or regulations issued pursuant
to the Act. The complaint shall be in writing in the form prescribed by the
City Council and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The
complaint shall state the particular provision, rule, or regulation believed
to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which belief is based. If
the City Council is satisfied that the complaint substantially charges a
violation and that from the facts alleged there is reasonable cause for that
belief, it shall set the matter for hearing within ten days from the date of
the filing of the complaint and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the
time and place of the hearing and of the particular charge in the complaint.
The complaint shall in all cases be disposed of by the City Council within 30
days from the date the complaint was filed by resolution thereof, which
resolution shall be deemed the final order for purposes of appeal to the
Nebraska Liquor Control Commission as provided in Neb. RS 53-1,115.



(Neb. RS 53-134.04)



RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 111.45  LOCATION.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
no license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
within 150 feet of any church, school, hospital, or home for aged or indigent
persons or for veterans, their wives or children. This prohibition does not
apply to any location within such distance of 150 feet:



      (1)   For which a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail
has been granted by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission for two years
continuously prior to making of application for license;



      (2)   To hotels offering restaurant service, to regularly
organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or other places where sale of
alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on, if such place of
business so exempted was established for such purposes prior to May 24, 1935;
or



      (3)   To a college or university in the state which is subject
to Neb. RS 53-177.01.



   (B)   If a proposed location for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor is within 150 feet of any church, a license may be issued if the
commission gives notice to the affected church and holds a hearing as
prescribed in Neb. RS 53-133.



(Neb. RS 53-177)



   (C)   No alcoholic liquor, other than beer, shall be sold for
consumption on the premises within 300 feet from the campus of any college or
university within the municipality, except that this section:



      (1)   Does not prohibit a nonpublic college or university from
contracting with an individual or corporation holding a license to sell
alcoholic liquor at retail for the purpose of selling alcoholic liquor at
retail on the campus of such college or university at events sanctioned by
such college or university but does prohibit the sale of alcoholic liquor at
retail by such licensee on the campus of such nonpublic college or university
at student activities or events; and



      (2)   Does not prohibit sales of alcoholic liquor by a
community college culinary education program pursuant to Neb. RS 53-124.15.



(Neb. RS 53-177.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   State Commission may waive 300-feet requirement, see Neb. RS 53-177.01



§ 111.46  ACCESS TO DWELLINGS.



   Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be
manufactured or sold at retail or wholesale upon any premises which have any
access which leads from the premises to any other portion of the same
building or structure used for dwelling or lodging purposes and permitted to
be used or kept accessible for use by the public. This section does not
prevent any connection between the premises and such other portion of the
building or structure which is used only by the licensee, his or her family,
or personal guests.



(Neb. RS 53-178)  (Am. Ord. 947, passed 9-19-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.47  SANITARY CONDITIONS.



   It shall be unlawful to open for public use any retail liquor
establishment that is not in a clean and sanitary condition. Toilet
facilities shall be adequate and convenient for customers and patrons. The
licensed premises shall be subject to any health inspections the City Council
or the city police may make or cause to be made. All applications for liquor
licenses shall be viewed in part from the standpoint of the sanitary
conditions, and a report concerning the sanitary conditions shall be made at
all hearings concerning the application for or renewal of a liquor license.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate licensed premises, see Neb. RS 53-134.03



   State sanitary rules and regulations authorized, see Neb. RS 53-118



§ 111.48  HOURS OF SALE.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any licensed person or his,
her or their agents to sell any alcoholic liquors within the city except as
provided herein, and except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the
state, to wit:



      (1)   Monday through Saturday:  6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.



      (2)   Sundays:  12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m., subject to division
(A)(4) below.



      (3)   Provided, however, on December 31 of each year, it shall
be lawful to dispense alcoholic beverages between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
1:00 a.m., on the following January 1, notwithstanding the above limitations.



      (4)   Provided further, if December 31 or March 17 falls on a
Sunday, a licensed person may sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on a
licensed premise from 12:00 noon to 1:00 a.m. the following Monday.



   (B)   No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages on a licensed
premise for a period of time longer than 15 minutes after the time fixed
herein for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
licensed premises from being open for other business on days and hours during
which the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by this
section.



(Neb. RS 53-179)  (Prior Code, § 10-117)  (Ord. 721, passed 4-6-1998; Am.
Ord. 861, passed 4-19-2011; Am. Ord. 959, passed 12-5-2017)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 111.49  CREDIT SALES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to
any person on credit, on a passbook, on an order on a store, in exchange for
any goods, wares, or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered,
and if any person extends credit for any such purpose, the debt thereby
attempted to be created shall not be recoverable at law.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the following:



      (1)   Any club holding a Class C license from permitting
checks or statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona
fide guests of members and charged to the account of such members or guests
in accordance with the bylaws of such club;



      (2)   Any hotel or restaurant holding a retail license from
permitting checks or statements for liquor to be signed by regular guests
residing at such hotel or eating at such restaurant and charged to the
accounts of such guests; or



      (3)   Any licensed retailer engaged in the sale of wine or
distilled spirits from issuing tasting cards to customers.



(Neb. RS 53-183)



(Am. Ord. 912, passed 3-17-2015)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.50  RESERVED.



§ 111.51  ORIGINAL PACKAGE REQUIRED.



   No person, except a manufacturer or wholesaler, shall fill or refill,
in whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same
or any other kind or quality of alcoholic liquor. It shall be unlawful for
any person to have in his or her possession for sale at retail any bottles,
casks, or other containers containing alcoholic liquor except in original
packages. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the refilling of original
packages of alcoholic liquor for strictly private use and not for resale.



(Neb. RS 53-184)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.52  MINOR'S PRESENCE RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, or leases an
establishment selling alcoholic beverages at retail to allow any minor under
the age of 18 years of age to frequent or otherwise remain in the
establishment unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or legal
guardian, and unless the minor remains seated with and under the immediate
control of the parent or legal guardian.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 53-134.03



§ 111.53  KEG SALES; REQUIREMENTS; PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   When any person licensed to sell alcoholic liquor at retail
sells beer for consumption off the premises in a container with a liquid
capacity of five or more gallons or 18.92 or more liters, the seller shall
record the date of the sale, the keg identification number, the purchaser's
name and address, and the number of the purchaser's motor vehicle operator's
license, state identification card, or military identification, if the
military identification contains a picture of the purchaser, together with
the purchaser's signature. This record shall be on a form prescribed by the
Nebraska Liquor Control Commission and shall be kept by the licensee at the
retail establishment where the purchase was made for not less than six
months. The records kept pursuant to this section shall be available for
inspection by any law enforcement officer during normal business hours or at
any other reasonable time. Any person violating this section shall be guilty
of an offense.



(Neb. RS 53-167.02)



   (B)   Any person who unlawfully tampers with, alters, or removes the
keg identification number from a beer container or is in possession of a beer
container described in division (A) with an altered or removed keg
identification number after the container has been taken from the licensed
premises pursuant to a retail sale and before its return to the licensed
premises or other place where returned kegs are accepted shall be guilty of
an offense.



(Neb. RS 53-167.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 112:  PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   License required



   112.03   Application procedure



   112.04   Standards for issuance



   112.05   Revocation procedure



   112.06   Standards for revocation



   112.07   Appeal procedure



   112.08   Exhibition of identification



   112.09   Policy on soliciting



   112.10   Notice regulating soliciting



   112.11   Posted notice; solicitors to comply



   112.12   Prohibited solicitation



   112.13   Exceptions



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor as defined in this section.



   GOODS.  Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but
is not restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.



   ITINERANT MERCHANT.  Any person, whether as owner, agent, or
consignee, who engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the
city and who, in the furtherance of the business, uses any building,
structure, vehicle, or any place within the city.



   PEDDLER.  Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:



      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods
for sale, or making sales, or making deliveries; or



      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers
goods for sale from any public place within the city.



   SOLICITOR.  Any person who travels by any means from place to place,
taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the
future or for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a
SOLICITOR is not a peddler.



§ 112.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor
shall obtain a license before engaging in the activity within the city.



   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as
set from time to time by the city.



   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.



   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days
after the date of issuance thereof.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.03  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall
file an application with the City Clerk. This application shall be signed by
the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by
the president if a corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide
information concerning the following items:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management
authority or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it
is proposed to be carried on in the city;



         (b)   The local address of the individual;



         (c)   The permanent address of the individual;



         (d)   The capacity in which the individual will act;



      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose
purpose the business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of
incorporation;



      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed
to carry on applicant's business;



      (5)   (a)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods
or services to be offered for sale or delivered;



         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are
to be sold by sample as well as from stock; and



         (c)   If goods, where and by whom the goods are
manufactured or grown, and where the goods are at the time of application;



      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for
the business; and



      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual
identified in division (A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division
(A)(3) has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature
of each offense and the penalty assessed for each offense.



   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required
to provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to
that requested under division (A) above:



      (1)   A description of the applicant; and



      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the
business, including its registration number, if any.



   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall
attach to their application, if required by the city, credentials from the
person, if any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing
the applicant to act as the representative.



   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach
to their application, in addition to any attachments required under division
(C), a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days
prior to the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of
contagious or communicable disease.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.04  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the
applicant's business reputation and moral character shall be made.



   (B)   The application shall be approved unless the investigation
discloses tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant's business
would pose a substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or
general welfare. In particular, tangible evidence that the applicant:



      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;



      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;



      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining
to itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like;



      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or



      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited
contracts will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application.



§ 112.05  REVOCATION PROCEDURE.



   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the
City Clerk after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in § 112.06.
Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting forth
specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. The notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his last known
address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.



§ 112.06  STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.



   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the
following reasons:



   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license
application;



   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in
connection with the business being conducted under the license;



   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;



   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or



   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in
such a way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, or
general welfare of the public.



§ 112.07  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§ 112.04 or 112.06
shall have the right to appeal to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken
by filing with the City Council, within 14 days after notice of the decision
has been mailed to the person's last known address, a written statement
setting forth the grounds for appeal. The City Council shall set the time and
place for a hearing, and notice for the hearing shall be given to the person
in the same manner as provided in § 112.05.



   (B)   The order of the City Council after the hearing shall be final.



§ 112.08  EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter
shall be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event
more than one place within the city shall be used to conduct the business
licensed, separate licenses shall be issued for each place.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall issue a license to each peddler or
solicitor licensed under this chapter. The license shall contain the words
"Licensed Peddler" or "Licensed Solicitor," the expiration date of the
license, and the number of the license. The license shall be kept with the
licensee during the time as he or she is engaged in the business licensed.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.09  POLICY ON SOLICITING.



   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the occupants
of the residences in the city shall make the determination of whether
solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.



§ 112.10  NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.



   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any
residence, shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches
by four inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the
applicable words, as follows:



   "NO SOLICITORS INVITED"



   (B)   The letters shall be at least one-third inch in height.



   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to
any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.



§ 112.11  POSTED NOTICE; SOLICITORS TO COMPLY.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any
premises in the city upon which a residence is located to first examine the
notice provided for in § 112.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the
statement contained on the notice. If the notice states "NO SOLICITORS
INVITED," then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately
and peacefully depart from the premises.



   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence,
whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises when requested to do so by the occupant.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.12  PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance
for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any
door, or create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention
of the occupant of the residence, for the purpose of securing an audience
with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice
exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of § 112.10
above.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.13  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to any person
selling produce raised within the county, or to wholesale salespersons
soliciting merchants directly.



(Prior Code, § 14-62)



CHAPTER 113:  MOBILE HOME PARKS



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   License required; fee



   113.03   Inspection



   113.04   Building permits; denial of permit



   113.05   Utilities standards



   113.06   License issuance; renewal, suspension, revocation grounds



   113.07   Prohibited locations



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD.  Board of Health.



   MOBILE HOME.  Movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed on
its own chassis, connected to utilities, and designed with or without a
permanent foundation for year-round living. It may consist of one or more
units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional
capacity, or of two or more units, separately towable but designed to be
joined into one integral unit.



   MOBILE HOME LOT.  Designated portion of a mobile home park designed
for the accommodation of one mobile home and its accessory buildings or
structures for the exclusive use of the occupants.



   MOBILE HOME PARK.  Parcel or contiguous parcels of land which have
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots
available to the general public for the placement thereon of mobile homes for
occupancy. MOBILE HOME PARK shall not be construed to include mobile homes,
buildings, tents, or other structures temporarily maintained by any
individual, corporation, company, or other entity on its own premises and
used exclusively to house its own labor force.



   MUNICIPALITY.  City of Gothenburg, Nebraska.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock company or association, political subdivision,
governmental agency or other legal entity, and shall include any trustee,
receiver, assignee, or other legal representative thereof.



(Prior Code, § 10-401)



§ 113.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall establish, conduct, operate or
maintain a mobile home park within the city without first obtaining an annual
license therefor from the Board. The license shall be issued for the calendar
year applied for and shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year.



      (2)   The application for the annual license to conduct,
operate, and maintain a mobile home park shall be in writing and upon the
form as the Board shall provide, and shall include the full name and address
of the applicant or applicants or name and addresses of the partner if the
applicant is a partnership, or the names and addresses of the officers if the
applicant is a corporation, and the current or most recent occupation of the
applicant at the time of the filing of the application, and the other
pertinent data as the Board may require by regulation.



(Prior Code, § 10-402)



   (B)   (1)   The application for the first or initial annual
license shall be submitted with the requirements mentioned in division (A) of
this section, accompanied by a fee of not less than $5 nor more than $50, as
determined by regulations of the Board, which regulations shall require
different fees for the following categories of mobile home parks:



         (a)   Those having facilities for only three or fewer
mobile homes;



         (b)   Those having facilities for more than three but
not more than 20 mobile homes; and



         (c)   Those having facilities for more than 20 mobile
homes.



      (2)   The fee charged for each category shall be in relation
to the number of facilities for mobile homes it contains, with the lower the
number of facilities for mobile homes in a category, the lower the fee for
that category. The license fees must be paid for each of the categories as a
condition of annual renewal of licensure.



      (3)   All licensee fees collected by the Board shall be paid
into the City Treasury and shall be credited by the City Treasurer to the
General Fund.



(Prior Code, § 10-403)



§ 113.03  INSPECTION.



   When any application is received, the Board shall cause the mobile home
park and appurtenances thereto to be inspected by representatives of the
Board. When the inspection has been made and the Board finds that all of the
provisions of this chapter governing mobile home parks and the rules,
regulations, and standards of the Board have been met by the applicant, the
Board shall issue an annual license. Inspection by the Board or its
authorized representatives at any time of a mobile home park is a condition
of continued licensure.



(Prior Code, § 10-404)



§ 113.04  BUILDING PERMITS; DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   (A)   No person shall construct, expand, remodel or make alterations
to the sanitary facilities in a mobile home park within the city without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the Board, except that no permit shall
be required in the making of minor repairs or in matters of general
maintenance. The application for the permit shall be made to the Board in the
manner as may be prescribed by regulations of the Board, which shall require
the applicant to supply plans and specifications and otherwise provide a
description of the nature, type, location and extent of the sanitary
facilities contemplated. When the application has been approved, the Board
shall issue a permit to the applicant to construct, expand, remodel, or make
alterations to sanitary facilities, including water and sewage disposal, upon
a mobile home park and the appurtenances thereto according to the plans and
specifications and other data submitted with the approved application. No
approval of plans and specifications and issuance of a permit to construct,
expand, remodel, or make alterations upon a mobile home park and the
appurtenances thereto by the Board shall be made unless the park is in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter governing mobile home parks
and the rules, regulations, and standards of the Board. A permit does not
relieve the applicant from obtaining building permits when located within the
city or from complying with any other city resolution, ordinance, or
regulation applicable thereto, and not in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter governing mobile home parks.



(Prior Code, § 10-405)



   (B)   (1)   If the application for a permit to construct, expand,
remodel, or make alterations upon a mobile home park and the appurtenances
thereto, pursuant to division (A) of this section, is denied by the Board, it
shall so state in writing, giving the reasons for denying the application. If
the objection can be corrected, the applicant may amend his or her
application and resubmit it for approval. No permit shall be denied except
after due notice and opportunity for a hearing before the Board.



      (2)   When the Board has approved an application for a permit
to construct, expand, remodel, or make alterations upon a mobile home park or
appurtenances thereto, pursuant to this chapter, or a license to establish,
conduct, operate, or maintain a mobile home park, it shall retain the
original and keep a file thereof. One copy shall be returned to the applicant
or his or her agent.



      (3)   The Board shall furnish all necessary forms to be
completed in making application for all licenses or permits issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter governing mobile home parks.



(Prior Code, § 10-406)



§ 113.05  UTILITIES STANDARDS.



   The Board shall adopt, promulgate, and enforce by rules and regulations
standards governing utility systems and sanitary conditions for mobile home
parks. The Board shall not adopt or enforce, by rules and regulations, any
design, construction, or land-use standards for any mobile home park.



(Prior Code, § 10-407)



§ 113.06  LICENSE ISSUANCE; RENEWAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION GROUNDS.



   (A)   The Board shall issue licenses for the establishment,
operation, and maintenance of mobile home parks which are found to comply
with the provisions of this chapter governing mobile home parks and the
rules, regulations, and standards as are lawfully promulgated by the Board
pursuant thereto. The Board shall deny, refuse renewal of, suspend or revoke
licenses on any of the following grounds:



      (1)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
governing mobile home parks or the rules, regulations, and standards lawfully
promulgated pursuant thereto;



      (2)   Permitting, aiding, or abetting the commission of any
unlawful act; or



      (3)   Conduct of utility or sanitation practices detrimental
to the health or safety of residents of a mobile home park.



   (B)   (1)   Should the Board determine to deny, refuse renewal
of, suspend, or revoke a license, it shall send to the applicant or licensee,
by either certified or registered mail, a notice setting forth the specific
reasons for the determination. The denial, refusal of renewal, suspension, or
revocation shall become final 30 days after the mailing of the notice in all
cases of failure to pay the required licensure fee if not paid by the end of
the period, and in all other instances unless the applicant or licensee,
within the 30-day period, shall give written notice of a desire for a
hearing. Thereupon, the applicant or licensee shall be given opportunity for
a formal hearing before the Board and shall have the right to present
evidence on his or her own behalf.



      (2)   On the basis of the evidence presented, the
determination involved shall be affirmed or set aside, and a copy of the
decision setting forth the findings of facts and the specific reasons upon
which it is based shall be sent by either certified or registered mail to the
applicant or licensee. The decision shall become final 30 days after a copy
thereof is mailed, unless the applicant or licensee within the 30-day period
appeals the decision of the Board as in appeals from the action of city
councils in cities of the second class.



(Prior Code, § 10-408)



§ 113.07  PROHIBITED LOCATIONS.



   After the effective date hereof, except as otherwise provided, it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a trailer or trailer coach within the
corporate limits for purposes of using the trailers as a dwelling or sleeping
place for one or more persons or the conduct of any business or profession,
occupation, or trade, or use as a selling or advertising device, except in a
designated and approved trailer camp for which a permit has been issued and
is currently valid.



(Prior Code, § 10-409)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who established, conducts, operates, or maintains a
mobile home park without first obtaining a license therefor from the Board as
provided in the provisions of this chapter governing mobile home parks shall
be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a
fine of not more than $100, and each day the mobile home park shall operate
without a license after a first conviction shall be considered a separate
offense. The person shall also be guilty of maintaining a nuisance pursuant
to § 94.16, and upon conviction thereof, in addition to payment of the fine,
the nuisance shall be removed.



   (B)   The Board may, in accordance with the laws governing
injunctions and other process, maintain an action in the name of the city,
against any person for establishing, conducting, operating, or maintaining
any mobile home park without first having a license therefor from the Board
as provided in the provisions of this chapter governing mobile home parks. In
charging any defendant in a complaint in the action, it shall be sufficient
to charge that the defendant did, upon a certain day and in a certain county,
establish, conduct, operate, or maintain a mobile home park without having a
license to do so without averring any further or more particular facts
concerning the same.



(Prior Code, § 10-410)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY





         131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND MORALS





         132.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES




CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



General Provisions



   130.01   Destruction of property in park or cemetery



   130.02   Trash, vehicles in park or cemetery



   130.03   Posting of advertisements



   130.04   Obstruction of public way or water flow



   130.05   Unauthorized removal of dirt from public property



   130.06   Smoking and tobacco use prohibited on premises



   130.07   Use of engine brake prohibited; affirmative defense



Fireworks



   130.20   Discharge of fireworks generally



   130.21   Prohibited fireworks



 



   130.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 130.01  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY IN PARK OR CEMETERY.



   No person in a park or cemetery shall:



   (A)   Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or
displace or remove any building, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
cemetery monuments, stones or markers, other public utilities or parts of
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices, placards, monuments, whether temporary
or permanent, or other structures or equipment facilities of park and
cemetery property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal;



   (B)   Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary in character, or operate any business in or
upon, provide any public service utility into, upon, or across lands, except
on written permit issued by the City Administrator; or



   (C)   Damage, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant, or
injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant.



(Prior Code, § 6-317)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  TRASH, VEHICLES IN PARK OR CEMETERY.



   (A)   No person shall dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse, or
other trash in any park or cemetery except in receptacles provided therefore.



   (B)   No person in a park or cemetery shall violate any of the rules
and regulations for the park or cemetery, as proposed by the Recreation
Committee and/or Cemetery Board duly adopted by resolution of the City
Council. Unless otherwise allowed by the regulation, no motor vehicle shall
be allowed in a park or cemetery except on designated roadways. Provided,
however, the regulations shall become effective from and after their
publication.



(Prior Code, § 6-317)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  POSTING OF ADVERTISEMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully and
maliciously tear, deface, remove, or cover up the posted advertisement or
bill of any person, firm, or corporation when the bill or advertisement is
rightfully and lawfully posted, and the same remains of value.



(Prior Code § 6-301)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paste, or paint
any sign, advertisement, or other writing of any nature upon a fence, pole,
building, or other property without the written permission of the owner of
the property.



(Prior Code § 6-302)



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAY OR WATER FLOW.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, or
suffer to remain, on any street or public sidewalk, a stand, wagon, display,
or other obstruction inconvenient to, or inconsistent with, the public use of
the same.



(Prior Code, § 6-310)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or obstruct the
passage of water in a street gutter, culvert, water pipe, or hydrant.



(Prior Code, § 6-311)



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF DIRT FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to remove, disturb, or
take away from any street, alley, or public grounds any dirt, earth, stones,
or other materials forming a part of the street, alley, or public grounds
without first having obtained written permission to do so from the City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 6-312)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE PROHIBITED ON PREMISES.



   (A)   No person shall smoke, or light cigarettes, cigars, pipes or
otherwise light tobacco, or use tobacco products, including chewable tobacco,
at any time at the following city properties:



      (1)   All ball fields, whether in the parking areas,
bleachers, fields, or public areas contiguous thereto; or



      (2)   Municipal swimming pool, and all public areas contiguous
thereto.



   (B)   All areas shall be posted with a sign clearly designating that
smoking and all tobacco use is prohibited in the area.



(Prior Code, § 6-321)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  USE OF ENGINE BRAKE PROHIBITED; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, ENGINE BRAKE is hereby
defined as a specific braking mechanism which utilizes the release of
compressed air as part of an engine retarder or engine brake on any motor
vehicle as a means of slowing or stopping the vehicle.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a motor vehicle and
use engine retarders or engine brakes as a means of slowing or stopping the
vehicle within the city limits.



   (C)   The use of an engine retarder or brake in an emergency
situation to avoid an imminent accident which would otherwise result in
damage or injury to person(s) or property, or the fact that the motor vehicle
is equipped with a proper muffler system which eliminates noise emitted or
caused by the use of an engine retarder or brake system shall constitute
affirmative defenses to the application of the provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, § 6-319)  Penalty, see § 130.99



FIREWORKS



§ 130.20  DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS GENERALLY.



   (A)   Permitted days and hours. A person commits the offense of
discharging fireworks if he or she discharges fireworks except during the
period beginning at 12:00 noon on June 25 and ending July 4 at 11:59 p.m. of
each year. Fireworks may be discharged only during the period of time between
the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on June 25 through and including July
3; and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:59 p.m. on July 4.



   (B)   Prohibited locations. It shall further be unlawful to
discharge fireworks within 100 feet of a fireworks stand. In addition it
shall be unlawful to discharge fireworks:



      (1)   In or on Lake Helen, the area defined as south and east
of the Nebraska Public Power District Canal, north of the Lake Helen Dam, and
west of Lake Avenue; and



      (2)   In the fire limits as described in § 91.23.



   (C)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in § 130.99(A).



(Am. Ord. 865, passed 5-17-2011; Am. Ord. 924, passed 10-6-2015)



§ 130.21  PROHIBITED FIREWORKS.



   (A)   Generally.  It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or
cause to be exploded fireworks or firecrackers of any description whatsoever,
except as defined and permitted under the statutes of the state.



   (B)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this section shall not apply
to any fireworks to be used for the purpose of public exhibitions or display
under authorization of the governing body or to fireworks furnished for
agricultural purposes pursuant to written authorization from the state's Fire
Marshal.



   (C)   Penalty.  Any person who violates this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in § 130.99(A).



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   All persons convicted of violating any provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by a monetary fine of not less than $35 and not
more than $500.



(Prior Code, § 6-312)



   (B)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for
each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24
hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 6-401)



   (C)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the
manner provided by law. Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722)  (Prior Code, § 6-402)



(Ord. 687, passed 11-4-1997; Ord. 830, passed 5-6-2008)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND MORALS



Section



   131.01   Discharge of weapons



   131.02   Disorderly conduct



   131.03   Curfew



   131.04   Window peeping



   131.05   Minors; tobacco products



   131.06   Sexual predator residency restrictions



   131.07   Prostitution



   131.08   Gambling



   131.09   Criminal mischief



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except an
officer of the law in the discharge of his or her official duty, to fire or
discharge any gun, pistol, or other fowling piece within the city; provided,
nothing herein shall be construed to apply to officially sanctioned public
celebrations if the persons so discharging firearms have written permission
from the City Council; provided further it shall not be a violation of this
section to discharge a firearm in an approved firing range in the city limits.



      (2)   An APPROVED FIRING RANGE shall mean a firearms range
which is constructed and operated pursuant to a set of posted rules, all of
which meet or exceed the standards for firing ranges adopted from time to
time by the National Rifle Association, and which has been inspected and
approved by the Chief of Police of the city as being in compliance with the
standards.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a slingshot,
air gun, BB gun, or arrow from a bow, or the like loaded with rock or other
dangerous missiles, out of doors at anytime or under any circumstances within
the city, except under the direct supervision of a governmental or
educational institution, or in areas approved by the City Council.



   (C)   It shall not be a violation of this section for an employee of
the city, with consent of the Mayor, to discharge a device utilized to haze
or control waterfowl in city parks.



(Prior Code, § 6-304)  (Am. Ord. 921, passed 8-18-2015)



Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.02  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   Any person who shall knowingly start a fight, fight, commit assault or
battery, make unnecessary noise, or otherwise conduct themselves in such a
way as to breach the peace shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense.



(Neb. RS 17-129, 17-556)  (Prior Code, § 6-305)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.03  CURFEW.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CURFEW HOURS.  11:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m. of the following day.



      EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not
limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



      ESTABLISHMENT.  Any privately-owned place of business operated
for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any
place of amusement or entertainment.



      GUARDIAN.



         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian
of the person of a minor; or



         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has
been placed by a court.



      MINOR.  Any person under 17 years of age.



      OPERATOR.  Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.



      PARENT.  A person who is:



         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent
of another person; or



         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a
parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses,
office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.



      REMAIN.



         (a)   Linger or stay; or



         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by
a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.



      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY.  Bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.



   (B)   Offenses.



      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew
hours.



      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he
or she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to
remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
city during curfew hours.



      (3)   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment
commits an offense if he or she  knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours.



   (C)   Defenses.



      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B) that
the minor was:



         (a)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;



         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's
parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;



         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



         (e)   Involved in an emergency;



         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the Police Department about the minor's presence;



         (g)   Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor;



         (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or



         (i)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of
minority removed in accordance with state law.



      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B)(3)
that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified
the Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.



   (D)   Enforcement.  Before taking any enforcement action under this
section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason
for being in the public place.  The officer shall not issue a citation or
make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that
an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, including any investigation additional to the actions required
by this division (D) as a reasonable person would deem necessary, no defense
in division (C) is present.



(Prior Code, § 6-313)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.04  WINDOW PEEPING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon the private premise of
another to look or peep into any window, door, or other opening in a building
occupied by any other person.



(Prior Code, § 6-314)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.05  MINORS; TOBACCO PRODUCTS.



   (A)   Use of tobacco by minors. Whoever, being a minor under the age
of 18 years, shall smoke cigarettes or cigars, use vapor products or
alternative nicotine products, or use tobacco in any form whatever, in this
city, shall be guilty of an offense. Any minor charged with a violation of
this section may be free from prosecution if he or she furnishes evidence for
the conviction of the person or persons selling or giving him or her the
cigarettes, cigars, vapor products, alternative nicotine products, or tobacco.



(Neb. RS 28-1418)



   (B)   Sale of tobacco to minors.  Whoever shall sell, give, or
furnish in any way any tobacco in any form whatever, or any cigarettes or
cigarette paper, vapor products, or alternative nicotine products, to any
minor under 18 years of age is guilty of an offense.



(Neb. RS 28-1419)



   (C)   Misrepresentation by minor to obtain tobacco. Any person under
the age of 18 years who shall obtain cigars, tobacco, cigarettes, or
cigarette material, vapor products, or alternative nicotine products from a
licensee hereunder by representing that he or she is of the age of 18 years
or over, is guilty of an offense.



(Neb. RS 28-1427)



(Prior Code, § 6-318)  (Am. Ord. 913, passed 3-17-2015)



§ 131.06  SEXUAL PREDATOR RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   The state legislature has found that certain sex offenders
present a high risk to commit repeat offenses and has enabled municipalities
to restrict the persons' place of residency as provided in the Sexual
Predator Residency Restriction Act; sex offenders who prey on children and
who are high risks to repeat the acts present an extreme threat to public
safety. The cost of sex offender victimization to these children and to
society at large, while incalculable, is exorbitant. It is the intent of this
section to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect, and
improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city by
creating certain areas around locations where children regularly congregate
and concentrated numbers where certain sexual predators cannot reside.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CHILD CARE FACILITY. Facility licensed pursuant to the Child Care
Licensing Act.



      RESIDE. To sleep, live, or dwell at a place, which may include
more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.



      RESIDENCE. A place where an individual sleeps, lives, or dwells,
which may include more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.



      SCHOOL. A public, private, nondenominational, or parochial school
which meets the requirements for state accreditation or approval.



      SEX OFFENDER. An individual who has been convicted of a crime
listed in Neb. RS 29-4003, and who is required to register as a sex offender
pursuant to the Sex Offender Registration Act, Neb. RS 29-4001 through
29-4019, inclusive, as the same may be amended from time to time.



      SEXUAL PREDATOR. An individual who is required to register under
the Sex Offender Registration Act, Neb. RS 29-4001 through 29-4019,
inclusive, as the same may be amended from time to time, who committed an
aggravated offense as defined in Neb. RS 29-4003 and has victimized a person
18 years of age or younger.



   (C)   (1)   It is unlawful for any sexual predator to reside
within 500 feet of a school or child care facility.



      (2)   For purposes of determining minimum distance separation,
the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer
property line of the residence to the nearest outer property line of the
school or child care facility.



      (3)   A person who violates this section shall be punished as
provided in this chapter.



      (4)   This section shall not apply to a sexual predator who:



         (a)   Resides within a prison or correctional or
treatment facility operated by the state, or a political subdivision;



         (b)   Established a residence before July I, 2006, and
has not moved from that residence;



         (c)   Established a residence after July 1, 2006, and
the school or child care facility a triggering of the restriction was
established after the initial date of the sexual predator's residence at that
location; or



         (d)   Established a residence after July 1, 2006, and
prior to the passage of this section, within 500 feet of a school or child
care facility, and fails to relocate the residence within 60 days from the
passage of this section.



(Prior Code, § 6-320)  (Ord. 821, passed 11-20-2007; Am. Ord. 862, passed
4-19-2011)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.07  PROSTITUTION.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, any person
who performs, offers, or agrees to perform any act of sexual contact or
sexual penetration, as those terms are defined in Neb. RS 28-318, with any
person not his or her spouse, in exchange for money or other thing of value,
commits the offense of prostitution.



   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section
that such person was a trafficking victim as defined in Neb. RS 28-830.



   (C)   If the law enforcement officer determines, after a reasonable
detention for investigative purposes, that a person suspected of or charged
with a violation of division (A) of this section is:



      (1)   A person engaging in those acts as a direct result of
being a trafficking victim as defined in Neb. RS 28-830, such person shall be
immune from prosecution for a prostitution offense; or



      (2)   A person under 18 years of age, such person shall be
immune from prosecution for a prostitution offense under this section and
shall be subject to temporary custody under Neb. RS 43-248 and further
disposition under the Nebraska Juvenile Code. A law enforcement officer who
takes a person under 18 years of age into custody under this section shall
immediately report an allegation of a violation of Neb. RS 28-831 to the
Department of Health and Human Services which shall commence an investigation
within 24 hours under the Child Protection and Family Safety Act.



(Neb. RS 28-801)  (Ord. 910, passed 3-17-2015; Am. Ord. 952, passed
9-19-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.08  GAMBLING.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the definitions found in Neb.
RS 28-1101 shall be used.



   (B)   A person commits the offense of promoting gambling if he or
she knowingly:



      (1)   Advances or profits from any unlawful gambling activity
by:



         (a)   Engaging in bookmaking;



         (b)   Receiving, in connection with any unlawful
gambling scheme or enterprise, any amount of money played in the scheme or
enterprise in any one day; or



         (c)   Betting something of value in an amount of $500 or
more with one or more persons in one day; or



(Neb. RS 28-1102 and 28-1103)



      (2)   Participates in unlawful gambling as a player by betting
less than $500 in any one day. (Neb. RS 28-1104)



   (C)   (1)   A person commits the offense of possession of a
gambling device if he or she manufactures, sells, transports, places,
possesses, or conducts or negotiates any transaction affecting or designed to
affect ownership, custody, or use of any gambling device, knowing that it
shall be used in the advancement of unlawful gambling activity.



      (2)   This division shall not apply to any coin-operated
mechanical gaming device, computer gaming device, electronic gaming device,
or video gaming device which has the capability of awarding free games, which
is intended to be played and is in fact played for amusement only, and which
may allow the player the right to replay such gaming device at no additional
cost, which right to replay shall not be considered money or property, except
that such mechanical game:



         (a)   Can be discharged of accumulated free replays only
by reactivating the game for one additional play for each accumulated free
replay; and



         (b)   Makes no permanent record directly or indirectly
of free replays so awarded.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division,
any mechanical game or device classified by the federal government as an
illegal gambling device and requiring a federal Gambling Device Tax Stamp as
required by the Internal Revenue Service in its administration of 26 U.S.C.
4461 and 4462, amended July 1, 1965, by Public Law 89-44, are hereby declared
to be illegal and excluded from the exemption granted in this division.



(Neb. RS 28-1107)



   (D)   In any prosecution under this section, it shall be an
affirmative defense that the writing, paper, instrument, or article possessed
by the defendant was neither used nor intended to be used in the advancement
of an unlawful gambling activity.



(Neb. RS 28-1108)



   (E)   Proof of possession of any gambling device shall be prima
facie evidence of possession thereof with knowledge of its contents and
character.



(Neb. RS 28-1109)



   (F)   It shall be no defense to a prosecution under any provision of
this section relating to gambling that the gambling is conducted outside this
city and is not in violation of the laws of the jurisdiction in which it is
conducted.



(Neb. RS 28-1110)



   (G)   In addition to any other penalty, a sentencing court may order
that any money, securities, negotiable instruments, firearms, conveyances, or
electronic communication devices as defined in Neb. RS 28-833 or any
equipment, components, peripherals, software, hardware, or accessories
related to electronic communication devices, or any gambling devices be
forfeited as a part of the sentence imposed if it finds by clear and
convincing evidence adduced at a separate hearing in the same prosecution,
conducted pursuant to Neb. RS 28-1601, that any or all such property was
derived from, used, or intended to be used to facilitate a violation of this
section.



(Neb. RS 28-1111)



   (H)   In any prosecution for an offense defined in this section,
when the defendant's status as a player constitutes an excusing condition,
the fact that the defendant was a player shall constitute an affirmative
defense.



(Neb. RS 28-1112)



   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to:



      (1)   Apply to or prohibit wagering on the results of
horseraces by the parimutuel or certificate method when conducted by
licensees within the racetrack enclosure at licensed horse race meetings; or



      (2)   Prohibit or punish the conducting or participating in
any bingo, lottery by the sale of pickle cards, lottery, raffle, or gift
enterprise when conducted in accordance with the Nebraska Bingo Act, the
Nebraska County and City Lottery Act, the Nebraska Lottery and Raffle Act,
the Nebraska Pickle Card Lottery Act, the Nebraska Small Lottery and Raffle
Act, the State Lottery Act, or Neb. RS 9-701.



(Neb. RS 28-1113)



   (J)   In any prosecution under this section in which it is necessary
to prove the occurrence of a sporting event, a published report of its
occurrence in any daily newspaper, magazine, or other periodically printed
publication of general circulation shall be admissible in evidence and shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the occurrence of the event.



(Neb. RS 28-1117)



(Ord. 950, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 131.09  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.



   (A)   A person commits criminal mischief if he or she:



      (1)   Damages property of another intentionally or recklessly;
or



      (2)   Intentionally tampers with property of another so as to
endanger person or property; or



      (3)   Intentionally or maliciously causes another to suffer
pecuniary loss by deception or threat.



   (B)   Criminal mischief is an offense:



      (1)   If the actor intentionally or maliciously causes
pecuniary loss of $500 or more but less than $5,000; or



      (2)   If the actor intentionally, maliciously, or recklessly
causes pecuniary loss in an amount of less than $500 or if his or her action
results in no pecuniary loss.



(Neb. RS 28-519)  (Ord. 949, passed 9-19-2017)



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Persons convicted of violating the provisions of § 131.05
shall be punished by a monetary fine of not less than $35 and not more than
$100.



(Prior Code, § 6-318)



   (B)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for
each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24
hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 6-401)



   (C)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the
manner provided by law. Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722)  (Prior Code, § 6-402)



(Ord. 687, passed 11-4-1997)



CHAPTER 132:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   132.01   Purpose and intent



   132.02   Findings



   132.03   Definitions



   132.04   Classification of businesses



   132.05   License required; application for license



   132.06   Investigation of application



   132.07   License issuance and display



   132.08   License fee



   132.09   Inspections



   132.10   License term and renewal



   132.11   License suspension



   132.12   License revocation



   132.13   Transfer of license



   132.14   Location of sexually oriented business



   132.15   Nonconforming uses



   132.16   Films or videos



   132.17   Additional regulations concerning public nudity or
semi-nudity



   132.18   Additional regulations concerning alcohol



   132.19   Prohibition of children in a sexually oriented business



   132.20   Hours of operation



   132.21   Display of sexually oriented materials to minors



 



   132.99   Penalty



§ 132.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of
any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. 
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material or sexual activities.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.02  FINDINGS.



   Based on convincing documented evidence, studies, findings and reports
concerning the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses
regarding both commercial and residential areas and the nexus between
sexually oriented businesses, obscene materials and sexual exhibits and
alcohol consumption, and illegal drug distribution and use, the City Council
finds:



   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses have negative secondary effects
on the existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas
adjacent to them, causing increased crime, the downgrading of property
values, the downgrading of adjacent neighborhoods making adjacent
neighborhoods significantly less attractive and less safe for raising
children and denigrating both residential life and commercial activity for
other types of businesses and sexually oriented businesses downgrade the
quality of life and fitness of property for other uses in areas both
immediate and adjacent to such businesses.



   (B)   The negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses
are increased when they are located in close proximity to each other and when
the service or consumption of alcohol is permitted at or near such locations.



   (C)   Improper conduct involving sexual acts occurs at sexually
oriented businesses which provide private or semi-private booths or viewing
rooms for the viewing of films, videos or live performances.



   (D)   The findings noted above raise substantial governmental
concerns for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and
it is appropriate for the purpose of promoting and protecting the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the city particularly the children of
the community and those conducting general business that reasonable
regulations be enacted so as to address the substantial governmental concerns
to minimize and control the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented
businesses and thereby promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the city, protect the citizens from increased crime, preserve
the value of property, and preserve the quality of life and the quality and
character of surrounding neighborhoods for residential and commercial
purposes.



   (E)   The enactment of reasonable regulations of sexually oriented
businesses which involve locational criteria, licensing criteria, operational
criteria and the prohibition of alcohol and illegal substance use are
appropriate to address the substantial governmental concerns and protect the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.



   (F)   A reasonable licensing procedure and zoning requirements are
appropriate mechanisms to place the burden of reasonable regulations on the
owners of sexually oriented businesses and such a licensing procedure will
place an incentive on the owners to see that the sexually oriented business
is operated in a manner which is consistent with the health, safety and
welfare of patrons, employees and citizens of the city.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT VIDEO STORE or ADULT NOVELTY STORE.



      (1)   A commercial establishment which has a significant or
substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or
substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial
portion of its interior business or advertising, or maintains a substantial
section of its sales or display space for sale or rental, for any form of
consideration, any one or more of the following:



         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video
reproductions, slides, laser or compact discs, or other visual
representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or



         (b)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are
designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.



      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal
business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental or
material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not
serve to exempt such commercial establishment from being categorized as an
adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store so long as one of
its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified materials which depict or describe specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or if the business advertises
the sale or rental of any such material in a way that can be seen or heard
from the outside of the location.



   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features any of the following:



      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity.



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.



      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides, laser or compact discs, or other visual
representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which
does any of the following:



      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, compact discs or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions.



      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than five hours.



      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than five hours.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by, or where the principal subject of depiction or description
is, specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a
state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure
of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.



   EMPLOYEE, EMPLOY and EMPLOYMENT. Describe and pertain to any person who
performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a
full-time, part-time or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is
denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent, or by another
status. EMPLOYEE does not include a person exclusively on the premises for
repair or maintenance of the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the
premises.



   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.



   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association, who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.



   ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business.



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business to a sexually
oriented business or from one type of sexually oriented business to another
type or types of sexually oriented business.



      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any
other existing sexually oriented business.



      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.



   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued but also includes the individual listed as
an applicant on the application for a license.



   NUDE, NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY. The showing or depiction of the human
post-pubertal male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than
a full opaque covering, the showing or depiction of covered male genitals in
a discemibly turgid state, or the showing or depiction of the female breast
with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of
the areola of the nipple. This definition shall include the entire portion of
the human female breast below the top of the areola of the nipple, but shall
not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited
by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other clothing.



   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. A commercial establishment which regularly features
a person who appears in a state of nudity and is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, or photographed by other persons who pay
money or any form of consideration. NUDE MODEL STUDIO shall not include a
proprietary school licensed by the State of Nebraska; or a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; or a
private college or university which maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation.



   OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERA TED. To cause to function or to put or
keep in a state of doing business. OPERA TOR means any person on the premises
of a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational
control of the business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in
operation, the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to
be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether or not that
person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.



   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, limited liability
company or partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.



   RESIDENTIAL.  A single-family, two-family, or multiple family use as
defined in the ordinances of the City of Gothenberg.



   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and the female breast below the top of the areola of
the nipple, with other portions of the body covered by supporting straps,
materials or devices. This definition shall include the entire portion of the
human female breast below the top of the areola of the nipple, but shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a
dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other clothing.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that
offers for any form of consideration:



      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex.



      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of
nudity or semi-nude.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult
novelty store or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, semi-nude model studio or
sexual encounter center.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The human, post-pubertal male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, the
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely
covered, or the female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the areola of the nipple.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic area, buttocks or female breasts whether clothed or unclothed; or



      (2)   Acts whether actual or simulated, of human sexual
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or



      (3)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth in divisions (1) and (2) above.



   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT. The increase in floor area occupied by the
business by more than 25% as the floor area exists on the date this chapter
takes effect or on the date of the issuance of a sexually oriented business
license.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.



      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business; or



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar
means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.04  CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES.



   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:



   (A)   Adult arcade;



   (B)   Adult bookstore, adult video store or adult novelty store;



   (C)   Adult cabaret;



   (D)   Adult motel;



   (E)   Adult motion picture theater;



   (F)   Adult theater;



   (G)   Escort agency;



   (H)   Nude model studio;



   (I)   Sexual encounter center.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.05  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   It is unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to operate, a
sexually oriented business without a valid license issued by the city for the
particular type of classification of business.



   (B)   An application for a license must be made to the City Clerk on
a form provided by the City Clerk.



   (C)   The applicant must meet all qualifications stated in this
chapter before a license is issued and continuously thereafter during the
license term. The application shall require and the applicant shall provide
such information and documentation as is specified in this chapter.



   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
is an individual, he/she must sign the application for a license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
other than an individual, each officer, director, general partner, managing
partner or other person who will participate directly in decisions relating
to management of the business shall sign the application for a license as
applicant. Each applicant must meet the qualifications as stated in this
chapter and each applicant shall be considered as a licensee if a license is
granted.



   (E)   The completed application for a sexually oriented business
license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by
the following documents:



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his or
her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he or she is 21 or more
years of age;



         (b)   A partnership or limited liability company, the
partnership or limited liability company shall state its complete name, and
the names of all partners or members, residence address and whether the
partnership or company is general or limited, a copy of the partnership,
LLC/LLP organizational agreement, if any, and verification of current state
registration, if any;



         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation
is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the name,
capacity and address of all officers, directors and principal stockholders,
and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the
registered office for service of process.



      (2)   Name of business. If the applicant intends to operate
the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant,
he or she must state the sexually oriented business's name and submit any
registration documents.



      (3)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a crime as
specified in § 132.07(A)(7)(a), and, if so, the crime, date, place and
jurisdiction.



      (4)   Whether the applicant has had a previous license or
holds a present license under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented
business ordinances from another city or county and whether any license has
been denied, suspended or revoked in this or any other jurisdiction,
including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which
the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the
denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant has been a
partner or member in a partnership or limited liability company or an
officer, director, or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed
under this chapter or in another jurisdiction or whose license has previously
been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended or
revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.



      (5)   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under
this chapter or operates other similar sexually oriented businesses in
another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other
businesses.



      (6)   The classification of license for which the applicant is
filing.



      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business,
including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone
number(s), if any.



      (8)   The applicant's mailing address and residential address.



      (9)   The applicant's driver's license number, social security
number, and state or federal issued tax identification number.



      (10)   The application must be accompanied by a sketch or
diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of
total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.



   (F)   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates a
sexually oriented business without a valid license issued by the city for
that particular classification of business.



   (G)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance
with the law and this chapter by the Building Inspector and Police Department.



   (H)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or
county licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining
a sexually oriented business license.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.06  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a copy of an application for a sexually
oriented business license, the Chief of Police or designee shall conduct an
investigation of the applicant and application including a location
inspection and shall issue an investigation report.



   (B)   The Chief of Police or designee shall forward a copy of the
application and investigation report to the Building Inspector and the
Building Inspector shall inspect the location.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.07  LICENSE ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall recommend to the City Clerk approval
of the issuance of a license to an applicant within 20 days after receipt by
the City Clerk of an application unless he or she finds one or more of the
following to be true:



      (1)   An applicant is not then 21 or more years of age.



      (2)   An applicant is currently required to register pursuant
to the Nebraska Sex Offender Registration Act.



      (3)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his
or her payment to the city or county of fees, fines, or penalties assessed
against him or her or imposed upon him or her in relation to a sexually
oriented business.



      (4)   An applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license including all information
requested on the application form or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form.



      (5)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business is not in compliance with state or local building codes, rules and
regulations.



      (6)   The investigation, inspection and license fees required
by this chapter have not been paid.



      (7)   An applicant has been convicted of a crime:



         (a)   Involving:



            1.   Any of the following offenses as described in
Nebraska State Statues:



               a.   Prostitution;



               b.   Pandering;



               c.   Keeping a place of prostitution;



               d.   Debauching a minor;



               e.   Obscenity;



               f.   Contributing to the delinquency of a
child;



               g.   Child pornography;



               h.   Possession, distribution or sale of
child pornography;



            2.   Any of the following offenses as described in
Nebraska State Statues:



               a.   Incest;



               b.   Public indecency;



               c.   Allowing a child to participate in
child pornography;



            3.   Sexual assault or sexual assault of a child
as described in Nebraska State Statutes;



            4.   Solicitation of a child, or harboring a
runaway child as described in Nebraska State Statutes; or



            5.   Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation
to commit any of the foregoing offenses;



         (b)   For which:



            1.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, or the date of release from probation or parole, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense;



            2.   Less than ten years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, or the date of release from probation or parole, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or



            3.   Less than ten years have elapsed since the
date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
last conviction, or the date of release from probation or parole, whichever
is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors of the
offenses listed in division (A) (7)(a) above.



   (B)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant under division (A) of this section.



   (C)   An applicant who has been convicted of an offense listed in
division (A)(7)(a) above may qualify for a sexually oriented business license
only when the time period required by division (A)(7)(b) has elapsed and all
fines reference the criminal offenses have been fully paid.



   (D)   The City Clerk shall approve or deny the issuance of a license
to an applicant within 45 days after receipt of an application. The City
Clerk, upon approving the issuance of a sexually oriented business license,
shall cause to be sent to the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, written notice of that action and that the applicant must pay the
investigation/inspection and license fees at the Office of the City Clerk.
The City Clerk's approval of the issuance of a license does not authorize the
applicant to operate a sexually oriented business until the applicant has
paid all fees required by this chapter and has obtained possession of the
license. The City Clerk, upon denial of the issuance of sexually oriented
business license, shall cause to be sent to the applicant, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, written notice of that action and the applicant can
appeal such decision to the City Council, in writing filed with the City
Clerk, within 30 days of the date of denial. City Council will hear the
appeal within 30 days from the date the written appeal is received. After
hearing, Council will affirm or reverse the decision of the City Clerk within
30 days after conclusion of the hearing. The hearing will be informal and
rules of evidence do not apply. The applicant has the right to be
represented. In case of reversal, the license shall issue.



   (E)   The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address
of the sexually oriented business, and the classification for which the
license is issued. The license must be posted in a conspicuous place at or
near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily
read at any time.



   (F)   A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one
classification and the applicant can operate a business for only one licensed
location in the city.



   (G)   The Police Department, Fire Department, and the City Building
Inspector shall complete their certification that the premises is in
compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application
by the City Clerk. The certifications of the Building Inspector and Fire
Department shall be promptly presented to the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.08  LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   The amount of the annual license fee for a sexually oriented
business shall be reflected in the fee resolution adopted annually by the
City Council



   (B)   In addition to the annual license fee to be paid to the city
at license issue as required by division (A) of this section, an applicant
for an initial sexually oriented business license shall, at the time of
making application, pay a nonrefundable investigation fee, also in an amount
reflected in the fee resolution adopted annually by the City Council, for the
city to conduct an investigation of the application and for the city also to
conduct inspections of the location to insure that the proposed sexually
oriented business is in compliance with the location and other restrictions
set forth in § 132.14.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.09  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   An applicant, licensee, operator or employee shall permit
representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department, City Building
Inspector, and any other state, county or city agency in the performance of
any function connected with the enforcement of this chapter or other
applicable laws, to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business, for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied
or open for business.



   (B)   An applicant, licensee or operator of a sexually oriented
business or his or her agent or employee commits a misdemeanor offense if he
refuses to permit an inspection of the premises by a representative of an
agency designated in division (A) of this section at any time it is occupied
or open for business.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.10  LICENSE TERM AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   A sexually oriented business license may be renewed only by
making application as provided in § 132.05. Application for renewal should
be made at least 45 days before the expiration date, and when made less than
45 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be
affected by the pendency of the application.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.11  LICENSE SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall direct the City Clerk to suspend a
license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he or she determines that a
licensee or an employee of a licensee:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of
this chapter.



      (2)   Is required to register under the Nebraska Sex Offender
Registration Act.



      (3)   Engaged in or permitted or did not control excessive use
of alcoholic beverages on the sexually oriented business premises.



      (4)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter.



      (5)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the
sexually oriented business premises.



   (B)   Appeal of the decision of the City Clerk and the Chief of
Police as to the existence of or noncompliance with the above matters shall
be made to the City Council. Hearing will be informal and the rules of
evidence shall not apply. The hearing will occur within 15 days from the
filing of the appeal upon written notice mailed at least ten days prior to
the hearing to the business address and applicant residence address as it
appears on the application which the licensee is to amend if the residence
address changes.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.12  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   (A)   The City Council shall revoke a license if a cause of
suspension in § 132.11 occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The City Council shall revoke a license if Council determines
that:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process;



      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;



      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operates the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's
license was suspended;



      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
132.07(A)(7)(a) for which the time period required in § 132.07(A)(7)(b) has
not elapsed;



      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 24-month period, a
person or persons committed an offense in or on the licensed premises of a
crime listed in § 132.07(A)(7)(a) for which a conviction has been obtained
and the person or persons convicted were licensees or employees of the
sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; or



      (7)   A licensee or an employee of the sexually oriented
business has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed
premises. This division shall not apply to an adult motel unless the licensee
or employee knowingly allowed such sexual acts to occur either in exchange
for money or in a public place or within public view.



   (C)   After revocation, the licensee shall not be issued a sexually
oriented business license for two years from the date revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City Council finds that the
basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date revocation
became effective and a corrective plan which addresses the violation and
assures that the violation will not occur again is provided to Council. If
the license was revoked under division (B)(5) above, an applicant may not be
granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under
§ 132.07(A)(7)(b) has elapsed.



   (D)   The determination by the City Council as to the existence of
or non-compliance with the above matters shall be made in open City Council
session after mailing notice of hearing time, place and date to the license
holder or its representatives 15 days in advance of said hearing, stating
that Council will consider revoking the license and the grounds therefor. At
said hearing, the license holder or its representatives may present oral or
written evidence in support of the continuance of its license and may
confront and question any witnesses or evidence in opposition to the
continuation of its license. Although rules of evidence do not apply, any
decision will be based on credible evidence of violation of the requirements
as stated herein.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.13  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the location designated in the license.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.14  LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.



   (A)   No sexually oriented business shall be established, operated
or caused to be operated, in any zoning district other than an I-2 zoning
district as defined in the city ordinances.



   (B)   No sexually oriented business shall be established, operated
or caused to be operated, within 1000 feet of:



      (1)   A church or other building primarily used for religious
services or associated church structure such as a parish or fellowship hall;



      (2)   A public or private educational facility including but
not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, home
schools, elementary schools, middle schools, high schools, special education
schools and community colleges. School includes the school grounds and
playgrounds;



      (3)   A property line of a lot devoted to a residential use,
either single or multiple family;



      (4)   A park;



      (5)   A hospital;



      (6)   Community recreation center;



      (7)   Public library;



      (8)   Facility for youth service such as youth center, boys or
girls club, scout, 4-H or other youth program meeting building.



   (C)   No sexually oriented business shall be established, operated,
caused to be operated or substantially enlarged, within 1,000 feet of another
sexually oriented business.



   (D)   (1)   For the purposes of § 132.14(B), measurement shall
be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part
of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the
nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in § 132.14(B).



      (2)   The presence of any political subdivision boundary shall
be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance
requirements of this section.



   (E)   For purposes of division (C) of this section, the distance
between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to any intervening structures or objects, from the
closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.15  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on December
18, 2012, that is in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a
nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a
period not to exceed three years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or
voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming
uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the
use may be changed to a conforming use upon application and issuance of a
license.



   (B)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a
conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the establishment of a
facility as defined in § 132.14, subsequent to the grant of the sexually
oriented business license, within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented
business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and
does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license
has expired, has not been continuously in effect, or has been revoked.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.16  FILMS OR VIDEOS.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, classified as an adult arcade, which exhibits on the
premises in a viewing room of 150 square feet or less of floor space a film,
video, cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following
requirements:



      (1)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the
premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.



      (2)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose
excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.
If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the
interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any reason from at least one of the manager's stations
and all must be staffed when viewing access is made available so that all
areas other than restrooms are supervised at all times viewing access is
permitted. The supervision required in this division must be by direct line
of sight from the manager's station.



      (3)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it
shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises,
to ensure that the view area specified in division (A)(2) above remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other
materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which
patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this
chapter.



      (4)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person
at any time.



      (5)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle as
measured at the floor level.



      (6)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it
shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that
any patron is present in the premises.



   (B)   A person having a duty under division (A) above commits a
misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.17  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING PUBLIC NUDITY OR SEMI-NUDITY.



   (A)   No person shall appear, in a sexually oriented business, in a
state of nudity or engage in or simulate specified sexual activities.



   (B)   No person shall appear, in a sexually oriented business, in a
seminude condition unless the person is an employee who, while seminude,
shall be at least six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at
least two feet from the door.



   (C)   No employee shall, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented
business, solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, and no
patron or customer shall pay or give any gratuity to any employee while said
employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented business.



   (D)   No employee shall, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented
business, touch a patron or customer or the clothing of a patron or customer.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012) Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.18  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING ALCOHOL.



   No sexually oriented business shall sell or serve alcohol and no
sexually oriented business shall permit the consumption of alcohol on the
premises of the sexually oriented business.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.19  PROHIBITION OF CHILDREN IN A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.



   No person under the age of 19 years shall be allowed on the premises of
a sexually oriented business and it is the licensee's affirmative duty to
enforce this minor age restriction through supervision and verification by
identification.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.20  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No sexually oriented business may remain open at any time between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and 1:00 a.m. and
12:00 p.m. on Sundays.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.21  DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATERIALS TO MINORS.



   (A)   No licensee or employee of a licensee shall permit a person
under the age of 19 years of age to be present on its business premises,
which age limitation will be enforced by age verification by said business.



   (B)   No sexually oriented business shall display posters, signs,
depictions or other visual representation on outside walls or any inside or
outside window which depict any of the following:



      (1)   Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy;



      (2)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
buttocks, or female breasts;



      (3)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the
areola of the nipple; or



      (4)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
whether covered or uncovered.



   (C)   The windows and doors of a sexually oriented business will be
tinted to the extent that there is no view of the interior from the exterior
of the business.



   (D)   DISPLAY means to locate an item in such a manner that, without
obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment:



      (1)   It is available to the general public for handling and
inspection; or



      (2)   The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to
members of the general public.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of any
article or section of this chapter and ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. Unless otherwise specified in the particular article or section
for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such
violation shall be a fine in any sum not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a
term not to exceed six months or both said fine and imprisonment at the
discretion of the sentencing court. A separate violation shall be deemed to
have been committed on each 24-hour period that a violation continues after
conviction.



(Ord. 879, passed 12-18-2012)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS





         151.   SUBDIVISIONS





         152.   ZONING





         153.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS



Section



Adoption of Standard Codes



   150.001   International Building Code adopted by reference



   150.002   International Residential Code adopted by reference



   150.003   International Energy Conservation Code adopted by reference



   150.004   International Plumbing Code adopted by reference



   150.005   International Mechanical Code adopted by reference



   150.006   National Electric Code adopted by reference



   150.007   International Existing Building Code adopted by reference



Building Inspector



   150.020   Power and authority



   150.021   Right of entry



   150.022   Appeal from decision of Building Inspector



Inspections



   150.035   Inspections required



   150.036   Inspection record card to be posted



   150.037   Approval required



   150.038   Time of inspection



   150.039   Inspection of approved-plan buildings



   150.040   Additional or special inspections



Building Permits



   150.055   Generally required



   150.056   Application for permit



   150.057   Plans and specifications



   150.058   Information in plans; preparation



   150.059   Review of plans by State Fire Marshal



   150.060   Exemption from permit



   150.061   Issuance of permit



   150.062   Retention of plans by Building Inspector



   150.063   Valid permit authority



   150.064   Expiration of building permit



   150.065   Duplicate of permit to County Assessor



   150.066   Installation, repair, replacement of fireplaces



   150.067   Permit fee



Building Moving



   150.080   Definition



   150.081   Permit required; security deposit



Unsafe Building



   150.095   Definition



   150.096   Prohibited



   150.097   Determination and notice



   150.098   Hearing and appeal



   150.099   Emergency



   150.100   Special assessments



Rapid Entry Key System



   150.200   Definitions



   150.201   Rapid entry key system required



   150.202   Key box contents



   150.203   Alert decals



   150.204   Location of key box



   150.205   Key box options



 



   150.999   Penalty



ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES



§ 150.001  INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
safe and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of materials in
buildings hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired,
relocated, and converted, Chapter 13 of the International Building Code, 2009
Edition, and all but such chapter of the 2012 Edition of the International
Building  Code, recommended by the International Conference of Building
Officials, and printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though
printed in full herein, insofar as the code does not conflict with the
statutes of the state.  Such code shall be deemed the "Building Code".  One
copy of the Building Code is on file at the office of the City Clerk and is
available for public inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of the
Building Code shall be controlling throughout the city and throughout its
zoning jurisdiction.



(Neb. RS 17-1001, 18-132, 19-902, 19-922)  (Prior Code, § 9-601)  (Ord.
760, passed 9-18-2001; Ord. 796, passed 7-19-2005; Ord. 827, passed 3-4-2008;
Ord. 896, passed 11-4-2014; Ord. 925, passed 12-1-2015)



§ 150.002  INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
safe and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of materials in
houses hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired,
relocated, and converted, Chapter 11 of the International Residential Code,
2009 Edition, and all but such chapter of the 2012 Edition of the
International Residential Code except section R313 thereof and a printed in
the booklet or pamphlet form is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference,
in addition to all amended editions as though printed in full here in insofar
as the code does not conflict with the statutes of the state. Such code shall
be deemed the "Housing Code".  One copy of the Housing Code is on file at
the office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The provisions of the Housing Code that shall be controlling
throughout the city and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.



(Neb. RS 17-1001, 18-132, 19-901, 19-922)  (Prior Code, § 9-701)  (Ord.
678, passed 7-15-1997; Ord. 827, passed 3-4-2008; Ord. 896, passed 11-4-2014;
Ord. 925, passed 12-1-2015)



§ 150.003  INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
energy efficient standards for insulation of structures and installation of
energy consuming devices in the design, methods of construction, and uses of
materials in buildings hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered,
repaired, relocated, and converted, the International Energy Conservation
Code, 2009 Edition and printed in book or pamphlet form is hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though
printed in full herein insofar as the Code does not conflict with the
statutes of the state. One copy of the Energy Conservation Code is on file at
the office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The provisions of the Energy Conservation Code shall be
controlling throughout the city and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 9-702)  (Ord. 828, passed 3-4-2008; Ord. 896, passed
11-4-2014)



§ 150.004  INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
safe and stable installation, methods of connection, and uses of materials in
the installation of plumbing, the International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition,
and printed in book or pamphlet form is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference in addition to all amended editions as though printed in full
herein insofar as the code does not conflict with the statutes of the state.
One copy of the Plumbing Code is on file at the office of the City Clerk and
is available for public inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of
the Plumbing Code shall be controlling throughout the city and throughout its
zoning jurisdiction.



(Neb. RS 17-1001, 18-132, 19-902, 19-922)  (Prior Code, § 9-801)  (Ord.
679, passed 7-15-1997; Ord. 761, passed 9-18-2001; Ord. 796, passed
7-19-2005; Ord. 827, passed 3-4-2008; Ord. 896, passed 11-4-2014; Ord. 925,
passed 12-1-2015)



§ 150.005  INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
safe and stable installation, methods of connection, and uses of materials in
the installation of heating, ventilation and air conditioning, the
International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, and printed in book or pamphlet
form is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference in addition to all
amended editions as though printed in full herein insofar as the code does
not conflict with the statutes of the state. One copy of the Mechanical Code
is on file at the office of the City Clerk and is available for public
inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of the Mechanical Code
shall be controlling throughout the city and throughout its zoning
jurisdiction.



(Neb. RS 17-1001, 18-132, 19-902, 19-922)  (Prior Code, § 9-802)  (Ord.
763, passed 9-18-2001; Ord. 796, passed 7-19-2005; Ord. 827, passed 3-4-2008;
Ord. 896, passed 11-4-2014; Ord. 925, passed 12-1-2015)



§ 150.006  NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   To provide minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for safe and
fire proof installation, methods of connection, and uses of materials in the
installation of electrical wiring and appliances, the National Electric Code,
2014 Edition, as recommended and published by the National Fire Protection
Association, and printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though
printed in full herein insofar as the code does not conflict with the
statutes of the state. One copy of the Electrical Code is on file at the
office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. Except as hereafter provided, the Electrical Code shall be
controlling throughout the city and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.



(Neb. RS 17-1001, 18-132, 19-902, 19-922)  (Prior Code, § 9-901) (Ord. 867,
passed 8-2-2011; Ord. 925, passed 12-1-2015)



§ 150.007 INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   To provide flexibility to permit the use of alternative approaches to
achieve compliance with minimum requirements to safeguard the public health,
safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the repair, alteration,
change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings. 
provisions, and requirements for safe and stable design, methods of
construction, and uses of materials and houses hereafter erected,
constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, relocated, and converted, the
International Existing Building Code, 2009 Edition, and a printed in the
booklet or pamphlet form is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, in
addition to all amended editions as though printed in full here in insofar as
the code does not conflict with the statutes of the state. Such code shall be
deemed the "Existing Building Code".  One copy of the Existing Building Code
is on file at the office of the City Clerk and is available for public
inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of the Existing Building
Code shall be controlling throughout the city and throughout its zoning
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 925, passed 12-1-2015)



BUILDING INSPECTOR



§ 150.020  POWER AND AUTHORITY.



   The Building Inspector shall be the city official who shall have the
duty of enforcing all building and housing regulations as herein prescribed.
He or she shall inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built, or moved in
the city as often as necessary to insure compliance with all city chapters.
He or she shall have the power and authority to order, at the direction of
the City Council, all work stopped on any construction, alteration, or
relocation which violates any provisions prescribed herein. He or she shall,
at the direction of the City Council, issue permission to continue any
construction, alteration, or relocation when the City Council is satisfied
that no provision will be violated.



(Prior Code, § 9-101)



§ 150.021  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the Building
Inspector entry into any building or structure where the work of
construction, alteration, repair, or relocation is taking place for the
purpose of making official inspections at any reasonable hour.



(Prior Code, § 9-102)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.022  APPEAL FROM DECISION OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   In the event it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this
chapter has been wrongly interpreted by the Building Inspector; that the time
allowed for compliance with any order of the Building Inspector is too short;
or that conditions peculiar to a particular building make it unreasonably
difficult to meet the literal requirements prescribed by this chapter and the
Building Inspector, the owner, his or her agent, or the occupant may file a
notice of appeal within ten days after the decision or order of the Building
Inspector has been made. The City Council shall hear all appeals and shall
have the power and authority, when appealed to, to modify the decision or
order of the Building Inspector. The decision shall be final, subject only to
any remedy which the aggrieved person may have at law or equity. Applications
for review shall be in writing and shall state the reasons why the variance
should be made. A variance shall be granted only where it is evident that
reasonable safety and sanitation is assured and may include conditions not
generally specified by this code to achieve that end. A copy of any variance
so granted shall be sent to both the Building Inspector and the applicant.



(Prior Code, § 9-103)



INSPECTIONS



§ 150.035  INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.



   All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Inspector, and certain types of
construction shall be continuous inspection by a Building Inspector as
required under § 150.040(B).



(Prior Code, § 9-201)



§ 150.036  INSPECTION RECORD CARD TO BE POSTED.



   Work requiring a building permit shall not be commenced until the
permit holder or his or her agent shall have posted an inspection record card
in a conspicuous place on the front premises and in the position to allow the
Building Inspector conveniently to make the required entries thereon
regarding inspection of the work. This card shall be maintained in the
position by the permit holder until the building is completed and is ready
for occupancy.



(Prior Code, § 9-202)



§ 150.037  APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   (A)   No work shall be done on any part of the building structure
beyond a point indicated in each successive inspection without first
obtaining written approval of the Building Inspector. The written approval
shall be given only after an inspection as indicated by each of the
inspections required under § 150.038.



   (B)   There shall be a final inspection and approval on all
buildings when completed and ready for occupancy.



(Prior Code, § 9-203)



§ 150.038  TIME OF INSPECTION.



   (A)   No reinforcing steel or structural frame work of any part of
any building or of any structure shall be covered or concealed in any manner
whatsoever without first obtaining the approval of the Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector, upon notification from the permit holder or his or
her agent, shall make the following inspections of buildings and shall either
approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the
permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with the
law.



   (B)   (1)   Footing inspection.  To be made after trenches are
excavated, forms erected, and reinforcing steel, if any, placed, and before
any footings are poured.



      (2)   Foundations inspection.  To be made after all
foundations are erected, forms removed, water proofing is completed, and
before backfill is placed.



      (3)   Frame inspections.  To be made after the roof, all
framing, fire-blocking, and bracing are in place, and all pipes, chimneys,
vents must be installed and rough inspections must have been made on all
installations.



      (4)   Mechanical inspections.  Rough-in inspection to be made
when all duct and pipe work is in place before it is covered. Final
inspection to be made when the system is completed and operating.



      (5)   Final inspection.  To be made after building is
completed and is ready for occupancy.



(Prior Code, § 9-204)  (Ord. 884, passed 9-17-2013)



§ 150.039  INSPECTION OF APPROVED-PLAN BUILDINGS.



   All buildings requiring plans that are signed and sealed by an
architect or engineer as provided for in § 150.058(B) shall be inspected by
the city's Building Inspector or the City Engineer. In lieu of city
inspections, the owner or his or her agent may choose to privately employ a
licensed architect or professional engineer (P.E.) registered in the state
for the inspections of work as specified in § 150.038. The architect or
engineer may hire a qualified inspector during construction, but must provide
a record of inspections as required under § 150.038 and sign off on the
certificate of occupancy. The certificate shall certify that any and all
building codes as adopted by the city and state have been adhered to and
complied with. A professional engineer doing work in lieu of the City
Inspector shall be appointed as a "Building Inspector – Single Application"
by the Mayor and approved by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 9-208)  (Ord. 822, passed 1-8-2008)



§ 150.040  ADDITIONAL OR SPECIAL INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   In addition to the inspections required in § 150.038, the
Building Inspector may make any other inspections of any kind of construction
work to ascertain complete compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 9-206)



   (B)   In addition to the inspections to be made as specified in §
150.038, the owner or his or her agent shall privately employ a qualified
inspector during construction of work involving unusual hazards or requiring
constant inspection.



(Prior Code, § 9-207)



BUILDING PERMITS



§ 150.055  GENERALLY REQUIRED.



   No person, firm, or corporation, nor the state, county or city
government, or any agency, subdivision, or department thereof, shall erect,
construct, enlarge, remodel, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert,
demolish, occupy, or change occupancy of any building or structure in the
city, or do any other work or cause the same to be done, without first having
obtained a separate permit for the specific work to be done for each
operation from the Building Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 9-301)



§ 150.056  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an
application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose.



   (B)   Every application shall:



      (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the
permit for which application is made;



      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be
done, by lot, block, tract, and house and street address, or similar
description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed
building or work;



      (3)   Show the use or occupancy of all parts of the building;



      (4)   Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required
in § 150.057;



      (5)   State the valuation of the proposed work;



      (6)   Be signed by the permittee, or his or her authorized
agent, who may be required to submit evidence to indicate authority; and



      (7)   Give other information as reasonably may be required by
the Building Inspector, including a plot plan showing property lines located
with reference to some fixed point or benchmark which may be readily
inspected at the site.



(Prior Code, § 9-302)



§ 150.057  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   A fee for review of plans and specifications shall be paid to
the City Clerk. The City Council shall have the power and authority to
establish plan and specification fees by resolution.



   (B)   (1)   Each permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans
and specifications. A rechecking fee shall be paid to the City Clerk, which
the City Council shall have the authority to establish rechecking fees by
resolution. The rechecking fee may be required on all plans submitted for
review that have been submitted to and disapproved by the Building Inspector.
This fee must be paid at the time the plans are submitted for review.



      (2)   At the discretion of the Building Inspector, plans and
specifications need not be submitted for alterations and repairs not
affecting the structure of the building or the safety of the occupants.



(Prior Code, § 9-303)  (Ord. 822, passed 1-8-2008)



§ 150.058  INFORMATION IN PLANS; PREPARATION.



   (A)   Plans and details shall be drawn to scale upon substantial
paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and
extent of the work proposed, the size and shape of the rooms, the materials
used, and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this
chapter and all relevant laws, rules, and regulations. The first sheet of
each set of plans shall give the exact location of the work to be done and
the name and address of the owner and the name and address and seal or stamp,
if any, of the person who prepared the plans and specifications. Plans shall
include a plot plan showing the location of the proposed building and of
every existing building on the property.



(Prior Code, § 9-304)



   (B)   (1)   (a)   All plans and specifications submitted in
connection with the application for a permit shall be prepared and stamped by
architects licensed by the state. Any plans and specifications prepared by a
professional engineer registered in the state and submitted in conjunction
with the architect's drawings, shall be sealed with the engineer's seal.
Periodic observation of construction of the buildings or structures to which
the plans and specifications pertain shall be performed by the licensed
architects and registered professional engineers.



         (b)   Plans need not be signed and sealed by an
architect or engineer if exempt as described under the Engineers and
Architects Act of the state.



      (2)   No provision herein shall operate to restrict or extend
the practice of a licensed architect or a registered professional engineer.



      (3)   Applications for permits under these exceptions shall be
processed as are all other applications, and permits shall be issued only if
the plans and specifications are complete and in accordance with this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 9-305)  (Ord. 777, passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 822, passed
1-8-2008)



§ 150.059  REVIEW OF PLANS BY STATE FIRE MARSHAL.



   Plans stamped by an architect or engineer shall be submitted to the
State Fire Marshal for review if the building is more than 5,000 square feet,
occupied by 20 or more people, or more than 30 feet high. The builder shall
be responsible for submitting the plans to the State Fire Marshal, and for
notifying the State Fire Marshal for final inspection.



(Prior Code, § 9-306)  (Ord. 777, passed 8-20-2002)



§ 150.060  EXEMPTION FROM PERMIT.



   (A)   (1)   Residential.



         (a)   No building permit shall be required for
repainting, redecorating, minor alterations, and repairs under the following
provisions:



            1.   The alterations or repairs do not materially
affect the actual structure of the building or the safety of the occupants or
property; and



            2.   The cost of the alterations or repairs does
not exceed $1,000.



         (b)   A building permit is not required if the
alteration or repair is a comparable replacement of the whole or part of the
system that was removed (such as a mechanical system, plumbing system, 
roofing, windows, or doors, and the like); and there are no material
alterations to the structure in excess of $500 in the replacement of the
system.



         (c)   A state electrical permit shall be required as
required by the State Electrical Code for residential buildings.  The State
Electrical Inspector shall conduct all residential inspections.



      (2)   Commercial.



         (a)   All commercial buildings shall have the same
exemptions as residential except as stated in the following division
(A)(2)(b).



         (b)   A state electrical permit shall be required as
required by the State Electrical Code for commercial buildings. The State
Electrical Inspector shall conduct all commercial inspections.



   (B)   Exemptions from the permit requirements of this code shall not
be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
violation of the provisions of the adopted Building Code for the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-307)  (Ord. 703, passed 5-19-1998; Ord. 790, passed
7-6-2004; Ord. 884, passed 9-17-2013)



§ 150.061  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The application, plans, and specifications filed by an
applicant for a permit shall be checked by the Building Inspector. All items
of construction for which a permit is required shall conform with this
chapter, and as such, be "Approved" by the Building Inspector. Upon payment
of the permit fee and "Approval" of the plans and specifications, the permit
shall be issued.



   (B)   The Building Inspector may issue a permit for the construction
of part of a building or structure before the entire plans and specifications
for the whole building or structure have been submitted or approved, provided
adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with
all pertinent requirements of this chapter. The holder of the permits shall
proceed at his or her own risk without assurance that the permit for the
entire building or structure will be granted.



(Prior Code, § 9-308)



§ 150.062  RETENTION OF PLANS BY BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   One set of approved plans, specifications, and computations shall be
retained by the Building Inspector for a period of not less than 90 days from
the date of completion of the work covered therein, and one set of approved
plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant, which set shall
be kept on the building or work at all times while the work authorized
thereby is in progress. Plans submitted for checking, for which no permit is
issued, and on which no action is taken by the applicant for 90 days, shall
be returned to the last known address of the applicant. To renew action on
the plans, a payment of a new plan-check fee shall be required.



(Prior Code, § 9-309)



§ 150.063  VALID PERMIT AUTHORITY.



   The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and
specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of,
any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to
give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be
valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorized is lawful.



(Prior Code, § 9-310)



§ 150.064  EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMIT.



   If the work described in any building permit has not begun within 60
days from the date of issuance thereof or if the work described in any
building permit has not been substantially completed within 18 months of the
date of issuance thereof, the permit shall expire and be cancelled by the
City Clerk and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected,
together with notice that any work as described in the cancelled permit shall
not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained;
provided, however, times for commencement or completion may be extended by
the Planning Commission prior to the expiration of the time periods; and
provided further, no building or other structure in the city shall be allowed
to remain in an unfinished condition for a period of over six months nor
shall any building or other structure in the city to be allowed to remain in
an unsafe, damaged, or demolished condition for a period of more than 60 days



(Prior Code, § 9-311)



§ 150.065  DUPLICATE OF PERMIT TO COUNTY ASSESSOR.



   Whenever a building permit is issued for the erection, alteration, or
repair of any building within the city's jurisdiction, and the improvement is
$1,000 or more, a duplicate of the permit shall be issued to the County
Assessor.



(Neb. RS 18-1743)  (Prior Code, § 9-313)



§ 150.066  INSTALLATION, REPAIR, REPLACEMENT OF FIREPLACES.



   The installation, repair, and replacement of any fireplace or similar
device to produce heat by the burning of wood or other solid substance shall
require the application and approval of a building permit therefore and shall
otherwise be subject to all of the Building, Electrical, and Fire Codes of
the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-314)



§ 150.067  PERMIT FEE.



   A fee for each building permit shall be paid to the City Clerk. The
City Council shall have the power and authority to establish permit fees by
resolution. Where work for which a permit is required by this chapter is
started or proceeded prior to obtaining the permit, the fees as established
by the City Council by resolution shall be doubled, but the payment of the
double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the
requirements of this chapter in the execution of the work, nor from any other
penalties prescribed.



(Prior Code, § 9-312)  (Ord. 822, passed 1-8-2008)



BUILDING MOVING



§ 150.080  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING.  Any structure or object sought to be moved over public ways
of the city which may interfere with traffic, or interfere or cause damage to
any walk, street, curb, gas main, sewer main, pole or wire within the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-404)



§ 150.081  PERMIT REQUIRED; SECURITY DEPOSIT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, to
move any building or structure within the city without a written permit to do
so. Application may be made to the City Clerk, and shall include the present
and future location of the building to be moved, the proposed route, the
equipment to be used, and other information as the City Council may require.
The City Council shall have the power and authority to establish permit fees
by resolution. The City Clerk shall refer the application to the city police
for approval of the proposed route over which the building is to be moved.
Upon approval of the City Administrator, the City Clerk shall then issue the
permit; provided, that a good and sufficient corporate surety bond or cash,
set in an amount not more than $10,000, set by the City Clerk, and approved
by the City Attorney as to form and substance, and conditioned upon moving
the building without doing damage to any private or city property, is filed
with the City Clerk prior to the granting of any permit. In the event it will
be necessary for any licensed building mover to interfere with the telephone
or telegraph poles and wires, or a gas line, the company or companies owning,
using, or operating the poles, wires, or line shall, upon proper notice of at
least 24 hours, be present and assist by disconnecting the poles, wires, or
line relative to the building moving operation. All expense of the
disconnection, removal, or related work shall be paid in advance by the
licensee unless the disconnection or work is furnished on different terms as
provided in the company's franchise. Whenever the moving of any building
necessitates interference with a water main, sewer main, pipes, or wire
belonging to the city, notice in writing of the time and route of the
building moving operation shall be given to the various city officials in
charge of the city utility departments, who shall proceed in behalf of the
city and at the expense of the mover to make the disconnections and do the
work as is necessary.



(Neb. RS 60-6,288 to 60-6,294, 60-6,296, 77-1725)  (Prior Code, § 9-401)



   (B)   At the time as the building moving has been completed, the
city police shall inspect the premises and report to the City Clerk as to the
extent of damages, if any, resulting from the relocation, and whether any
city laws have been violated during the operation. Upon a satisfactory report
from the city police, the City Clerk shall return the corporate surety bond,
cash, or check deposited by the applicant. In the event the basement,
foundation, or portion thereof is not properly filled, covered, or in a clean
and sanitary condition, the City Council may apply the money deposited for
the purpose of defraying the expense of correcting the conditions. If the
expense of correcting the hazardous condition is greater than the amount of
the deposit set by resolution of the City Council, as required herein, the
City Council may recover the excess expense by civil suit or otherwise as
prescribed by law.



(Prior Code, § 9-402)



   (C)   There shall be no license issued or general permit given to
anyone to move buildings at will or generally within the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-403)



(Ord. 822, passed 1-8-2008)



UNSAFE BUILDING



§ 150.095  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   UNSAFE BUILDING.



      (1)   Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure
which:



         (a)   Is dangerous to the public health because of its
condition, and which may cause or aid in the spread of disease or injury to
the health of the occupants of it or neighboring structures;



         (b)   Because of faulty construction, age, lack of
proper repair, or any other cause, is especially liable to fire and
constitutes or creates a fire hazard; and/or



         (c)   By reason of faulty construction or any other
cause, is liable to cause injury or damage by the collapse or fall of all or
any part of the structure.



      (2)   Any UNSAFE BUILDING in the city is hereby declared to be
a nuisance.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01)  (Prior Code, § 9-501)



§ 150.096  PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any unsafe
building in the city, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or
person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in
an unsafe condition or to occupy the building or permit it to be occupied
while it is in an unsafe condition.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01)  (Prior Code, § 9-502)  Penalty,
see § 150.999



§ 150.097  DETERMINATION AND NOTICE.



   (A)   Whenever the Building Inspector or the Board of Health shall
be of the opinion that any building or structure in the city is an unsafe
building, he, she, or it shall file a written statement to this effect with
the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall thereupon cause the
property to be posted accordingly, and shall file a copy of the determination
in the office of the County Register of Deeds, and shall serve written notice
upon the owner thereof, and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by certified
mail or by personal service. The notice shall state that the building has
been declared to be in an unsafe condition, and that the dangerous condition
must be removed or remedied by repairing or altering the building or by
demolishing it, and that the condition must be remedied within 60 days from
the date of receipt. The notice may be in the following terms:



      To                                         
  (owner/occupant  of premises) of the premise known and described as    
                                                   
    .



      You are hereby notified that                        
    (describe building) on the premises above mentioned has been determined
to be an unsafe building and a nuisance after inspection by            
                                                   
    . The causes for this decision are                        
                  (here insert the facts as to the dangerous
condition).



      You must remedy this condition or demolish the building within 60
days from the date of receipt of this notice, or the city will proceed to do
so. Appeal of this determination may be made to the City Council, acting as
the Board of Appeals, by filing with the City Clerk within ten days from the
date of receipt of this notice a request for a hearing.



   (B)   If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith,
or taken an appeal from the determination of the officer or employee finding
that a dangerous building exists, within 60 days from the time when this
notice is served upon the person by personal service or certified mail, the
Building Inspector may, upon orders of the City Council, proceed to remedy
the condition or demolish the unsafe building.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01)  (Prior Code, § 9-503)



§ 150.098  HEARING AND APPEAL.



   Upon receiving the notice to repair or demolish the building, the owner
of the building, within the time stipulated, may, in writing to the City
Clerk, request a hearing before the City Council, sitting as the Board of
Appeals, to present reasons why the building should not be repaired or
demolished. The City Council shall grant the hearing within ten days from the
date of receiving the request. A written notice of the City Council's
decision following the hearing shall be sent to the property owner by
certified mail. If the City Council rejects the appeal, the owner shall have
five days from the sending of the decision to begin repair or demolition and
removal. If, after the five-day period, the owner has not begun work, the
City Council shall proceed to cause the work to be done; provided, the
property owner may appeal the decision to the appropriate court for
adjudication during which proceedings the decision of the City Council shall
be stayed.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01)  (Prior Code, § 9-504)



§ 150.099  EMERGENCY.



   Where any unsafe building or structure poses an immediate danger to the
health, safety, or general welfare of any person or persons, and the owner
fails to remedy the situation in a reasonable time after notice by the
Building Inspector to do so, the city may summarily repair or demolish and
remove the building or structure.



(Prior Code, § 9-505)



§ 150.100  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   If any owner of any building or structure fails, neglects, or
refuses to comply with notice by or on behalf of the city to repair,
rehabilitate, or demolish and remove a building or structure which is unsafe
and a public nuisance, the city may proceed with the work specified in the
notice to the property owner.



   (B)   A statement of the cost of the work shall be transmitted to
the City Council. The City Council may:



      (1)   Levy the cost as a special assessment against the lot or
real estate upon which the building or structure is located; or



      (2)   Collect the cost from the owner of the building or
structure and enforce the collection by civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction.



   (C)   The special assessment shall be a lien on the real estate and
shall be collected in the manner provided for special assessments.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01, 77-1725)  (Prior Code, § 9-506)



RAPID ENTRY KEY SYSTEM



§ 150.200  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL STRUCTURE. Any building with more than 50% of its floor
space used for commercial activities, including the sale of products or
services. COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES for purposes of this subchapter do not
include any building owned or occupied by the federal government, the state
of Nebraska or any of its political subdivisions.



   FDC. A Fire Department connection.



   FIRE DISTRICT. The corporate limits of the City of Gothenburg.



   FIRE LANES. A road, designated area, or other passageway developed to
allow passage of or access by fire apparatus.



   FIRE OFFICIAL. The Fire Chief of the Gothenburg Volunteer Fire
Department and/or his designee.



   KEY BOX. A secure, locked hinged metal box providing for keyed or
keypad entry in size and style approved by the Fire Official that meets the
requirements and uses the same security key code adopted by the Gothenburg
Fire Department.



   KEY SWITCH. A product which is an electric override for perimeter gates
and uses the same security key code adopted by the Gothenburg Fire Department.



   MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. A structure comprised of four or
more units used for a single-family dwellings having a single common entrance.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The property owner, business owner, or other
person(s) or occupant charged with the responsibility for the use and
occupancy of a commercial structure.



   SECURITY PADLOCK. A padlock approved by the Fire Official that utilizes
the approved key code adopted by the Gothenburg Fire Department.



(Ord. 888, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 150.201  RAPID ENTRY KEY SYSTEM REQUIRED.



   (A)   Commercial and multifamily residential structures. Any new or
planned commercial or multifamily residential structure which does not have a
certificate of occupancy prior to the effective date of this section shall be
equipped with an approved key box, installed at a location approved by the
Fire Official. The Building Inspector or Fire Official or his designee shall
provide notice of the requirements of this subchapter to the responsible
party of all new or planned commercial or multifamily residential structure
at the time a building permit is issued. The cost of purchasing and
installing, along with any cost associated with implementation shall be borne
solely and exclusively by the responsible party.



   (B)   Automatic gates. All newly constructed commercial, multifamily
residential, or residential structures, which can only be accessed through a
gate or cross arm or other like device that impedes ingress through required
fire lanes by means of a key, swipe card, or manual activation by a stationed
guard, shall be equipped with two systems designed to allow for emergency
access. The system shall have a key switch to be installed as a backup to the
public entry system. Both of these systems shall be installed at a location
approved by the Fire Official.



   (C)   Security padlock. Any newly constructed commercial or
multifamily residential structure that is located on a property protected by
a locked fence or gate shall be equipped with an approved security padlock to
be installed at a location approved by the Fire Official. It shall be the
responsibility of the responsible party to ensure that the fence or gate is
secured properly so that the security padlock is accessible.



   (D)   Construction sites. Any newly constructed commercial or
multifamily residential structure under construction which is secured by a
locked fence or gate shall, until the locked fence or gate is removed,  be
secured by a security padlock, which shall be obtained by the responsible
party at his or her expense. It shall be the responsibility of the
construction company to insure that the fence or gate is secured properly so
that the security padlock is accessible.



   (E)   Registration required. To obtain a key box for a location as
required by this subchapter, the responsible party or his or her designee
shall request, in person, from the Gothenburg Volunteer Fire Department, a
form available at the office of the City Clerk. Fees for such application
shall be established by resolution of the City Council from time to time.



   (F)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to mandate
compliance of any commercial or multifamily residential structure which has
previously been granted a certificate of occupancy from the city; however,
all owners and operators of any such building may, and are encouraged to,
voluntarily comply with the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 888, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 150.202  KEY BOX CONTENTS.



   (A)   The responsible party shall insure that all installed key
boxes contain items designated by the Fire Official, including but not
limited to:



      (1)   Labeled keys to locked points of egress, whether in
interior or exterior of such buildings.



      (2)   Labeled keys to the locked mechanical rooms.



      (3)   Labeled keys to any fence or secured areas not covered
in § 150.201(C) and (D).



      (4)   Labeled keys to any other areas that may be required by
the Fire Official.



      (5)   The number or sets of keys shall be determined based on
the following criteria:



         (a)   One -story building: one set;



         (b)   Two - three stories: two sets;



         (c)   Four - six stories: three sets;



         (d)   Large assembly (arenas, stadium, etc.): up to five
sets.



         (e)   In cases where the commercial or multifamily
residential structure is very large or has unusual configurations, additional
set(s) of keys may be required in the sole judgment of the Fire Official.



      (6)   A card containing the emergency contact people and phone
numbers for each occupancy. This card should contain day/night contact
information for not less than three individuals. This card should contain the
date of the last update or review.



      (7)   For commercial structures of six or more stories, floor
plans of the rooms within the building may also be required, showing
locations of shut offs. These plans shall be placed in a designated position
or in an approved cabinet accessible to the fire service.



   (B)   Upon proper installation the responsible party or his designee
must contact the Gothenburg Volunteer Fire Department to schedule a time when
the appropriate item(s) outlined herein can be secured inside the key box.



(Ord. 888, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 150.203  ALERT DECALS.



   Alert decals, approved by the Fire Official, to alert firemen of the
presence of security features covered by this subchapter, shall be displayed
on any outside doors or windows as designated by the Fire Official.



(Ord. 888, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 150.204  LOCATION OF KEY BOX.



   Unless otherwise specified by the Fire Officials, key boxes shall be
installed adjacent to the main entrance to the commercial or multifamily
residential structure, and shall be installed at a height no less than 48
inches from walking grade and no greater than 66 inches from walking grade at
the installation location. Additional key boxes may be required at locations
as determined by the Fire Official. All key boxes shall be installed within
ten feet left of the front doors of the occupancy and approved location by
the Fire Official.



(Ord. 888, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 150.205  KEY BOX OPTIONS.



   In order to comply with the provisions of this subchapter, only key
boxes and security padlocks approved by the Fire Official in his sole
discretion are approved for installation. The key box and the key or code to
access the key box shall be uniform and the Fire Department shall not be
required to maintain more than one style of key to access the key box,
security padlocks or key switches. The Fire Official shall file with the City
Clerk the specifications and acceptable products for the key box, security
padlock and key switches.



(Ord. 888, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full
length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for
each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24
hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 9-1101)



   (B)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the
manner provided by law. Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722)  (Prior Code, § 9-1102)



CHAPTER 151:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   151.001   Definitions



   151.002   Title; jurisdiction



   151.003   Purpose



   151.004   Interpretation and application of chapter



Administration



   151.015   Planning Commission duties



   151.016   Secretary of Planning Commission



   151.017   Duties of City Council



Plat Review and Submittal Requirements



   151.030   Pre-application procedure



   151.031   Preliminary plat procedure



   151.032   Final approval procedure



Minimum Design Standards



   151.045   General requirements



   151.046   Suitability of land for proposed subdivision



   151.047   Community asset



   151.048   Conformance with zoning and other regulations



   151.049   Block dimensions



   151.050   Street regulations



   151.051   Lot regulations



   151.052   Utility and drainage easements



   151.053   Public open spaces



   151.054   Solar access for energy conservation



Improvements



   151.065   Required minimum improvements



   151.066   Exceptions for existing improvements



   151.067   Guarantees for subdivision improvements



   151.068   Operation and maintenance



Lot Consolidation and Setback Requirements



   151.070   Contiguous parcel setback; agreement



Administrative Subdivision



   151.080   Definition



   151.081   Administrative approval



   151.082   Application for an administrative subdivision



   151.083   Administrative certificate approval



   151.084   Review and action by Planning Commission and City Council



   151.085   Approval of plat filing



Variances and Waivers



   151.100   Conditions for granting variance



   151.101   Recording of plat required



   151.102   Small subdivision waiver



Annexation



   151.115   Adjoining and contiguous properties



   151.116   Petition for annexation



   151.117   Adoption of resolution and plan



Enforcement



   151.130   Enforcement of provisions



Amendments



   151.145   Amendments



 



   151.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Minimum street standards



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A public or private right-of-way which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property from a street or road.



   ARTERIAL STREET.  A street designed or utilized for high vehicular
speeds or heavy volumes of traffic.



   BLOCK.  A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public
highway, streets, streams, railroad rights-of-way or parks and the like, or a
combination thereof.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of Gothenburg, Nebraska.



   CITY ENGINEER.  The person responsible to perform the duties of the
City Engineer as provided for under Neb. RS 17-568, including any and all
special engineers as appointed by the City Council pursuant to the statute.



   COLLECTOR STREET.  A street designed for moderate volumes of traffic
between minor streets and arterial streets.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  The general plan for the improvement and
development of the city as adopted as required by the applicable state
statute.



   CUL-DE-SAC.  A vehicular turnaround which is located at the closed end
of a dead-end street or alley.



   DESIGN.  The location of streets, alignment of streets, grades, and
widths of streets, alignment of easements, grades, and widths of easements,
alignment and rights-of-way for drainage and sanitary sewers, and the
designation of minimum lot area, width, and length.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation,
or persons, of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes.



   FINAL PLAT.  A plan or map prepared in accordance with the provisions
of this regulation and those of any other applicable local regulation, which
plat is prepared to be placed on record in the office of the Register of
Deeds of the county.



   FLOOD PLAIN.  Those lands within the zoning jurisdiction of the city
which are subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The regulatory flood plain for this chapter shall be based on the official
Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map issued by the Federal
Insurance Administration, United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development and any revision thereto. Copies of the maps shall be on file in
the office of the City Clerk.



   IMPROVEMENTS.  Street work and utilities that are to be installed, or
agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public
or private use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood
traffic, drainage needs, and other improvements, as a condition precedent to
the approval and acceptance of the final plat.



   LOT.  A portion of land in a subdivision or other parcel of land,
intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development.



   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET  A minor street which is parallel to and
adjacent an arterial street and which serves to reduce the number of access
points to the arterial street.



   MINOR STREETS.  Street which is used primarily for access to
properties abutting thereon and which carries relatively small volumes of
traffic.



   OPEN SPACE.  An area of land or water or combination thereof planned
for passive or active recreation, but does not include areas utilized for
streets, alleys, driveways or private roads, off-street parking or loading
areas, or required front, rear, or side yards.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  Right-of-way dedicated to public use which cuts
across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and
properties.



   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Gothenburg Planning Commission.



   SECRETARY.  Secretary of the Planning Commission.



   SETBACK LINE or BUILDING LINE.  A line on a plat generally parallel to
the street right-of-way, indicating the minimum open space to be provided
between buildings or structures and the edge of the street right-of-way.



   STREET.  A right-of-way, dedicated to the public use, or a private
right-of-way which provides principal vehicular and pedestrian access to
adjacent properties.



   SUBDIVIDER.  A person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association
who causes land to be divided into a subdivision for itself or for others.



   SUBDIVISION.  The division of a tract of land into two or more lots or
parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or,
if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term
SUBDIVISION includes RESUBDIVISION, and the term RESUBDIVISION, as used
herein, shall include any further subdivision of a lot or parcel of land
previously subdivided, for sale, use, or other purposes, which varies from
the latest, approved plat of the same.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, Art. 3; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, Art. 3)



§ 151.002  TITLE; JURISDICTION.



   (A)   This chapter may be known and cited and referred to as
"Subdivision Regulation Ordinance of the City of Gothenburg, Nebraska."



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 110; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 110)



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the area of
planning jurisdiction as defined on the Official Zoning Map of the city, as
the same may be amended by subsequent annexation.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 120; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 120)



§ 151.003  PURPOSE.



   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for the harmonious
development of the community and its environs; to prescribe standards for the
laying out of subdivisions in harmony with the comprehensive plan; for the
coordination of streets and utilities within subdivisions with other existing
or planned streets and utilities; and for coordination of subdivisions with
other features of the comprehensive plan to provide for adequate open space
for traffic, recreation, light, and air, all in accordance with applicable
state statutes.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 130; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 130)



§ 151.004  INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   (1)   Any plat hereafter made for each subdivision or each
part thereof lying within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be prepared,
presented for approval, and recorded as herein prescribed. The regulations
contained herein shall apply to the subdivisions of the lot, tract, or parcel
of land into two or more lots, tracts, or other division of land for the
purpose of sale or of building development, whether immediate or future,
including the resubdivision or replatting of land or lots. Further, the
regulations set forth by this chapter shall be minimum regulations which
shall apply uniformly throughout the jurisdiction of this chapter except as
hereinafter provided.



      (2)   Each separate principle use building within the planning
jurisdiction of the city shall be situated on a separate and single
subdivided lot or record, unless otherwise provided in the zoning regulations
for the city.



      (3)   No subdivision of land shall be permitted within the
city planning jurisdiction unless a plat is approved in accordance with
provisions of these regulations.



      (4)   These regulations shall apply not only to subdivision as
herein set forth, but shall also apply, insofar as payment of costs for
improvement of subdivisions is concerned, to those subdivisions, or parts
thereof, already platted and approved, which are undeveloped, wholly, or
partially.



      (5)   These regulations shall not apply to subdivision of
burial lots in cemeteries.



      (6)   These regulations shall not apply to a division of land
for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of ten acres or more and not
involving a new street.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 140; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 140)



   (B)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of the
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Wherever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations, chapters, the most restrictive or that imposing the
higher standards shall govern.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 150; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 150)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 151.015  PLANNING COMMISSION DUTIES.



   (A)   Review and approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove
preliminary and final plats and transmit plats together with appropriate
recommendations to the City Council for its action.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 221; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 221)



   (B)   Make other determinations and decisions as may be required of
the Planning Commission from time to time by these regulations, and by the
applicable sections of the state statutes.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 222; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 222)



§ 151.016  SECRETARY OF PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Maintain permanent and current records with respect to these
regulations including amendments thereto. Keep minutes and agendas of all
meetings and hearings.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 211; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 211)



   (B)   File copies of all preliminary and final plats, together with
applications and filing fees, with the City Clerk.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 212; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 212)



   (C)   Transmit preliminary and final plats and Planning Commission
recommendations to the City Council for its action.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 213; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 213)



   (D)   Send notice of intent to plat to owners of record of unplatted
land within 200 feet of property being considered for subdivision or
resubdivision.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 214; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 214)



§ 151.017  DUTIES OF CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Consider Planning Commission recommendations on preliminary
and final plats, and approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove plats.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 221; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 221)



   (B)   Take other actions as required from time to time including the
consideration of amendments to these regulations.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 222; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 222)



PLAT REVIEW AND SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 151.030  PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Pre-application conference.  Before filing a preliminary
plat, the subdivider shall consult with the Planning Commission and/or the
Zoning Administrator for advice regarding general requirements affecting the
proposed development. A sketch of the proposed subdivision drawn on the
topographic survey map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision
to existing community facilities.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 411; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 411)



   (B)   Notification of requirements.  The Planning Commission and/or
the Zoning Administrator shall inform the subdivider of the requirements
pertaining to the proposed subdivision as the requirements are established by
these regulations.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 412; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 412)



   (C)   Waiver of fees.  The pre-application procedure does not
require formal application, fee, or filing of plat with the Planning
Commission.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 413; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 413)



§ 151.031  PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Plat submission requirements.  The subdivider shall submit to
the Zoning Administrator five copies of the preliminary plat and supplemental
material specified with written application for conditional approval. The
complete submission shall occur at least 15 days prior to the regular meeting
of the Planning Commission at which the request will be heard.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 421; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 421)



   (B)   Fees.  A plat review fee, as established by the City Council,
shall accompany the application for conditional approval.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 421; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 422)



   (C)   Scale and preliminary plat contents.  Preliminary plats shall
be a scale of one inch to 100 feet, or one inch equals 200 feet, if 75% of
the lots are one acre or larger, and shall be prepared with the following
information:



      (1)   Name, location, acreage, owner and designer of the
subdivision;



      (2)   Present zoning;



      (3)   Date, north point, and graphic scale;



      (4)   Location of property lines, roads, existing utilities
with the size of lines, and other underground installations and easements;



      (5)   Names of adjoining properties or subdivisions;



      (6)   Proposed utility system (type, capacity, and the
location of major transmission lines and treatment plants);



      (7)   Names of new streets;



      (8)   Dimensions, lot lines, and building setbacks, except
that in industrial-type subdivisions, lot lines may be excluded;



      (9)   Contours at intervals of two feet, or five feet
intervals at one inch equals 200 feet scale;



      (10)   Proposed improvements and grading concepts;



      (11)   Location of existing buildings;



      (12)   Location of existing trees with trunks at least six
inches in diameter, measured two feet above the ground level. Clumps of
numerous trees may be identified as tree group without precisely locating
each tree;



      (13)   Proposed easements, dedications, and reservations of
land required shall be provided; and



      (14)   Restrictive covenants.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 423; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 423)



   (D)   Notification of improvements schedule.  The subdivider shall
indicate by a letter when improvements as required will be provided.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 424; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 424)



   (E)   Notification of school board.  At least five days prior to
the Planning Commission meetings at which the preliminary plat is to be
considered for approval, the Planning Commission shall submit a copy of the
proposal to the school board of each school district which the proposed
development affects, and shall notify the school board of the meeting date.
Copies of the plat may be submitted to any other agency which may be affected.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 425; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 425)



   (F)   Planning Commission approval/rejection.  After review of the
preliminary plat and negotiations with the subdivider, the Planning
Commission shall reject or conditionally approve the preliminary plat within
40 days after the official meeting at which the plat was considered.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 426; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 426)



   (G)   Recording of action by Planning Commission.  The action of
the Planning Commission shall be noted on three copies of the preliminary
plat, referenced and attached to the conditions determined. One copy shall be
returned to the subdivider, one copy relayed to the City Council, and one
copy retained by the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 427; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 427)



   (H)   Approval is conditional.  Approval of a preliminary plat
shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed
as expression of approval or conditional approval of the submitted plat as a
guide for the preparation of the final plat, which will be subject to further
consideration by the Planning Commission and City Council. Any conditional
approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one year
unless an extension is granted by the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 428; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 428)



§ 151.032  FINAL APPROVAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Plat submission requirements.  Final plats shall be submitted
to the Zoning Administrator within one year of approval of the preliminary
plat, unless an extension is granted by the Planning Commission. The final
plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and to the
requirements of all applicable ordinances and state laws, and, if desired by
the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which he or she proposes to record and develop at the time;
provided, however, that the portion conforms to all requirements of these
regulations. Submittal of any portion of the approved area shall be
interpreted as satisfying the one-year submission requirement.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 431; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 431)



   (B)   Fees.  No fees are required for final plat submission.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 432; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 432)



   (C)   Scale and final plat contents.



      (1)   The original and five copies of the final plat and other
exhibits required for approval shall be submitted. The final plat shall be
drawn in ink on tracing cloth, mylar, or similar material, and shall be at a
scale of one inch to 100 feet or larger.



      (2)   The final plat shall show the following:



         (a)   Date, title, name, and location of subdivision;



         (b)   Streets and street names, lots, setback lines, lot
numbers, and the like, except that in industrial-type subdivisions, lot
designation may be excluded;



         (c)   Graphic scale and true north point;



         (d)   Monuments;



         (e)   Dimensions, angles, and bearings, and complete
legal description of the property;



         (f)   Sufficient engineering data to reproduce any line
on the ground;



         (g)   Names of adjoining properties;



         (h)   Location, dimensions, and purpose of any easements;



         (i)   Purpose for which sites are dedicated or reserved,
and the transfer of ownership of the same;



         (j)   Certification signed and acknowledged by all
parties holding title or having any title interest in the land subdivided and
consenting to the preparation and recording of the plat as submitted;



         (k)   Certification recording the approval by the
Planning Commission; and



         (l)   Certification recording the approval by the City
Council and the acceptance of any dedications.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 433; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 433)



   (D)   Supplementary data required.  The final plat shall be
accompanied by:



      (1)   Detailed construction plans of all required public
improvements, the plans to be approved by the Zoning Administrator and/or
City Engineer; and



      (2)   A certificate by the Zoning Administrator certifying
that the subdivider has complied with all provisions of §§ 151.045 through
151.054; or, certifying that all required improvements have been installed in
accordance with the approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning
Commission.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 434; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 434)



   (E)   Planning Commission recommendations.  The Planning Commission
shall approve or reject the final plat and have prepared a recommendation to
the City Council recommending approval or rejection. All reasons for
recommending or rejection shall be clearly stated. Notification of approval
or rejection by the Planning Commission or the City Council shall be given to
the subdivider within 60 days after submission of the final plat to the
Planning Commission.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 435; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 435)



MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 151.045  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   The general requirements and minimum standards of design and
development set forth are hereby adopted as the minimum requirements and
standards to which a subdivision must conform prior to approval. All
subdivision design shall conform to and be in harmony with the comprehensive
plan.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 510; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 510)



§ 151.046  SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR PROPOSED SUBDIVISION.



   (A)   If the City Council finds that land proposed to be subdivided
is unsuitable for subdivision development due to flooding, bad drainage,
steep slopes, rock formations, and other conditions as may increase the
danger to health, life, or property, or aggravate erosion or flood hazards;
and, if from adequate investigations, conducted by all the public agencies
concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of the public,
the land should not be platted and developed for the purpose proposed, the
City Council shall not approve the land for subdivision unless adequate
methods are formulated by the subdivider for meeting the problems that will
be created by the subdivision and development of the land.



   (B)   The City Council may refuse to approve what it considers to be
scattered or premature subdivision of land which would involve danger or
injury to the public health, safety, welfare, or prosperity by reason of lack
of adequate water supply, schools, proper drainage, good roads and
transportation facilities or other public services; or which would
necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of the
services (such as undue maintenance costs for adequate roads).



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 511; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 511)



§ 151.047  COMMUNITY ASSET.



   In all subdivisions, due regard shall be shown for natural features
such as large trees, unusual rock formations, and water courses; for sites
which have historical significance; and for similar assets which, if
preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision and to the
community. The City Council may prepare a list of all features within its
area of planning jurisdiction which it deems worthy of preservation.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 512; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 512)



§ 151.048  CONFORMANCE WITH ZONING AND OTHER REGULATIONS.



   No final plat of land within the area of force and effect of an
existing zoning ordinance will be approved unless it conforms with the
ordinance. Whenever there is a variance between the minimum standards set
forth in these regulations and those contained in the zoning chapter,
Building Code, or other official regulations, the highest standard shall
apply.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 513; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 513)



§ 151.049  BLOCK DIMENSIONS.



   (A)   Length.  Block length shall not exceed 1,200 feet or be less
than 300 feet, except as the City Council considers necessary to secure
efficient use of land or desired features of street layout.



   (B)   Width.  Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of
lots of minimum depth. However, where this would require lots to front on an
arterial street or highway, or where topographical conditions or the size of
the property prevent two tiers of lots, the City Council may approve a single
tier of lots of minimum depth.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, §§ 520-522; Ord.
851, passed 8-4-2009, §§ 520—522)



§ 151.050  STREET REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Generally.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade,
and location of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive development
plan, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned
streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and
in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served
by the streets. A copy of Schedule A: Minimum Street Standards is included in
Appendix A.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 530; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 530)



   (B)   Street extensions.  The street layout of the proposed
subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of
streets and alleys already existing in areas being subdivided. Where, at the
determination of the Planning and Zoning Commission, it is desirable to
provide street access to adjoining properties, proposed streets shall be
extended by dedication to the boundaries of the properties. Where the
Planning and Zoning Commission deems it necessary, the dead-end streets shall
be provided with a temporary turnaround having a radius of at least 50 feet.
The street system for the proposed subdivision shall provide for extending
existing streets at the same or greater width, but in no case shall a street
extension be of less width than the minimum width required in these
regulations for a street in its category.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 531; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 531)



   (C)   Dedication of right-of-way for new streets.  The dedication
of right-of-way for new streets measured from lot line to lot line shall be
as shown on the comprehensive plan, or, if not shown thereon, shall meet the
right-of-way requirements as provided in Appendix A of this chapter. All
streets classified as arterial streets by the comprehensive plan shall have
all points by access approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Marginal
access streets may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission for
subdivisions fronting on arterial streets.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 532; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 532)



   (D)   Dedication of right-of-way for existing streets. 
Subdivisions platted along existing streets shall dedicate additional
right-of-way width if necessary to meet the minimum street width requirements
set forth in these regulations. The entire minimum right-of-way width shall
be dedicated where the subdivision is on both sides of an existing street.
When the subdivision is on only one side of an existing street, one-half of
the required right-of-way width, measured from the center line of the
existing roadway, shall be dedicated. Dedication of one-half of the
right-of-way for proposed streets along the boundaries of land proposed for
subdivision shall be prohibited.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 533; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 533)



   (E)   Intersection.  Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible
at an angle of 90 degrees, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less
than 60 degrees. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of at
least 20 feet. When the smallest angle of street intersection is less than 75
degrees, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require curb radii of greater
length. Wherever necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a
desirable radius without reducing the sidewalk at a street corner to less
than normal width, the property line at the street corner shall be rounded or
otherwise set back sufficiently to permit the curb construction. No lot or
other parcel of land which abuts on and has access to either a collector or a
minor street shall have a service drive, curb cut, or other means of access
to an arterial street within 75 feet of the right-of-way of any street which
intersect the arterial street on the side on which the lot or parcel is
located.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 534; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 534)



   (F)   Horizontal and vertical street curves.  A tangent at least
100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and
collector streets. Where there is a deflection angle of more than ten degrees
in the alignment of a street, a curve with a radius adequate to ensure safe
sight distance shall be made. The minimum radii of curves provided in
Schedule A of these regulations shall be required. Every change in grade
shall be connected by a vertical curve constructed so as to afford a minimum
sight distance of 200 feet, the sight distance being measured from a driver's
eyes, which are assumed to be four and one-half feet above the pavement
surface, to an object four inches high on the pavement. Profiles of all
streets showing natural or finished grades, drawn to an approved scale, may
be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 535; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 535)



   (G)   Cul-de-sacs.  Minor terminal or dead-end streets or courts
which are designed so as to have one end permanently closed shall not be
longer than 600 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a
turn-around having a radius at the outside of the pavement of at least 50
feet and a radius at the outside of the right-of-way of at least 60 feet.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 536; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 536)



   (H)   Street names.



      (1)   Proposed streets which are in alignment with other
already existing and named streets shall bear the names of the existing
streets. The name of a proposed street which is not in alignment with an
existing street shall not duplicate the name of any existing street,
irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive,
place, court, land, road, pike, highway, parkway, or similar suffix.



      (2)   To avoid duplication and confusion, the proposed names
of all streets shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior
to the names being assigned or used.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 537; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 537)



   (I)   Private streets and reserve strips.  There shall be no
private streets platted within a subdivision. Provided, however, the City
Council may approve private streets in subdivisions that lie within the
zoning jurisdiction of the city, but are located outside of the city limits.
There shall be no reserve strips in a subdivision except where their control
is definitely vested in the municipality or county under conditions approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission as authorized in these regulations.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 538; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 538; Ord. 904, passed 12-16-2014)



§ 151.051  LOT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Relationship to streets.  All lots shall front on a public
street or road for a minimum distance of 50 feet, except that lots which
front on the turnarounds of permanent dead-end streets shall front on the
turnarounds for a minimum distance of 25 feet.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 541; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 541)



   (B)   Arrangements.  Except where infeasible, side lot lines shall
be at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 542; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 542)



   (C)   Dimension.  The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be
such as the City Council deems appropriate for the type of development and
use contemplated. Lot dimensions within the jurisdiction of this chapter
shall conform to any requirements of the zoning chapter.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 543; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 543)



   (D)   Building line setback.  The building line to establish yards
for all buildings and lots shall be as provided in the zoning chapter.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 544; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 544)



   (E)   Corner lots.  Corner lots shall have sufficient extra width
to meet the building setback lines established on both the front street and
the side street.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 545; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 545)



   (F)   Yard requirements.  Yard requirements for residential,
commercial, and industrial subdivisions or the portions thereof within the
jurisdiction of the chapter, shall be the same as the yard requirements set
forth in the zoning chapter for the zoning district or districts in which
they are located.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 546; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 546)



   (G)   Flood hazards.



      (1)   Land subject to flooding, and land deemed to be
topographically unsuitable for residential development, shall not be platted
for residential use or for any other use which may increase the danger to
health, life, or property, or aggravate erosion of flood hazards. The land
within the subdivision shall be set aside on the plat for the uses as will
not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation contrary to the public
welfare. To ensure that lots will be located only where they will provide
flood-free house sites, the City Council may require the subdivider to
provide elevation and flood profiles sufficient to demonstrate that the house
sites will be flood free.



      (2)   If a stream flows through or adjacent the proposed
subdivision, the plat plan shall provide for an easement along the stream for
a floodway. The floodway easement shall be wide enough to provide for future
enlargement of the stream channel as adjacent areas become more highly
developed and run-off rates are increased.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 547; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 547)



§ 151.052  UTILITY AND DRAINAGE EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Except where alleys are permitted for the purpose, the City
Council shall require easements at least ten feet in width along all rear lot
lines for poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas mains,
water mains, heat mains, and other utility facilities. Where necessary or
advisable in the opinion of the City Council, similar easements shall be
provided along side lot lines or across lots.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 551; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 551)



   (B)   Where the City Council deems it necessary for the proper
drainage within or through a subdivision, it shall require that a storm water
or drainage easement be provided.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 552; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 552)



§ 151.053  PUBLIC OPEN SPACES.



   Where a school, neighborhood park, recreation area, or public access to
water frontage which is shown on an official map or in a plan for future land
use is located in whole or in part in the applicant's proposed subdivision,
the City Council may require the dedication or reservation of the open space
within the proposed subdivision for school, park, recreation, or other
purposes.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 560; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 560)



§ 151.054  SOLAR ACCESS FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION.



   (A)   In order to promote the conservation of energy through the use
of both passive and active solar systems, streets in residential subdivisions
should, where possible, have an east-west alignment. Lots intended for
detached dwelling should be of sufficient width to allow the structure to be
built with its longest axis running east-west.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 571; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 571)



   (B)   In order to allow the orientation of structures on the site so
as to maximize potential solar gain, side lot lines should run as near to
north-south as possible, providing that the angle between the side of the lot
line and the street right-of-way line on a straight street or the tangent to
a curved street shall not be less than 80 degrees.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 572; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 572)



IMPROVEMENTS



§ 151.065  REQUIRED MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Required improvements.  The subdivider shall install or
provide for the installation of the following improvements.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 610; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 610)



      (1)   Streets.



         (a)   The subdivider shall provide for the installation
of pavement and curb and gutter on all streets, except intersections. No
grading or other construction shall take place within a street right-of-way
until the construction plans have been examined by the City Engineer and
approved by the City Council. All street pavings shall be located in the
center of the right-of-way. All street construction shall conform with the
specifications of the City Council, and compliance therewith shall be
confirmed by the City Engineer prior to release of surety by the City Council.



         (b)   If the subdivision is not within the corporate
limits of the city or in an area designated for annexation, either by the
city or at the request of the subdivider, then the City Council may allow the
streets to be surfaced with crushed rock with a surface thickness of not less
than three inches, or gravel with a surface thickness of not less than four
inches.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 611; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 611)



      (2)   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides
of all residential streets upon which houses face. All sidewalks shall be not
less than four feet in width of portland cement concrete, and shall comply
with the specifications of the City Council. Sidewalks shall be located in
the platted right-of-way, one foot from the property line. Walks shall also
be installed in any pedestrian easements, as may be required by the City
Council. In all residential subdivisions approved by the City Council, after
the effective date of this chapter, no building permit shall be issued for a
residential structure unless the building permit specification requires the
installation of a sidewalk as provided in this division. Provided, however,
all lots in a residential subdivision, the final approval for which occurs
after the effective date of this chapter, must have sidewalks installed
within five years of the action of the City Council approving the final
subdivision plat in any event.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 612; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 612)



      (3)   Storm drainage.  The subdivider shall install culverts,
storm sewers, rip-rap slopes and/or stabilized ditches, and these and other
improvements shall comply with the minimum standards of the City Council and
shall be examined by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council prior
to construction.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 613; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 613)



      (4)   Water distribution.



         (a)   Where a public water supply is within 1,320 feet
of a proposed subdivision and along an accessible easement or street
right-of-way, the subdivider shall install or have installed a system of
water mains and connect to the supply. A connection to each lot shall be
installed prior to the paving of the street. The City Council may require the
installation of water mains, which are in excess of the subdivision design
needs, and mutually establish with the subdivider a prorated distribution
cost to be shared by the city or other persons and the subdivider.



         (b)   Where a public water supply is not available, each
lot in a subdivision shall be furnished with a water supply system with
proper provisions for the maintenance thereof. Any lot so serviced shall have
a minimum area of 12,000 square feet. The design of any system shall be
subject to the approval of the State Department of Health, or County Health
Officer, whichever is applicable. Where it is feasible and practical for an
adequate water supply to be made available for every lot, the subdivider
shall present evidence to this effect, and include deed restrictions on the
final plat requiring any individual water supply system to comply with the
requirements of the State Department of Health.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 614; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 614)



      (5)   Sanitary sewage disposal.



         (a)   Where a public sanitary sewer is within 1,320 feet
of the subdivision and along an accessible easement or street right-of-way,
the subdivider shall connect with the sewer and provide a connection to each
lot. The sanitary sewerage system shall be installed prior to the
installation of the street pavement. The City Council may require the
installation of sanitary sewer lines which are in excess of the subdivision
design needs, and mutually establish with the subdivider a prorated
distribution cost to be shared by the city or other persons and the
subdivider.



         (b)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not accessible,
each lot in the subdivision shall be serviced by either a disposal plant
system or a septic tank with proper provision for the maintenance thereof.
Any lot so serviced shall have a minimum area of 12,000 square feet. The
design and location of either system shall be subject to the approval of the
State Department of Health or County Health Officer, whichever is applicable.
Where it is feasible and practical for an adequate sewerage disposal system
to be made available for every lot, the subdivider shall present evidence to
this effect and include deed restrictions on the final plat requiring any
individual sewerage disposal system to comply with the requirements of the
State Department of Health and/or State Department of Environmental Quality.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 615; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 615)



      (6)   Fire hydrants.  Fire hydrants shall be placed so that
no lot in a residential subdivision is more than 600 feet from two fire
hydrants, the distance to be measured along street lines, provided water
mains are available. The City Council may require special spacing in
commercial and industrial districts.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 616; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 616)



      (7)   Other utilities.  All telephone, cable television
lines, electrical services, and distribution lines shall be placed
underground, except that this provision shall not include meters, electric
and telephone service pedestals, transformers, three-phase feeder lines,
subtransmission and transmission lines (34.5KV and above), electrical
substations and other facilities as the utility may deem necessary to install
utilizing overhead-type construction.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 617; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 617)



      (8)   Street signs.  The city shall install street signs at
all intersections within a subdivision, the cost of which shall be paid for
by the subdivider.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 618; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 618)



      (9)   Permanent monuments.



         (a)   All subdivision boundary corners, point of
curvature, angles, and intersection of street center lines shall be marked
with permanent monuments, subject to approval by the City Engineer. Monuments
shall be of concrete at least four inches in diameter or square, three feet
long, with a flat top. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross
or metal pin to identify properly the location of the point, and shall be set
flush with the finished grade.



         (b)   All lot corners shall be marked with metal pins
not less than one-half inch in diameter and two feet long and driven so as to
be flush with the finished grade. Installation of monuments and pins shall be
certified by a surveyor.



         (c)   Where circumstances prohibit the installation of
monuments or pins at the time of filing the final plat, a written
certification by the subdivider shall be included on the plat stating that no
lot will be sold until the monuments or pins are placed by a surveyor. A
permanent benchmark shall be accessibly placed within the subdivision, the
elevation of which shall be referred to the U.S.G.S. datum and accurately
noted on the subdivision plat.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 619; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 619)



      (10)   Street lights.  Street lights shall be installed.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 620; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 620)



      (11)   Erosion control.  The subdivider shall be required to
provide for the control of erosion of areas of the subdivision which are
disturbed by grading operations by construction temporary terraces on slopes,
temporary silting basins, sod swales and to prevent erosion and damage to
adjacent properties from surface drainage as approved by the Zoning
Administrator and the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 621; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 621)



   (B)   Other improvements.  The City Council may require the
installation of other recommended improvements, constructed in accordance
with standards and specifications as approved and adopted by the City Council.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 622; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 622)



§ 151.066  EXCEPTIONS FOR EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Where proposed subdivision is a resubdivision or concerns an
area presently having any or all required improvements as previously set out,
and where the improvements meet the requirements of this chapter and are in
good condition as determined by the City Council upon its consideration of
the opinion of the City Engineer, the subdivider shall provide for the
repair, correction, or replacement of the improvements as determined by the
City Council upon its consideration of the opinion of the City Engineer.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 631; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 631)



   (B)   Where the proposed subdivision is a resubdivision or concerns
an area presently abutting or continuing any existing public street of less
than the minimum required right-of-way width or roadway width, land shall be
dedicated so as to provide a minimum street right-of-way width established by
these regulations and/or by the policy of the City Council, and the
subdivider of the proposed subdivision shall provide an additional roadway
pavement meeting the minimum standards set by these regulations and the City
Council. The City Council shall determine what adjustment to make where the
aforesaid widenings merge with existing streets which are the smaller width
at the boundary of the proposed subdivision. The City Council may reduce the
minimum roadway system if the extension of the roadway is already improved at
each end of the roadway in the subdivision and the roadway in the subdivision
to be reduced is two blocks or less in length. Lanes to be painted on the
widened streets designating driving and parking areas may also be required by
the City Council. The foregoing provisions requiring the widening of pavement
may be waived by the City Council when the length of the pavement is less
than one block.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 632; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 632)



§ 151.067  GUARANTEES FOR SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Completion of improvements.



      (1)   Prior to final plat approval, the subdivider shall
complete in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Commission and the Zoning
Administrator, all improvements required in these regulations specified in
the final subdivision plat, and as approved by the Planning Commission, and
shall dedicate same to the city in accordance with division (H) of this
section. Final plat approval shall not be granted until the dedication of the
improvements has been accepted by the city.



      (2)   In lieu of requiring the completion of all improvements
prior to final plat approval, the city may, at its discretion, enter into a
contract with the subdivider whereby the subdivider shall guarantee to
complete all improvements required by this chapter or otherwise specified by
the Planning Commission in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Commission.
To secure this contract, the subdivider shall provide, subject to the
approval of the Planning Commission, one of the guarantees provided in
divisions (B) through (E) of this section.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 641; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 641)



   (B)   Surety performance bond.  The subdivider shall obtain a
security bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the
state. The bond shall be payable to the city and shall be in an amount to
cover the entire cost, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the
Zoning Administrator, of installing all contract improvements. The duration
of the bond shall be until the time the improvements are accepted by the city
in accordance with this section.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 642; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 642)



   (C)   Escrow account.



      (1)   The subdivider shall deposit cash, or other instrument
readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the city, or in
escrow with a bank. The use of any instrument other than cash, and, in the
case of an escrow account, the bank with which the funds are to be deposited,
shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission. The amount of
the deposit shall be at least equal to the cost, as estimated by the
subdivider and approved by the Zoning Administrator, of installing all
required improvements.



      (2)   In the case of an escrow account, the subdivider shall
file with the Planning Commission an agreement between the financial bank and
himself or herself guaranteeing the following:



         (a)   The funds of the escrow account shall be held in
trust until released by the Planning Commission, and may not be used or
pledged by the subdivider as security in any other matter during that period;
and



         (c)   In the case of a failure on the part of the
subdivider to complete the improvements, then the bank shall immediately make
the funds in the account available to the city for use in the completion of
those improvements.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 643; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 643)



   (D)   Sequential approval of subdivision segments without
guarantee.  Where a subdivision is to be developed in several sections, the
Planning Commission may, at its discretion, waive the use of a guarantee on
the initial sections, provided that the sections may not be larger than 25
lots, or 50% of the total number of lots in the subdivision, whichever is
less. The Planning Commission shall grant final plat approval for each
succeeding section being contingent upon completion of all contracted
improvements in each preceding section, and acceptance of those improvements
in accordance with this subchapter. Completion of improvements in the final
section of the subdivision, which shall include at least 25 lots, or 50% of
the total number of lots in the subdivision, whichever is less, must be
guaranteed through the use of one of the other methods detailed under this
section.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 644; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 644)



   (E)   Special assessment.  The city may, at its discretion, enter
into an agreement with the subdivider to pay the cost of the required
improvements through the use of a special assessment. The city shall make the
arrangements for actual construction and interim financing at it deems
appropriate, providing that construction of improvements in any section of
the subdivision shall be completed in a time period of not longer than would
be allowed if another form of improvement guarantee were used.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 645; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 645)



   (F)   Time limits.  Prior to the granting of final plat approval,
the subdivider and the Planning Commission shall agree upon a deadline for
the completion of all required improvements, the deadline not to exceed two
years from the date of final plan approval. The Planning Commission shall
have the power to extend that deadline for one additional year where the
subdivider can present substantial reason for doing so.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 646; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 646)



   (G)   Failure to complete improvements.  If any portion of the
required improvements shall fail to be accepted for dedication in compliance
with this subchapter within the allocated time period, either for reason of
incompletion or for reason of substandard construction, then the Planning
Commission shall take one of the following actions:



      (1)   Where improvements have been guaranteed under division
(B) of this section, preliminary plat approval shall be revoked; or



      (2)   Where improvements have been guaranteed under division
(C) of this section, the Planning Commission shall declare whatever security
has been pledged as a guarantee to be forfeit. Where the Planning Commission
is not already in possession of the guarantee, it shall immediately take the
actions necessary to obtain it. Upon receipt of these securities, the
Planning Commission shall use them, or receipts from their sale if that be
necessary, to finance the completion of contracted improvements or the
rebuilding of the improvements to the proper specifications. Unused portions
of these securities shall be returned to the subdivider, bonding company, or
crediting institution, as is appropriate.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 647; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 647)



   (H)   Inspection and certification.



      (1)   The Zoning Administrator, or other knowledgeable
official as specified by the City Council, shall regularly inspect for
defects in the construction of required improvements. Upon completion of
these improvements, the Zoning Administrator shall file with the Planning
Commission a statement either certifying that the improvements have been
completed in the specific manner or listing the defects in those
improvements. Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider shall file
with the Planning Commission a statement stipulating the following:



         (a)   All required improvements are complete;



         (b)   These improvements are in compliance with the
minimum standards specified by the Planning Commission for their construction;



         (c)   The subdivider knows of no defects from any cause
in those improvements; and



         (d)   These improvements are free and clear of any
encumbrance or lien.



      (2)   If the Zoning Administrator has certified that the
contracted improvements are complete and free from defect, then upon receipt
of the other statements and agreements detailed above, the city shall accept
the dedication of those improvements. The city may, at its discretion, accept
the dedication of any portion of the required improvements, provided that all
statements and agreements specified above have been received for that portion
of the improvements.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 648; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 648)



   (I)   Reduction of guarantee.  In those cases where improvements
guarantees have been made under division (C) of this section, the amount of
the guarantee may be reduced upon acceptance, in compliance with division
(D), of the dedication of portion of the required improvements.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 649; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 649)



   (J)   Release of guarantee.  Upon acceptance, in accordance with
division (H), of the dedication of the final portion of improvements, the
city shall authorize the release of the remaining portion of the improvement
guarantee.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 650; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 650)



§ 151.068  OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   It is the intention of the city to provide no services other than
planning and zoning administration to its area of planning and zoning
jurisdiction beyond the corporate boundaries of the city. Therefore, it will
be the obligation of the subdivider to present the Planning Commission and
City Council a precise approach for the provision of these services. The
approach may include the formation of districts, homeowners organization, or
other methods to operate and provide for long term maintenance and service.
The approach shall be made binding on the subdivider in a form, agreement, or
contract in a manner which is accepted by the City Attorney.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 660; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 660)



LOT CONSOLIDATION AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS



§ 151.070  CONTIGUOUS PARCEL SETBACK; AGREEMENT.



   Where two platted lots (including parcels conveyed by metes and bounds
descriptions) are under common ownership and have been permanently appended
to each other by an agreement in writing between the owner thereof and the
city, which agreement shall run with the land and be binding upon the heirs,
personal representatives, successors and assigns of such owners, which
agreement provides that such lots or parcels or portions of such lots and
parcels are permanently appended (meaning that the two lots or parcels may
not be conveyed except in a simultaneous transaction to the same grantee);
the determination of minimum front, rear and side yard requirements, the
outer boundary of the resulting appended lots and parcels shall be considered
the lot line for establishing setback requirements, and no setback from
internal lot lines separating permanently appended lots or parcels shall be
required.



(Ord. 883-1, passed 7-16-2013)



ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION



§ 151.080  DEFINITION.



   (A)   The administrative subdivision procedure shall be available to
make minor adjustments to previously platted lots. It shall not be used in
any manner that substitutes for or circumvents compliance with subdivision
laws or regulations. An administrative subdivision may consist of dividing
one lot into two or more parts, combining two or more lots (or parts of lots)
into one parcel, or a combination thereof. Transactions or conveyances
classified as administrative subdivision are hereby deemed not to constitute
"subdivision development."



   (B)   For the purposes of this subchapter, the subdivider may apply
for subdivision approval as an administrative subdivision if the following
conditions are met:



      (1)   The administrative subdivision does not contain more
than three lots, except as provided for in division (B)(6) below;



      (2)   The administrative subdivision fronts on an existing
city street, does not involve any new street, road or easement, or the
extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of any public improvements;



      (3)   The administrative subdivision would not require the
vacation or dedication of any easements;



      (4)   The administrative subdivision does not adversely affect
the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property;



      (5)   The administrative subdivision is not in conflict with
any provisions of the comprehensive plan, zoning regulations, or these
regulations; and



      (6)   The administrative subdivision may contain more than
three lots with the agreement of the Zoning Administrator, City Engineer, and
City Administrator.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 710; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 710)



§ 151.081  ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL.



   (A)   The City Administrator or designee shall have the right to
approve administrative subdivision plats as defined herein at § 151.080.



   (B)   The City Administrator or designee may approve an
administrative subdivision plat if the following conditions are met:



      (1)   In the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, City
Engineer, and City Administrator, the administrative subdivision would not
require the dedication of additional public right-of way;



      (2)   The proposed subdivision has not been previously denied
by the City Council;



      (3)   A separate site plan has been prepared under supervision
of, and certified by, a registered state land surveyor. The site plan shall
be a survey of the lots to be subdivided and abutting lots. It shall show all
lots, blocks, streets, alleys, structures, building setbacks, city sanitary
sewer, city water, street paving, easements, location map, north arrow,
scale, date, legal description, and the like, in addition to the
administrative subdivision plat.



      (4)   The administrative subdivision plat shall show all lots,
blocks, streets, alleys, easements, certificates, location map, north arrow,
scale, date, legal description, and the like; and



      (5)   All new lots shall continue to be described in terms of
the pre-existing lot description.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 720; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 720)



§ 151.082  APPLICATION FOR AN ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION.



   (A)   An application for approval of an administrative subdivision
shall be submitted to the Planning Department.



   (B)   The following shall be submitted with the application.



      (1)   Application, copy of deed, title report, site plan,
administrative subdivision plat and fees. Fees will be based on the city fee
schedule.



      (2)   Five prints of the site survey plat and one print of the
administrative subdivision plat. After city departments review, changes shall
be shown on the plats, and one corrected site survey and one administrative
subdivision will need to be resubmitted.



      (3)   One final plat after all changes have been made shall be
submitted for filing.



      (4)   The City Administrator or designee shall approve or
disapprove the plat. In the event of disapproval, the City Planner shall give
the applicant a written statement of reasons for the disapproval.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 730; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 730)



§ 151.083  ADMINISTRATIVE CERTIFICATE APPROVAL.



   (A)   Certificates described in divisions (B) through (D) below may
be placed on a separate document and signed by the appropriate individuals
and attached to the final plat for filing, or placed on the final plat.
Certificates described in divisions (E) through (G) below shall be placed on
the final plat and signed by the appropriate individuals.



   (B)   A certificate signed by the County Treasurer and/or the City
Treasurer that all property taxes and special assessments on the property are
paid in full. Any special assessments not paid in full shall have a statement
attached showing the apportioning of any installments against the newly
proposed lots.



   (C)   Certificate signed and acknowledged by all property owners
having any record title or other interest in the land subdivided, and
consenting to the preparation and recording of the plat.



   (D)   Acknowledgment of a notary public, acknowledging the
signatures of all owners.



   (E)   Certificate signed by the registered state land surveyor
preparing the administrative subdivision that the plat as presented complies
with the requirements of the administrative subdivisions.



   (F)   Certificate signed by the City Administrator or designee
certifying that the administrative subdivision has been reviewed by the City
Administrator and is in compliance with the city subdivision regulations.



   (G)   Certificate signed by the Register of Deeds shall be placed on
the final plat or shall be stamped at the deeds office.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 740; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 740)



§ 151.084  REVIEW AND ACTION BY PLANNING COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL.



   If the plat does not qualify for administrative approval or has been
disapproved by the City Administrator or designee, the application may be
processed by the city as a regular subdivision plat and may be approved or
denied by the City Planning Commission and City Council.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 750; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 750)



§ 151.085  APPROVAL OF PLAT FILING.



   The final plat shall be submitted to the Planning Department after all
approvals. The planning staff will have all certificates signed by the
appropriate individuals and taken to the Register of Deeds for filing, or may
require the applicant to obtain any or all signatures.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 760; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 760)



VARIANCES AND WAIVERS



§ 151.100  CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING VARIANCE.



   The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may grant,
variances from the provisions of these regulations, but only after
determining that:



   (A)   There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting the
property;



   (B)   The variance is necessary for the reasonable and acceptable
development of the property in question; and



   (C)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to adjacent property.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 810; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 810)



§ 151.101  RECORDING OF PLAT REQUIRED.



   In no case shall the requirement of filing and recording a plat for
subdivision be waived.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 820; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 820)



§ 151.102  SMALL SUBDIVISION WAIVER.



   (A)   The subdivider may make application for and the Planning
Commission may grant a waiver of some or all of the requirements provided in
§§ 151.045 through 151.054, and §§ 151.065 through 151.068 for small
residential subdivisions where the following conditions exist:



      (1)   The subdivision contains no more than five lots;



      (2)   All lots of the proposed subdivision shall be platted on
existing streets;



      (3)   Street surfaces of all streets serving the subdivision
shall meet or exceed street surface standards of the city;



      (4)   Public water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer facilities
are available to all lots in the subdivisions; and



      (5)   The development of the subdivision will not increase
erosion or flooding potential.



   (B)   (1)   A subdivider requesting a waiver under the provisions
of this section shall submit the request in writing to the Planning
Commission prior to submission of the preliminary plat.



      (2)   The request for a waiver shall include a list of all
requirements for which a waiver is sought by reference to the section numbers
and descriptive catch-heads which appear in these regulations.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 830; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 830)



ANNEXATION



§ 151.115  ADJOINING AND CONTIGUOUS PROPERTIES.



   All subdivisions or additions laid out adjoining or contiguous to the
corporate limits shall be included within the same and become a part of the
city for all purposes whatsoever, upon approval of and acceptance by
resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 910; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 910)



§ 151.116  PETITION FOR ANNEXATION.



   (A)   Any subdivision in which there are lands dedicated to the city
or any subdivision serviced by public utilities shall be annexed to the city.



   (B)   Before approval for the final plat is given, the City Council
shall receive a petition for annexation from the owners of the subdivided
properties.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 920; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 920)



§ 151.117  ADOPTION OF RESOLUTION AND PLAN.



   (A)   The City Council desiring to annex land under the authority of
this section shall first adopt both a resolution stating that the city is
considering the annexation of the land, and a plan for extending city
services to the land. The resolution shall state:



      (1)   The time, date, and location of the public hearing
required in division (C) below;



      (2)   A description of the boundaries of the land proposed for
annexation; and



      (3)   The plan of the city for extension of city services to
the land proposed for annexation is available for inspection during regular
business hours in the office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   The plan adopted by the City Council shall contain sufficient
detail to provide a reasonable person with a full and complete understanding
of the intentions of the city for extending city services to the land
proposed for annexation. The plan shall:



      (1)   State the estimated cost impact of providing the
services to the land;



      (2)   State the method by which the city plans to finance the
extension of services to the land and how any services already provided to
the land will be maintained;



      (3)   Include a timetable for extending service to the land
proposed for annexation; and



      (4)   Include a map drawn to scale clearly delineating the
land proposed for annexation, the current boundaries of the city, the
proposed boundaries of the city after annexation, and the general land-use
pattern of the land proposed for annexation.



   (C)   A public hearing on the proposed annexation shall be held
within 60 days following the adoption of the resolution to allow the City
Council to receive testimony from interested persons. The City Council may
recess the hearing, for good cause, to a time and date specified at the
hearing.



   (D)   A copy of the resolution providing for the public hearing
shall be published in the official newspaper in the city at least once and
not less than ten days preceding the date of the public hearing. A map drawn
to scale delineating the land proposed for annexation shall be published with
the resolution. A copy of the resolution providing for the public hearing
shall be sent by first-class mail, following its passage, to the school board
of any school district in the land proposed for annexation.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 930; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 930)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 151.130  ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No plat or plan of a subdivision of land located within the
jurisdiction of this chapter shall be admitted to the records of the county
until the plat has received final approval in writing by the City Council as
provided in Neb. RS 17-415 through 17-426, 17-1002 and 17-1003, and 19-919,
as amended.



   (B)   No board, public officer, or authority shall accept, lay out,
improve, or authorize utilities to be laid in any street within the territory
for which the City Council has adopted a comprehensive plan, unless the
street has received the legal status of a public street prior to the adoption
of the comprehensive plan, or unless the street is shown on a subdivision
plat or a street plat which has been approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 1010; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 1010)



AMENDMENTS



§ 151.145  AMENDMENTS.



   Any provisions of this chapter from time to time may be amended,
supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed by the City Council, according
to law; provided, however, that the amendments, supplements, changes,
modifications, or repealed provisions shall not become effective until after
study and report by the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 851, passed 8-4-2009, § 1110)



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   Pursuant to Neb. RS 17-426, as amended, any person who shall dispose
of, or offer for sale or lease, any lots in the city, or addition to the
city, until plat thereof has been duly acknowledged and recorded as provided
in Neb. RS 17-416, as amended, shall forfeit and pay $50 for each lot and
part of lot sold or disposed of, leased, or offered for sale.



(Ord. 628, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 816, passed 6-19-2007, § 1020; Ord. 851,
passed 8-4-2009, § 1020)



APPENDIX A:  MINIMUM STREET STANDARDS



 

 
Minimum Right-of-way (ft)
 
Surface Width (ft)
 
Number of Traffic Lanes
 
Minimum Number of Parking Lanes
 
Maximum Grade %
 
Minimum Spacing Intersection with Arterial Street (ft)




Arterial Street
 
60
 
44(1)
 
2
 
2
 
7
 


Collector Street
 
50
 
33(1)
 
2
 
2
 
7
 
300


Local Street
 
50
 
33 (1)
 
2
 
2
 
7
 
300


Cul-de-sac and Loop
 
60
 
44(1)
 
2
 
2
 
10
 
None allowed


(1) Add greater width if parking and/or turning lanes are to be provided:


   Minimum turning lane = 10 feet


   Minimum parking lane = 8 feet




 



(Ord. 851, passed 8-4-2009, App. A)



CHAPTER 152:  ZONING



Section



General Provisions



   152.001   Title; jurisdiction



   152.002   Purpose



   152.003   Definitions



   152.004   Application and interpretation



Zoning Districts



   152.015   Planning Commission recommendations; districts created



   152.016   Official zoning map



   152.017   Boundary interpretation; annexation



   152.018   AG General Agricultural District



   152.019   AG 1 Residential Agricultural District



   152.020   R-1 Residential District



   152.021   R-2 Residential District



   152.022   R-3 Residential District



   152.023   R-4 Residential District



   152.024   C-1 Central Business District



   152.025   C-2 Highway Commercial District



   152.026   I-1 Light Industrial/Storage/Warehouse District



   152.027   I-2 Industrial District



   152.028   GB Greenbelt/Conservation District



   152.029   P Public Use District



   152.030   AHA Airport Hazard Area



Supplementary Regulations



   152.040   Intersection visibility



   152.041   Accessory uses



   152.042   Building projections



   152.043   Height regulation exceptions



   152.044   Access to structures required



   152.045   Residential utility and lot area requirements



   152.046   Temporary structures



   152.047   Parking regulations



   152.048   Required loading spaces



   152.049   Industrial use performing standards



   152.050   Adjustment of front yard requirement



   152.051   Assignment of street address



   152.052   Replacing nonstandard accessory building on narrow lot



   152.053   Reserved



   152.054   Reserved



   152.055   Home occupation standards; inconspicuous home occupation



   152.056   Sign regulation



   152.057   Fences, walls, and hedges



   152.058   Manufactured homes



   152.059   Towers



   152.060   Wind energy systems



   152.061   Salvage or junk yard



   152.062   Landfills and sanitary landfills



   152.063   Residential design standards



   152.064   Commercial design standards



Special Use Permit



   152.075   General authority



   152.076   Procedures



Board of Zoning Adjustment



   152.090   Creation; membership



   152.091   Meetings



   152.092   Powers



   152.093   Variance request procedure



   152.094   Appeal from decision



Administrative Procedure and Enforcement



   152.105   Procedure for interpretation of regulations



   152.106   Zoning Administrator



   152.107   Certificate of zoning compliance



   152.108   Final inspection



   152.109   Amendments



   152.110   Complaint of violation



 



   152.999   Penalty



   Appendix A: Illustrations



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.001  TITLE; JURISDICTION.



   (A)   This chapter shall be known, referred to, and cited as the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Gothenburg, Nebraska.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the
corporate limits of the city, and within the territory beyond the corporate
limits for a distance of up to one mile in all directions, as defined on the
Official Zoning Map of the city, as the same may be amended by subsequent
annexation.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 931, passed 8-16-2016)



§ 152.002  PURPOSE.



   In pursuance of the authority conferred by Neb. RS Chapter 19, Article
9, § 19-901, as amended, this chapter is enacted for the purpose of
promoting the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and welfare of
the present and future inhabitants in the city by regulating and restricting
the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures,
the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts, and
other open spaces, the density of population, and the location and use of
buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, or other
purposes in accordance with the comprehensive plan and the zoning map adopted
herewith.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.003  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General provisions. The following rules of construction shall
apply unless inconsistent with the plain meaning of the context of this
chapter.



      (1)   Tense. Words used in the present tense include the
future tense.



      (2)   Number. Words used in the singular include the plural,
and words used in the plural include the singular.



      (3)   SHALL and MAY. The word SHALL is mandatory; the word MAY
is permissive.



      (4)   Headings. In the event that there is any conflict or
inconsistency between the heading of a subchapter, section or division of
this chapter and the context thereof, the heading shall not be deemed to
affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the context.



   (B)   General terminology.



      (1)   The word CITY shall mean the City of Gothenburg,
Nebraska. The word CITY COUNCIL shall mean the City Council of Gothenburg,
Nebraska. The words PLANNING COMMISSION shall mean the Planning Commission
duly appointed by the municipality.



      (2)   Words or terms not herein defined shall have their
ordinary meaning in relation to the context.



   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACCESSORY USE or BUILDING. A subordinate building or use which
customarily is incidental to that of the main or principal building or use of
the premises. Customary accessory uses include, but are not limited to,
tennis courts, swimming pools, detached garages, air conditioners, garden
houses, fire places, patios, antenna/satellite dishes, barbecue ovens and
residential storage sheds. Garages or other accessory uses attached to the
principal structure shall be considered a part thereof and meet the
requirements of the principal structure.



      ALLEY. A dedicated public right-of-way, other than a street,
which provides only a secondary means of access to abutting property, the
right-of-way which is 20 feet or less in width.



      APARTMENT. A part of a building consisting of a room or suite of
rooms intended, designed, or used as a place of residence by an individual or
a single-family dwelling.



      ATTACHED GARAGE.  The area included within a dwelling that is
not used for living space, but commonly used for automobile storage.



      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroads, rights of way, or boundary
lines of the block.



      BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of a lot remaining after required
yards have been provided.



      BUILDING. An enclosed structure, anchored to permanent
foundation, and having exterior or party walls and a roof, designed for the
shelter of persons, animals or property. When divided by other than common or
contiguous walls, each portion or section of such building shall be regarded
as a separate building, except that two buildings connected by a breezeway
shall be deemed one building. The term BUILDING includes STRUCTURE.



      BUILDING COVERAGE. Any area of a portion of a lot which is
covered by all buildings on that lot.



      BUILDING HEIGHT. Vertical distance above the existing grade to
the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the average height of
the highest gable of pitched, hipped, or shed roof. (See Appendix A:
Illustrations)



      CHILD CARE CENTER. A facility which is or should be licensed by
the State Department of Health and Human Services, as defined under Title 474
of the Nebraska Administration Code, Chapter 6, Section 002, as a day care
center.



      CHILD CARE HOME. A facility which is or should be registered by
the State Department of Health and Human Services as a family daycare home
under Neb. RS 71-1908 through 71-1918.



      CITY. City of Gothenburg, Nebraska.



      CITY COUNCIL.  City Council of Gothenburg, Nebraska.



      DOMESTIC ANIMAL. An animal that is normally considered a house
pet. Examples of this type shall include dogs, cats, and other small domestic
animals.



      DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof which is designed and
used exclusively for residential purposes.



      DWELLING, ATTACHED. A residential building which is joined to
another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls.



      DWELLING, DUPLEX. A building containing two dwelling units. Each
unit is totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from
ground to roof.



      DWELLING, MULTI-UNIT OR MULTI-FAMILY. A building used by two or
more families living independently of each other in separate dwelling units
but not including hotels, motels, or resorts.



      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.  A building having accommodations for
and occupied by one family.



      EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner to the public, a
corporation or persons of the use of a tract of land for a specific purpose
or purposes.



      EXCEPTION. A use that would not be appropriate generally or
without restriction throughout the zoning district, but which, if controlled
as to the number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would
promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort,
convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. The uses may be
permitted in the zoning districts as exceptions, if specific provision for
the exception is made in this chapter.



      FARM RESIDENCE. Residential dwellings located on a farmstead
including mobile homes appurtenant to agricultural operations including the
living quarters for persons employed on the premise.



      FARMSTEAD. An area ten acres or more on which is located at least
one farm residence and on which farm products of a value of $ 1,000 or more
are normally produced each year.



      FLOOD PLAIN. The lands within the zoning jurisdiction of the city
which are subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The regulatory flood plain for this chapter shall be based on the official
Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map issued by the Federal
Insurance Administration, United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development and any revision thereto. Copies of the map shall be on file in
the office of the City Clerk.



      FLOOR AREA. Total number of square feet of floor space within the
outside of the exterior walls of a building, not including storage space in
cellars or basements, garages, and other areas of no regular access by
patrons.



      GROUP HOME. Facility in which more than two but less than 16
persons who are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption reside while
receiving therapy or counseling, but not nursing care, for any of the
purposes listed below. The facility shall be licensed or approved by the
state or other appropriate agency:



         (a)   Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from,
the handicaps of physical disability;



         (b)   Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from,
the handicaps of emotional or mental disorder, or mental retardation;



         (c)   Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from,
physical and/or sexual abuse;



         (d)   Rehabilitation from the effects of drug or alcohol
abuse; and



         (e)   Supervision while under a program of alternatives
to imprisonment, including, but not limited to, pre-release, work-release,
and probationary programs.



      HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or activity carried on within the
dwelling or accessory building by a member of the family residing on the
premises, which occupation or activity is incidental and secondary to the
residential occupancy and does not change the residential character nor
infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to enjoy a peaceful
occupancy of their homes. Specifically excluded are outdoor storage and
outside display of merchandise, equipment, or machinery.



      INCONSPICUOUS HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or activity carried
on solely within the dwelling (and not in an outbuilding) by a member of the
family residing in the dwelling, which occupation or activity is incidental
and secondary to the residential occupancy of the dwelling. The occupation
shall not change the residential character of the dwelling, nor infringe upon
the rights of neighboring residents to enjoy a peaceful occupancy of their
home. Specifically excluded are any outdoor storage, display, or merchandise,
equipment, or machinery. Outbuildings may not be used for any purpose
whatsoever, and no individual who is not a resident of the dwelling may be
employed in any inconspicuous home occupation.



      KENNELS, COMMERCIAL. The raising and boarding of five or more
dogs or cats, or any combination thereof, shall meet the definition of a
commercial kennel.



      KENNELS, DOMESTIC. The raising and boarding of no more than four
dogs or cats, or any combination thereof, may be kept on the premises of a
dwelling. Offspring of any domestic pet in excess of four animals may be
housed on the premises for a period not to exceed 90 days.



      LANDFILL. A disposal site employing an engineering method of
disposing solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by
spreading, compacting to the smallest volume, and applying cover material
over all exposed waste at the end of each operating day and in conformance
with the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Service
System.



      LIVESTOCK, CONFINEMENT FACILITIES/OPERATIONS. Any building(s),
lot(s), pen(s), pool(s) or pond(s) or other confined spaces, which normally
are not used for raising crops or grazing animals, which are designed and/or
used for ongoing confined raising, feeding or management of animals for more
than 180 consecutive days.



      LIVING SPACE. Space within a dwelling unit utilized for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, bathing, washing and sanitation purposes.



      LOT. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupation by a
use permitted in this chapter, and fronting upon a street. (See Appendix A:
Illustrations)



      LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting two or more streets at their
intersection.



      LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of a lot which, when viewed directly
from above, would be covered by a structure or structures, or any part
thereof, excluding projecting roof eaves.



      LOT DEPTH. The distance between the midpoints of the front lot
line and the mid-point of the rear lot line.



      LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the
portion nearest the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements
on corner lots and through lots, see § 152.050. (See Appendix A:
Illustrations)



      LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in
the office of the Register of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes
and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.



      LOT WIDTH. The distance on a horizontal plane between the side
lot lines of a lot, measured at right angles to the line establishing the lot
depth at the established building setback line.



      MANUFACTURED HOME. A factory-built structure which is to be used
as a place for human habitation, which is not constructed or equipped with a
permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a
permanent site, which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame
any wheels or axles, and which bears a label certifying that it was built to
compliance with National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards,
24 C.F.R. §§ 3280 et seq., promulgated by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, or a modular housing unit as defined in Neb.
RS 71-1557 bearing the seal of the Department of Health and Human Services.



      MOBILE HOME. A year-round, transportable structure which is a
single-family or two-family dwelling unit suitable for permanent (more than
30 days) living quarters, more than eight feet wide and 32 feet in length,
designed and built to be towed on its own chassis and designed to be used as
a single-family or two-family dwelling with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities. This portable dwelling may consist
of one or more units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for
additional capacity, or two or more units, separately towable but designed to
be joined as one integral unit. Nothing in this definition shall be construed
so as to include prefabricated, modular, precut dwelling units or these
manufactured in sections or parts away from the site and transported thereto
for assembly.



      MOBILE HOME PARK. Any area of land upon which one or more mobile
homes are parked, connected to utilities and used by one or more persons for
living or sleeping purpose, and meets all of the requirements of §
152.022(F). A MOBILE HOME PARK includes any premises set apart for supplying
to the public parking space, either free of charge or for revenue purposes
for one or more mobile homes, connected to utilities and used by one or more
persons living, or sleeping purposes and shall include any building,
structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the
equipment of such mobile home park.



      MODULAR HOME. Any dwelling whose construction consists entirely
of or the major portions of its construction consist of a unit or units not
fabricated on the final site for the dwelling units, which units are movable
or portable until placed on a permanent foundation and connected to
utilities. All modular homes shall bear a label or seal indicating that it
was built in accordance with the Nebraska Uniform Standards for Modular
Housing Units Act, as established in Neb. RS 71-1557.



      NONCONFORMING USE. The use of any dwelling, building, structure,
lot, land, or premises, or part thereof, which was existing and lawful prior
to the effective date of this chapter and which does not conform with the
provisions of this chapter and any amendments thereto.



      NONDOMESTIC ANIMAL. An animal that is normally not considered a
house pet. Examples of this type shall include livestock such as cows,
horses, and other large animals.



      NONSTANDARD USE. Lots occupied by buildings or structures or uses
which existed immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter and any
amendments thereto which fail to comply with any of the following: minimum
lot requirements for the area, density, width, front yard, side yard, rear
yard, height or parking for the district in which they are located, even
though the use of the premises conforms to the permitted uses within the
district, as identified in the provisions of this chapter.



      PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET.  An area, enclosed or unenclosed,
sufficient in size to store one automobile, together with a driveway
connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress
and egress of an automobile.



      PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission duly appointed by
the City Council.



      PORCH. A roofed open area usually attached to or part of and with
direct access to or from a building.



      RECYCLING CENTER. A facility which accepts salvage material
limited to paper, aluminum foil, containers made of glass, plastic, metal,
aluminum, and paper; and similar household wastes; no hazardous material as
defined by state and federal law is accepted; there is no wrecking or
dismantling of salvage material and no salvage material is held outside a
building.



      SALVAGE OR JUNK YARD. A place where waste, discarded or salvaged
metals, building materials, paper, textiles, used plumbing fixtures,
abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles or parts thereof, and other used
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled or cleaned; and places
or yards for the storage of salvaged metal, materials and equipment; but not
including pawn shops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of
used cars or trucks presently in operable condition, boats or trailers
presently in operable condition, and used furniture and household equipment
in usable condition and not including the processing of used, discarded or
salvaged material as part of manufacturing operations.



      SANITARY LANDFILL. A lot or parcel of land used primarily for the
disposal, abandonment, dumping, burial or burning of garbage, sewage, trash,
refuse, junk, discarded machinery or motor vehicles, or parts thereof, or
other waste, and which is in conformance with the requirements of the
Nebraska Department of Health and Human Service System.



      SANITARY TRANSFER STATION. A collection point for temporary
storage of refuse .No processing of refuse would be allowed. The transfer
station must be in conformance with the requirements of the Nebraska
Department of Health and Human Service System.



      SETBACK LINE. A line or lines designating the area outside of
which buildings may not be erected.



      SIGN. Any device which shall display or include any letter, word,
model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device, or representation used as, or
which is in the nature of, an advertisement or announcement which directs
attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization, or business, but shall not include any display of official
notice or official flag.



      SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A written permit issued by the Zoning
Administrator with the written authorization of the City Council. The SPECIAL
USE PERMIT provides permission under specific conditions to make certain
conditional uses of land in certain zoning districts as stipulated under
exceptions in each of the zoning district regulations. See § 152.075 for the
procedure and criteria to be considered when reviewing an application for a
SPECIAL USE PERMIT.



      STREET. All property acquired or dedicated to the public and
accepted by the appropriate governmental agencies for street purposes.



      STREET, CENTERLINE. A line midway between street lines.



      STREET LINE. A dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of
land and the contiguous street. The right-of-way line of a street.



      STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change to the supporting members of a
structure, including foundations, bearing walls, or partitions, columns,
beams, girders or any structural change in the roof.



      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something have a
permanent location on the ground, but not including fences or public items
such as utility poles, street light fixtures, and street signs.



      TOWNHOUSE. One of a group of row of not less than two nor more
than 12 attached, Single- family dwellings designed and built as a single
structure facing upon a street in which the individual townhouse may or may
not be owned separately. For the purpose of the side yard regulations, the
structure containing the row or group of townhouses shall be considered as
one building occupying a single lot.



      VARIANCE. A relaxation of the terms of the zoning chapter, where
the variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property, and not the result of the actions of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of the chapter would result in unnecessary
and undue hardship.



      WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (COMMERCIAL). A wind energy
conversion system under common or aggregated ownership or operating control
that includes substations, MET towers, cables/wires and other building
accessories, whose main purpose is to supply electricity to off-site
customers.



      WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (SMALL). A wind energy conversion
system which has a rated capacity of up to 25 kilowatts and which is
incidental and subordinated to another use of the same parcel. A system is
considered a small wind energy system only if it supplies electrical power
for site use, except that when a parcel on which the system is installed also
received electrical power supplied by a utility company, access electrical
power generated and not presently needed for onsite use may be sold back to
the utility company. (25 kilowatt limit approved by the Planning Commission
and City Council may be increased to a maximum of 100 kilowatts with Nebraska
State Legislature authorization by future amendment.)



      YARD. A required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from 30 inches above
the general ground level of the graded lot upward; provided, however, that
fences, walls, poles, posts, and other customary yard accessories, ornaments,
and furniture may be peraiitted in any yard subject to the district
regulations. (See Appendix A: Illustrations)



      YARD, FRONT. A yard extending from the front lot line adjoining a
public street to the front of the building between side lot lines.



      YARD, REAR. A yard extending between side lot lines and measured
horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot to the
nearest point of the main building.



      YARD, REQUIRED. The required minimum open space between the
property line and the yard line. The required yard shall contain no building
or structure other than the projection of the usual steps, unenclosed
balconies, or open porches, or as otherwise provided in this chapter.



      YARD, SIDE. A yard between a building and the side lot line
measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line from the side lot
line to the nearest point of the main building.



      ZONING MAP. A map or maps officially enacted by the governing
body as part of this chapter showing the boundaries of a zoning district or
districts, a copy or copies of which, certified to have been enacted as
provided by law, is filed in the office of the City Clerk as an official
record of the city.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 932, passed 11-1-2016)



§ 152.004  APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   General. The zoning regulations set forth by this chapter
within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly
to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   Zoning affects every building and use. No building, structure,
or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or
part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved,
or structurally altered, except in conformity with all of the zoning
regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
Permitted special uses are allowed only by a special permit granted by the
City Council upon finding that the specified conditions exist.



   (C)   Yard and lot reduction prohibited. No yard or lot existing at
the time of passage of this chapter shall be reduced by private action in
dimension or area below the minimum requirements set herein. Yards or lots
created after the effective date of this chapter shall meet the minimum
requirements established by this chapter, except as provided by division (D)
below.



   (D)   Combination of lots and portion of lots. If a lot or portion
of a lot, or two or more lots, or combinations of lots and portions of lots,
with continuous frontage in single ownership, are of record at the time of
passage of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the
requirements established for lot width and area, the following rules shall
apply.



      (1)   Eighty percent rule applicable in all cases concerning
three lots or less. Where the lot, portion of lot, or combination consists of
sufficient width and area to provide at least 80% of the width and area
generally required for three lots or less in the district, the land may be
divided for use into three lots or less, each of which shall have at least
80% of the lot width and area generally required in the district.



      (2)   Rule for other multiple lots not covered by division
(D)(1). Where the lot, portion of lot, or combination consists of greater
width or area than generally required for creation of three lots, the land
shall be divided for use into lots all of which conform to the lot width and
area generally required in the district, provided however, that in the
division one remaining lot may be created having not less than 80% of the lot
width and area generally required in the district or that reduction
equivalent in total to the reduction on a remaining lot may be distributed
between the divisions created.



   (E)   Minimum requirements. In their interpretation and application,
the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements,
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general
welfare. Whenever the provisions of this chapter require a greater width or
size of yards, courts or other spaces, or require a lower height of building
or less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left
unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required in any other
chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Wherever the provisions
of any other chapter require a greater width or size of yards, courts or
other open spaces, or require a lower height of buildings or less number of
stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or
impose other higher standards than are required by the provisions of this
chapter, the provisions of the chapter shall govern.



   (F)   Nonconformities; intent.  Nonconformities are of three types:
nonconforming lots of record, nonconforming structures and nonconforming
uses.  Any lawful use of land or structure existing at the time of enactment
or subsequent amendment of this chapter, but not in conformity with its
provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   Nonconforming lots of record. The Zoning Administrator
may issue a permit for any nonconforming lot of record provided that:



         (a)   Said lot is shown by a recorded plat or deed to
have been owned separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at
a time when the creation of a lot of such size and width at such location
would not have been prohibited; and



         (b)   Said lot has remained in separate and individual
ownership from adjoining tracts of land continuously during the entire time
that the creation of such lot has been prohibited by the zoning regulation;
and



         (c)   Said lot can meet all required yard regulations
for the district in which it is located.



      (2)   Nonconforming structures. 



         (a)   Authority to continue.  Any structure, which is
devoted to a use, which is permitted in the zoning district in which it is
located, but which is located on a lot, which does not comply with the use
regulations, and/or the applicable yard and height regulations may be
continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful.



         (b)   Enlargement, repair, alterations.  Any
nonconforming structure may be enlarged, maintained, repaired, remodeled, or
rebuilt; provided, however, that no such enlargement, maintenance, repair or
remodeling shall not create any additional nonconformity or increase the
degree of existing nonconformity of all or any part of such structure, unless
the property owner receives a special use permit in accordance with the
zoning district in which it is located, see § 152.076(E).



         (c)   Damage or destruction.  In the event any
nonconforming structure, with the exception of a residential dwelling, is
damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than 75% of its
assessed fair market value, such structure shall not be restored unless it
shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which
it is located.  When a non-residential structure is damaged to the extent of
75% or less of its assessed fair market value, no repairs or restoration
shall be made unless a building permit is obtained within six months, and
restoration is actually begun within one  year after the date of such
partial destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.



         (d)   Moving. No nonconforming structure shall be moved
in whole or in part for any distance whatever, to any other location on the
same or any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to
the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being
moved.



      (3)   Nonconforming uses.



         (a)   Authority to continue.  Any lawfully existing
nonconforming use of part or all of a structure or any lawfully existing
nonconforming use of land, not involving a structure or only involving a
structure which is accessory to such use or land, may be continued, so long
as otherwise lawful.



         (b)   Ordinary repair and maintenance.



            1.   Normal maintenance and incidental repair, or
replacement, installation or relocation of nonbearing walls, nonbearing
partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, water and/or waste disposal
systems, may be performed on any structure or system that is devoted in whole
or in part to a nonconforming use.



            2.   Nothing in these regulations shall be deemed
to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of a structure
in accordance with an order of a public official in charge of protecting the
public safety who declares such structure to be unsafe and orders its
restoration to a safe condition.



         (c)   Extension.  A nonconforming use shall not be
extended, enlarged, or increased in intensity.  Such prohibited activities
shall include, without being limited to the extension of such use to any
structure or land area other than that occupied by such nonconforming use on
the effective date of these regulations (or on the effective date of
subsequent amendments hereto that cause such use to become nonconforming).



         (d)   Enlargement.  No structure that is devoted in
whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged or added to in any
manner unless such structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to
the regulations of the district in which it is located.



         (e)   Damage or destruction. In the event that a
nonconforming building or use, excluding residential buildings, is damaged to
the extent of more than 75% of its reasonable replacement value, the property
shall conform to the zone in which it is located.



         (f)   Moving.  No structure that is devoted in whole or
in part to a nonconforming use and nonconforming use of land shall be moved
in whole or in part for any distance whatever, to any location on the same or
any other lot, unless the entire structure and the use thereof or the use of
land shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located after being so moved.



         (g)   Change in use.  If no external structural
alterations are made which will expand the area or change the dimensions of
the existing structure, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure
and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the
governing body after receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission,
by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is
more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use.  More
appropriate shall mean creating less traffic, noise, glare, odor or other
characteristics of the proposed use.  In permitting such change, the
governing body may require appropriate conditions and safeguards to protect
surrounding areas and properties.  Once such use has changed, it may no
longer be returned to the original use or any other less appropriate use.



         (h)   Abandonment or discontinuance.  When a
nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned, for a period of 12
consecutive months, such use shall not thereafter be re-established or
resumed, and any subsequent use or occupancy of such land shall comply with
the regulations of the zoning district in which such land is located.



         (i)   Nonconforming accessory uses.  No use, which is
accessory to a principal nonconforming use, shall continue after such
principal use shall cease or terminate.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 152.015  PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS; DISTRICTS CREATED.



   (A)   It shall be a purpose of the Planning Commission to recommend
the boundaries of the various original districts and appropriate regulations
to be enforced therein. The Planning Commission shall make a preliminary
report and hold public hearing thereon before submitting its final report,
and the City Council shall not hold its public hearing or take action until
it has received the final report of the Planning Commission.



   (B)   The city is hereby divided into zoning districts, as named and
described in §§ 152.018 through 152.028 of this chapter.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.016  OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   (A)   The boundaries of the districts are shown upon a map, which is
made a part hereof by reference, which map is designated as the "Gothenburg
Zoning District Map," dated August 16, 2016, and signed by the Mayor and City
Clerk and hereinafter referred to as the Official Zoning Map.



   (B)   The signed copy of the zoning map containing the zoning
districts designated at the time of adoption of this chapter shall be
maintained in the office of the City Clerk for the use and benefit of the
public.



   (C)   (1)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, changes are made in the district boundaries or other matter
portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, the changes shall be entered on the
appropriate part of the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has
been approved by the City Council, with an entry, which shall be signed by
the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk, on the Official Zoning Map as
follows:



      "On (date), by official action of the City Council, the following
change was made in the Official Zoning Map (brief description of the nature
of the change)."



      (2)   No amendment to this chapter which involves matter
portrayed on the Official Zoning Map shall become effective until after the
change and entry have been made on the map.



   (D)   No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning
Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set
forth in this chapter.



   (E)   (1)   In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes
damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret, the City Council may, by
resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior
Official Zoning Map.



      (2)   The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or
other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no correction
shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any
subsequent amendment thereof.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 931, passed 8-16-2016)



§ 152.017  BOUNDARY INTERPRETATION; ANNEXATION.



   (A)   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as
shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:



      (1)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow the
center lines;



      (2)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted
lot lines shall be construed as following the lot lines;



      (3)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city
limits shall be construed as following the city limits;



      (4)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall
be construed to be midway between the main tracks;



      (5)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extension of
features indicated in divisions (A)(1) through (4) above shall be so
construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map
shall be determined by the scale of the map;



      (6)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the
ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in
other circumstances not covered by divisions (A)(1) through (5) above, the
Board of Zoning Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries; and



      (7)   Where district boundary line divides a lot which was in
single ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the Board of Zoning
Adjustment may permit, as an exception, the extension of the regulations for
either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into
the remaining portion of the lot.



   (B)   All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the zoning
area shall be in the AG General Agricultural District until otherwise changed
at the time of annexation, or where the area annexed was zoned some other
district prior to annexation, the same district shall apply within the zoning
area until otherwise changed at the time of annexation.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.018  AG GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. This district is intended primarily for application to
rural areas of the city, which are generally characterized by extensive or
intensive agricultural uses of land.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures. The following shall
be permitted as uses by right:



      (1)   Any form of agriculture including the raising of crops,
horticultural uses, animal husbandry, poultry husbandry, but excluding
commercial auction yards and barns and livestock confinement
facilities/operations;



      (2)   Single-family and mobile home dwellings;



      (3)   Bulk grain storage, both publicly or privately owned or
managed; and



      (4)   Irrigation and flood control projects.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted:



      (1)   Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to
the permitted uses and structures, and to uses and structures permitted as
exceptions;



      (2)   Home occupations, which comply with the provisions of §
152.055.



      (3)   One-family residences including mobile homes for farm
residence or adjacent to farm residences for relatives or farm workers; and



      (4)   Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural produce
grown on the site.



   (D)   Permitted special uses. A building or premises may be used for
the following purposes in the AG General Agricultural District if a special
permit for the use has been obtained, in accordance with §§ 152.075 and
152.076:



      (1)   Airports and heliports, including crop dusting strips;



      (2)   Agricultural service establishment primarily engaged in
performing agricultural, animal husbandry, or horticultural services on a fee
or contract basis; agricultural product milling and processing;
establishments engaged in performing services such as crop dusting, fruit
picking, grain cleaning, harvesting, and plowing; farm equipment service and
repair;



      (3)   Public utility and public service structures, including
electric transmission lines and distribution substations, and gas regulator
stations;



      (4)   Public and private open recreational facilities,
operated for profit or otherwise;



      (5)   Public and quasi-public uses of an educational or
religious type;



      (6)   Community facilities and institutions, including
cemeteries, hospitals, private, noncommercial clubs and lodges;



      (7)   Public uses of an administrative, public service, or
cultural type;



      (8)   Sewage treatment plants for primary and secondary
treatment; public and private sanitary landfills in conformance with §
152.062; gravel plants and asphalt or concrete batch plants;



      (9)   Irrigation wells, waste retention pits, and silage
bunkers;



      (10)   One single-family rental unit, when the same is
rehabilitated or created in an existing structure. Provided, however, no
special use permit shall authorize a subdivision thereof;



      (11)   Commercial kennels;



      (12)   Alternative energy systems not exceeding 25KW which
utilizes biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar and/or wind sources in
conformance with "Net Metering" as defined in Neb. RS 70-2001 to 70-2005;



      (13)   Alternative energy systems that exceed 25 KW and are
recognized by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission as a Qualifying
Facility (QF). The system shall not adjoin any residential zone; and



      (14)   Salvage or junk yards which comply with the provisions
of § 152.061.



   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures. All other uses and structures
which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special uses shall
be prohibited from the AG General Agricultural District.



   (F)   Special regulations. Provision must be made for disposal of
manure and other organic wastes in the manner as to avoid pollution of ground
water or any lake or stream.



   (G)   Minimum lot requirements.



      (1)   The minimum lot area for single-family dwellings shall
be ten acres; or five acres from an existing farmstead as defined in §
152.003 in which a residence and outbuildings, if any, is to be split off
from farmland and said home was constructed prior to June 1, 2012.



      (2)   The minimum lot area for uses prescribed as special uses
shall be five acres, subject to approval of the City Council.



   (H)   Minimum yard requirements.



      (1)   Front yard. There shall be a minimum front yard of not
less than a depth of 75 feet from the centerline of a federal aid-primary or
federal aid-secondary designated street or highway or 35 feet from the
property line, whichever is greater. On all other streets or highways there
shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of 60 feet from the
centerline of the street or highway or 25 feet from the property line,
whichever is greater; and further, these yard requirements shall apply to any
yard abutting a public street or highway regardless of the lot being an
interior or corner lot.



      (2)   Rear yard. There shall be a minimum yard of not less
than a depth of 50 feet.



      (3)   Side yard. Side yards shall not be less than 15 feet.



      (4)   Distance between structures. The minimum distance
between principal structures used for human habitation shall be 90 feet.



   (I)   Maximum height. No limitations, except as provided for in §
152.030.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 941, passed 6-6-2017)



§ 152.019  AG 1 RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. This district is intended to provide low-density
acreage residential use with a gross density of one dwelling unit per a
minimum of three acres, when such individual dwelling has its own water well
and sanitary disposal system.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures. The following shall
be permitted as uses by right:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings;



      (2)   Manufactured homes which complies with the provisions of
§ 152.058;



      (3)   Agricultural uses; animals, other than a maximum of five
domestic animals, shall not be permitted on less than three acres. A maximum
of one nondomestic animal is allowed per acre for every acre or fraction of
an acre above the three acres. By way of example, no nondomestic animals
shall be allowed on a parcel of less than three acres. For a parcel
consisting of at least three, but less than four acres, one nondomestic
animal shall be allowed. For a parcel consisting of at least four, but less
than five acres, two nondomestic animals shall be allowed, and so on.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted: accessory uses and
structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to
uses and structures permitted as exceptions; provided, in addition to §
152.041, no accessory structure shall be closer than the required side yard
of this district.



   (D)   Permitted special uses. A building or premises may be used for
the following purpose in the AG 1 Residential Agricultural District if a
special permit for the use has been obtained in accordance with §§ 152.075
and 152.076:



      (1)   Public and quasi-public uses of an education,
recreational, or religious type including public and parochial elementary
schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges; churches,
parsonages, and other religious institutions;



      (2)   Public uses of an administrative, public service or
cultural type including city, county, state, or federal administrative
centers and courts, libraries, police and fire stations, and other public
buildings, structures, and facilities;



      (3)   Establishments which provide services or supply
commodities primarily for the convenience of patrons traveling on highways
and roads;



      (4)   Other local commercial establishments providing services
and supplies to the community and local trade area;



      (5)   Electrical distribution substations, gas regulator
stations, communication equipment buildings, public service pumping stations,
and/or elevated pressure tanks;



      (6)   Home occupations, which comply with the provisions of §
152.055;



      (7)   Alternative energy systems not exceeding 25KW which
utilizes biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar and/or wind sources in
conformance with "Net Metering" as defined in Neb. RS 70-2001 to 70-2005;



      (8)   Alternative energy systems that exceed 25 KW and are
recognized by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission as a Qualifying
Facility (QF). The system shall not adjoin any residential zone; and



      (9)   Rural subdivisions, in which all dwellings within the
subdivision utilize a shared of "community style" water well and distribution
system and/or sanitary sewer lagoon and collection system in accordance with
the restrictions of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (NDEQ)
and the Department of Health and Human Services.  In which case, the minimum
lot sizes may be reduced to one acre in area.



   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures. All other uses and structures
which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special uses shall
be prohibited from the AG 1 Residential Agricultural District.



   (F)   Height and area regulations. The maximum height and minimum
lot requirements within the AG 1 Residential Agricultural District shall be
as follows:



 

 

Lot Area (sq. ft.)

 

Lot Width

 

Required Front Yard

 

Required Side Yard

 

Required Rear Yard

 

Height




Dwelling, single-famil y

 

1 acre

 

140 feet

 

35 feet

 

15 feet

 

50 feet

 

35 feet




Other permitted uses

 

1 acre

 

140 feet

 

35 feet

 

15 feet

 

50 feet

 

35 feet




 



   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. 25%.



   (H)   Nonconforming use for Zone AG 1. Any nonconforming use in
existence at the time of the creation of this district may be continued.
Existence of a structure such as a livestock confinement facility/operation,
which does not contain livestock at the time of the creation of this
district, still qualifies as a nonconforming use, regardless of the length of
time that the facility is in a period of non- use.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 933, passed 11-15-2016; Ord. 941, passed
6-6-2017)



§ 152.020  R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. This district is intended to provide residential use
with a gross density of two to three dwelling units per acre.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures. All residential
property located within the R-1 Residential District, shall meet design
standards in § 152.063.  The following shall be permitted as uses by right:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings;



      (2)   Manufactured homes which comply with the provisions of
§ 152.058; and



      (3)   Group homes.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted: accessory uses and
structures normally appurtenant to the permitted principal uses and
structures and to permitted special uses and structures permitted as
exceptions, when in accordance with the provisions of § 152.041.



   (D)   Permitted special uses. A building or premises may be used for
the following purposes in the R-1 Residential District if a special permit
for the use has been obtained in accordance with §§ 152.075 and 152.076:



      (1)   Public and quasi-public uses of an educational,
recreational, or religious type including public and parochial elementary
schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges; churches,
parsonages, and other religious institutions;



      (2)   Public uses of an administrative, public service, or
cultural type including city, county, state, or federal administrative
centers and courts, libraries, police and fire stations and other public
buildings, structures, and facilities;



      (3)   Electrical distribution substations, gas regulator
stations, communication equipment buildings, public service pumping stations,
and/or elevated pressure tanks;



      (4)   Inconspicuous home occupation, which comply with the
provisions of § 152.055;



      (5)   Bed and breakfast guest houses;



      (6)   Alternative energy systems utilizing biomass,
geothermal, hydropower, solar and/or wind sources in conformance with "Net
Metering" per Neb. RS §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005 (August 30, 2009, as amended).
Individual or small wind energy conversion systems (SWECS) shall also be in
conformance with the provisions of § 152.063;



      (7)   Child care centers that are located within buildings
that are permitted or currently grandfathered as uses as defined in division
(D)(1) above; and



      (8)   Alternative energy systems not exceeding 25KW which
utilizes biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar and/or wind sources in
conformance with "Net Metering" as defined in Neb. RS 70-2001 to 70-2005.



   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures. All other uses and structures
which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special uses shall
be prohibited from the R-1 Residential District.



   (F)   Height and area regulations. The maximum height and minimum
lot requirements within the R-1 Residential District shall be as follows:



 



 

Lot Area (sq. ft.)

 

Lot Width

 

Required Front Yard

 

Required Side Yard

 

Required Rear Yard

 

Height




Dwelling, single-family

 

12,000 feet*

 

85 feet

 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

Smaller of 30 feet or 20% of depth

 

35 feet




Other permitted uses

 

12,000 feet

 

85 feet

 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

Smaller of 30 feet or 20% of depth

 

35 feet




Notes:


*   Single-family dwellings and vacant platted lots in existence within
the R-1 Residential District as of January 20, 2014 are exempt from the
minimum lot area and width requirements.  As long as the yard setbacks and
height requirements are met; the dwellings may continue as permitted
principle structures and not be classified as structures on non-conforming
lots of record. Dwellings planned to be constructed on lots platted after
January 20, 2014 shall meet all requirements of the above table.



 



   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. 35%.



   (H)   Design Standards.  All residential property located within
the R-1 Residential District, shall meet design standards in § 152.063. 



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 918, passed 4-21-2015; Ord. 941, passed
6-6-2017)



§ 152.021  R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. This district is intended to provide residential uses
with a gross density of three to five dwelling units per acre.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures. All residential
property located within the R-2 Residential District, shall meet design
standards in § 152.063.  The following shall be permitted as uses by right:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings;



      (2)   Two-family, duplex dwellings;



      (3)   Multi-family dwellings and/or townhouses;



      (4)   Manufactured homes which comply with the provisions of
§ 152.058; and



      (5)   Group homes.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted: accessory uses and
structures normally appurtenant to the permitted principal uses and
structures and to permitted special uses and structures permitted as
exceptions, when in accordance with the provisions of § 152.041;



   (D)   Permitted special uses. A building or premises may be used for
the following purposes in the R-2 Residential District if a special permit
for the use has been obtained in accordance with §§ 152.075 and 152.076:



      (1)   Public and quasi-public uses of an educational,
recreational, or religious type including public and parochial elementary
schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges; nursery schools,
private nonprofit schools, churches, parsonages, and other religious
institutions;



      (2)   Public and private charitable institutions;



      (3)   Public uses of an administrative, public service, or
cultural type including city, county, state, or federal administrative
centers and courts, libraries, police and fire stations and other public
buildings, structures, and facilities;



      (4)   Electrical distribution substations, gas regulator
stations, communications equipment buildings, public service pumping
stations, and/or elevated pressure tanks;



      (5)   Home occupations, which comply with the provisions of §
152.055;



      (6)   Child care center;



      (7)   Bed and breakfast guest houses;



      (8)   Mortuaries; and



      (9)   Alternative energy systems not exceeding 25KW which
utilizes biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar and/or wind sources in
conformance with "Net Metering" as defined in Neb. RS 70-2001 to 70-2005.



      (9)   Alternative energy systems utilizing biomass,
geothermal, hydropower, solar and/or wind sources in conformance with "Net
Metering" per Neb. RS §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005 (August 30, 2009, as
Amended).  Individual or small wind energy conversion systems (SWECS) shall
also be in conformance with the provisions of § 152.063.



   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures. All other uses and structures
which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special uses shall
be prohibited from the R-2 Residential District.



   (F)   Height and area regulations. The maximum height and minimum
lot requirements within the R-2 Residential District shall be as follows:



 



 

Lot Area (sq. ft.)

 

Lot Width

 

Required Front Yard

 

Required Side Yard

 

Required Rear Yard

 

Height




Dwelling, single-family

 

7,500

 

50 feet

 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

Smaller of 30 feet or 20% of depth

 

35 feet




Dwelling, two-family/ duplex

 

5,250 per family

 

35 feet per family

 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

Smaller of 30 feet or 20% of depth

 

35 feet




Dwelling, multi-family

 

2,625 per family

 

70 feet

 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

Smaller of 30 feet or 20% of depth(1)

 

45 feet




Other permitted uses

 

7,500

 

50 feet

 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

Smaller of 30 feet or 20% of depth(1)

 

35 feet




(1)   Buildings and structures exceeding one story shall provide an
additional five-foot setback for every ten feet of building height above the
first story.




 



   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. 35%.



   (H)   All residential property located within the R-2 Residential
District, shall meet design standards in § 152.063.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 941, passed 6-6-2017)



§ 152.022  R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. This district is intended to provide mixed residential
uses with a gross density of five dwelling units or more per acre.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures. All residential
property located within the R-3 Residential District, shall meet design
standards in § 152.063.  The following shall be permitted as uses by right:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings;



      (2)   Two-family, duplex dwellings;



      (3)   Multi-family dwellings and/or townhouses;



      (4)   Mobile homes which comply with the standards listed in
§ 152.023(G);



      (5)   Manufactured homes which comply with the provisions of
§ 152.058; and



      (6)   Group homes.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted: accessory uses and
structures normally appurtenant to the permitted principal uses and
structures and to permitted special uses and structures permitted as
exceptions, when in accordance with the provisions of § 152.041.



   (D)   Permitted special uses. A building or premises may be used for
the following purposes in the R-3 Residential District if a special permit
for the use has been obtained in accordance with §§ 152.075 and 152.076:



      (1)   Public and quasi-public uses of an educational,
recreational, or religious type, including public and parochial elementary
schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges; nursery schools,
private nonprofit schools, churches, parsonages, and other religious
institutions;



      (2)   Public and private charitable institutions;



      (3)   Public uses of an administrative, public service, or
cultural type, including city, county, state or federal administrative
centers and courts, libraries, police and fire stations and other public
buildings, structures, and facilities;



      (4)   Electrical distribution substations, gas regulator
stations, equipment buildings, public service pumping stations, and/or
elevated communications pressure tanks;



      (5)   Home occupations, which comply with the provisions of §
152.055;



      (6)   Child care center;



      (7)   Mortuaries;



      (8)   Private garage or nonresidential building and other
local commercial establishments providing services and supplies to the
community and local trade area; and



      (9)    Alternative energy systems not exceeding 25KW which
utilizes biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar and/or wind sources in
conformance with "Net Metering" as defined in Neb. RS 70-2001 to 70-2005.



   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures. All other uses and structures
which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special uses shall
be prohibited from the R-3 Residential District.



   (F)   Height and area regulations. The maximum height and minimum
lot requirements within the R-3 Residential District shall be as follows:



 



 

Lot Area
(sq. ft.)

 

Lot Width

 

Required Front Yard

 

Required Side Yard

 

Required Rear Yard

 

Height




Dwelling, single-family

 

6,000

 

50 feet

 

20 feet

 

5 feet

 

Smaller of 30 feet or 20% of depth

 

35 feet




Dwelling, two-family/ duplex

 

3,750 per family

 

60 feet

 

20 feet

 

5 feet

 

Smaller of 30 feet or 20% of depth

 

35 feet




Dwelling, multi-family

 

1,500 per unit

 

60 feet

 

20 feet

 

10 feet

 

Smaller of 30 feet or 20% of depth

 

45 feet




Manufactured homes/ mobile homes

 

6,000

 

50 feet

 

20 feet

 

5 feet

 

Smaller of 30 feet or 20% of depth

 

35 feet




 



   (I)   Maximum lot coverage. 35%.



   (J)   Design standards.  All residential property located within
the R-3 Residential District, shall meet design standards in § 152.063.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 941, passed 6-6-2017)



§ 152.023  R-4 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. This district is intended to provide residential use
for mobile homes and mobile home parks.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures. All residential
property, with the exception of mobile homes, located within the R-4
Residential District, shall meet design standards in § 152.063.  The
following shall be permitted as uses by right:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings;



      (2)   Two-family duplex dwellings;



      (3)   Multi-family dwellings and/or townhouses;



      (4)   Mobile homes, which comply with the provisions of
division (G) below;



      (5)   Mobile home parks, which comply with the provisions of
division (F) below;



      (6)   Manufactured homes which comply with the provision of §
152.058; and



      (7)   Group homes.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted: accessory uses and
structures normally appurtenant to the permitted principal uses and
structures and to permitted special uses and structures permitted as
exceptions, when in accordance with the provisions of § 152.041;



   (D)   Permitted special uses. A building or premises may be used for
the following purposes in the R-4 Residential District if a special permit
for the use has been obtained in accordance with §§ 152.075 and 152.076:



      (1)   Public and quasi-public uses of an educational,
recreational or religious type, including public and parochial elementary
schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges; nursery schools,
private nonprofit schools, churches, parsonages, and other religious
institutions;



      (2)   Public and private charitable institutions;



      (3)   Public uses of an administrative, public service, or
cultural type, including city, county, state or federal administrative
centers and courts, libraries, police and fire stations, and other public
buildings, structures, and facilities;



      (4)   Electrical distribution substations, gas regulator
stations, communications equipment buildings, public service pumping
stations, and/or elevated pressure tanks;



      (5)   Home occupation, which comply with the provisions of §
152.076(E);



      (6)   Child care center;



      (7)   Private garage or nonresidential building and other
local commercial establishments providing services and supplies to the
community and local trade area; and/or



      (8)   Alternative energy systems not exceeding 25KW which
utilizes biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar and/or wind sources in
conformance with "Net Metering" as defined in Neb. RS 70-2001 to 70-2005.



   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures. All other uses and structures
which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special uses shall
be prohibited from the R-4 Residential District.



   (F)   Mobile home parks. A mobile home park may be established in
this district, provided that the proposed mobile home park meets all of the
following requirements:



      (1)   Certification of compliance with all chapters and
regulations regarding mobile home park licensing, zoning, health, plumbing,
electrical, building, fire prevention, and all other applicable chapters and
regulations;



      (2)   Individual mobile home lots shall have an area of not
less than 5,000 square feet for single-wide mobile homes, and 6,000 square
feet for double-wide mobile homes. Each mobile home lot shall have a minimum
width of 40 feet;



      (3)   Planting of trees and shrubs is required to the extent
needed to provide for:



         (a)   Screening;



         (b)   Adequate shade; and



         (c)   A suitable setting for the mobile homes in the
park as well as neighboring uses.



      (4)   A minimum of 25 feet measured from any entrance,
lean-to, or other extension from the mobile home shall be maintained between
mobile homes;



      (5)   A mobile home park shall have an area of not less than
one acre, nor more than five acres, and no mobile home parking or office or
service building shall be closer to a street right-of-way or other property
line than 25 feet;



      (6)   A request for an exception shall set forth the location
and legal description of the proposed mobile home park property, and a sketch
of the proposed mobile home park, showing dimensions, driveways, proposed
locations of mobile homes, the location of sanitary conveniences and other
buildings and improvements;



      (7)   All mobile homes shall meet the standards specified in
division (G) below, except for division (G)(1);



      (8)   Blocks for mobile homes in mobile home parks must be
located along the full length of the frame, spaced no more than ten feet
apart, and not more than five feet from the ends of the home. Blocks shall
consist of a heavy concrete footer block (16 inches by 16 inches by four
inches minimum), at least two standard concrete blocks, with cells aligned
vertically and a concrete cap;



      (9)   Individually owned lots on which mobile homes are placed
may be purchased within an approved mobile home park if the owner wishes to
sell; and



      (10)   Recreational vehicles, campers, travel trailers may be
located on a temporary basis not to exceed one year. The vehicles shall be
exempt from skirting and tie down requirements.



   (G)   Mobile homes.



      (1)   All mobile homes located on individually owned private
lots in R-3 or R-4 shall be replaced on a permanent foundation of concrete
block or poured reinforced concrete or other comparable foundation. The
height of the mobile home floor shall be no more than three feet above grade
level. The tongue of the mobile home shall be removed. The area of the mobile
home shall be improved to provide an adequate and approved foundation for the
placement and tie-down of the mobile home, thereby securing the
superstructure and the foundation against uplift, frost upheaval, sliding,
rotation, or overturning. All of the above requirements must be met or in
place before occupancy.



      (2)   Skirting of all mobile homes located within a mobile
home park is required. The skirting shall not attach a mobile home
permanently to the ground, but shall be sufficient to withstand wind load
requirements and shall not provide a harborage for debris or rodents, nor
create a fire hazard. The skirting shall be provided with removable access
panels sufficient to provide easy access to all utility connection points of
the mobile home and its subsequent connection to the utility risers if they
are located within the skirted area.



      (3)   For either a permanent foundation or skirting, the
mobile home shall be provided with anchors and tie-downs, such as
cast-in-place concrete "dead men," eyelets imbedded in concrete foundations
or runways, screw augers, arrowhead anchors, or other devices securing the
stability of the mobile home. The tie-downs devices shall be compatible with
the foundation system provided for the mobile home such that the tie-down are
designed to resist the action of frost in the same manner as the foundation
system.



      (4)   A minimum of four anchors and tie-downs shall be placed
on each full length of the frame or comply with manufacturer's
recommendation, and shall be able to resist and design wind pressures. Wheels
shall not be for bearing pressures.



   (H)   Height and area regulations. The maximum height and minimum
lot requirements within the R-4 Residential District for single-family
dwellings, two-family duplex dwellings, multi-family dwellings and/or
townhouses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located outside mobile home
parks shall conform to the provisions of § 152.022(F).



   (I)   Design standards.  All residential property, with the
exception of mobile homes, located within the R-4 Residential District, shall
meet design standards in § 152.063.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 941, passed 6-6-2017)



§ 152.024  C-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of the C-1 Central Business District is to
provide a commercial area for those establishments serving the general
shopping needs of the trade area and in particular, those establishments
customarily oriented to the pedestrian shopper. The grouping of uses is
intended to strengthen the central business area as the center of trade,
service, governmental, and cultural activities.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures. All commercial
property located within the C-1 Central Business District, shall meet
commercial design standards in § 152.064. The following shall be permitted
as uses by right:



      (1)   Business and professional offices;



      (2)   Retail stores and service establishments which supply
commodities or provide services primarily to meet the needs of residents of
the trade area conducted entirely within an enclosed building; and



      (3)   Dwelling units above the first story of a building.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted: accessory uses and
structures normally appurtenant to the permitted principal uses and
structures and to permitted special uses and structures permitted as
exceptions, when in accordance with the provisions of § 152.041;



   (D)   Permitted special uses. A building or premise may be used for
the following purposes in the C-1 Central Business District if a special
permit for the use has been obtained in accordance with §§ 152.075 and
152.076:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings;



      (2)   Two-family duplex;



      (3)   Multi-family complex;



      (4)   Wholesale;



      (5)   Car/truck wash; and



      (6)   Alternative energy systems not exceeding 25KW which
utilizes biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar and'or wind sources in
conformance with "Net Metering" as defined in Neb. RS 70-2001 to 70-2005.



   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures. All other uses and structures
which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special uses shall
be prohibited from the C-1 Business District.



      (1)   There shall be no manufacturing, compounding,
processing, or treatment of products other than that which is clearly
incidental and essential to a retail store or business, and where all
products are customarily sold at retail on premises; and



      (2)   The uses, operations, or products are not objectionable
due to odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, or other similar causes.



   (F)   Height and area regulations. The maximum height and lot
requirements within the C-1 Central Business District shall be as follows:



      (1)   Minimum lot area. No limitations.



      (2)   Minimum yard requirements.



         (a)   Front yard. No limitations.



         (b)   Rear and side yards. No limitations, unless a
commercial structure is located adjacent a residential lot. In these
instances, there shall be a minimum rear and side yard requirement of ten
feet.



      (3)   Maximum height.  45 feet.



   (G)   Use limitations and utility requirements.



      (1)   All business, service, repair, processing, storage or
merchandise display on property abutting or facing a lot within a residential
district shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, unless
screened from the residential district by a sight-obscuring barrier
permanently maintained at least six feet in height.



      (2)   All businesses located within this district shall
utilize municipal water, sewer, and power facilities and at the owners
expense.



   (H)   Design standards. All commercial property located within the
C-1 Central Business District, shall meet commercial design standards in §
152.064



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 941, passed 6-6-2017)



§ 152.025  C-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. The C-2 Highway Commercial District is intended
primarily for application to areas along major highway entrances to the
community in accord with policies of the comprehensive plan where access to
the highway is afforded for the convenience of patrons traveling the highway.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures. All commercial
property located within the C-2 Highway Commercial District, shall meet
design standards in § 152.064.  The following shall be permitted as uses by
right:



      (1)   Establishments which provide services or supply
commodities primarily for the convenience of patrons traveling on highways
and roads; and



      (2)   Other local commercial establishments providing services
and supplies to the community and local trade area.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted:



      (1)    Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to
the permitted principal uses and structures and to permitted special uses and
structures permitted as exceptions, when in accordance with the provisions of
§ 152.041;



   (D)   Permitted special uses. A building or premises may be used for
the following purposes in the C-2 Commercial District if a special permit for
the use has been obtained in accordance with §§ 152.075 and 152.076:



      (1)   Churches and other religious institutions;



      (2)   Private clubs and lodges;



      (3)   Public buildings and grounds;



      (4)   Hospital, nursing home, and other medical facilities;



      (5)   Public and private charitable institutions; and/or



      (6)   Alternative energy systems not exceeding 25KW which
utilizes biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar and/or wind sources in
conformance with "Net Metering" as defined in Neb. RS 70-2001 to 70-2005.



   (E)   Conditions for special uses. Notwithstanding the requirements
of §§ 152.075 and 152.076, the following regulations shall apply as minimum
requirements for granting special use permits in the C-2 Highway Commercial
District:



      (1)   Where a site adjoins or is located across an alley from
a residential district, a solid wall or fence or compact evergreen hedge six
feet in height shall be located on the property line common to the districts,
except in a required front yard;



      (2)   Open storage of materials attendant to a permitted use
or special permit use shall be permitted only within an area surrounded or
screened by a solid wall or fence; and



      (3)   No use shall be permitted, and no process, equipment, or
materials shall be used, which are found by the Council to be objectionable
to persons living or working in the vicinity by reasons of odor, fumes, dust,
smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, noise, vibrations, illumination, glare, or
unsightliness, or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion.



   (F)   Height and area regulations.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements. The minimum lot area shall be
8,000 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum yard requirements.



         (a)   Front yard. There shall be a minimum front yard of
not less than a depth of 20 feet from the property line.



         (b)   Rear yard. No limitations, unless abutting a
residential district; then, the minimum rear yard shall be ten feet.



         (c)   Side yard. No limitations, unless abutting a
residential district, then the minimum side yard shall be ten feet.



      (3)   Maximum lot coverage. No limitations.



      (4)   Maximum height. No structure shall exceed 45 feet.



   (G)   Design standards.  All commercial property located within the
C-2 Highway Commercial District, shall meet design standards in § 152.064. 



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 941, passed 6-6-2017)



§ 152.026  I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL/STORAGE/WAREHOUSE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of this district is to provide space for
certain commercial and a limited range of industrial uses and structures
which are able to meet certain performance standards to protect nearby
noncommercial and nonindustrial uses from undesirable environmental
conditions. Residential and other similar uses are prohibited from this
district in order to limit environmental effects associated with certain
commercial and industrial uses, irrespective of their meeting performance
standards.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses and other structures. The following
shall be permitted as uses by right:



      (1)   Wholesale, storage, and warehouse uses;



      (2)   Agricultural uses, except livestock confinement
facilities/operations;



      (3)   Automobile service stations; and



      (4)   Any industrial use which can meet the performance
standards for this district set forth in § 152.049, provided the use is not
specifically prohibited.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted:



      (1)   Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to
the permitted principal uses and structures and to permitted special uses and
structures permitted as exceptions, when in accordance with the provisions of
§ 152.041;



      (2)   Offices, retail stores, and watchperson's living
quarters incidental to and on the same site with an industrial use.



   (D)   Permitted special uses. A building or premises may be used for
the following purposes in the I-1 Light Industrial/ Storage/Warehouse
District if a special permit for the use has been obtained in accordance with
§§ 152.075 and 152.076:



      (1)   Commercial/retail outlets;



      (2)   Office buildings;



      (3)   Public buildings and grounds utilized for maintenance
facilities, shops and storage of materials;



      (4)   Electrical distribution substations, gas regulator
stations, communications equipment buildings, utility facilities, and grounds;



      (5)   Recycling center;



      (6)   Sanity transfer station;



      (7)   Alternative energy systems not exceeding 25KW which
utilizes biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar and/or wind sources in
conformance with "Net Metering" as defined in Neb. RS 70-2001 to 70-2005; and



      (8)   Alternative energy systems that exceed 25 KW and are
recognized by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission as a Qualifying
Facility (QF). The system shall not adjoin any residential zone.



   (E)   Conditions for approving industrial uses listed in the
permitted principle uses and other structures; and permitted special uses.
Notwithstanding the requirements of §§ 152.075 and 152.076, the following
regulations shall apply as minimum requirements for granting special permits
in the I-1 Light Industrial District:



      (1)   All uses shall meet or exceed the performance standards
set forth in § 152.049;



      (2)   A use not conducted entirely within a completely
enclosed structure, on a site across a street or alley from a residential
district, shall be screened by a solid wall or fence or compact evergreen
hedge;



      (3)   Where a site adjoins a residential district, a solid
wall, fence, or compact evergreen hedge shall be located on the property line;



      (4)   Storage of liquid petroleum products or chemicals of a
flammable or noxious nature in excess of 25,000 gallons shall not be located
closer than 50 feet from any structure intended for human inhabitation, or
closer than 200 feet from any residential district; and



      (5)   All open and un-landscaped portions of any lot shall be
maintained in good condition free from weeds, dust, trash, and debris.



   (F)   Prohibited uses and structures. All residential dwellings of
any kind, and all other uses and structures which are not specifically
permitted, or cannot meet the performance standards for industry set forth in
§ 152.049, shall be prohibited.



   (G)   Minimum lot requirements. The minimum lot area shall be 10,000
square feet.



   (H)   Minimum yard requirements.



      (1)   Front yard. There shall be a minimum front yard of not
less than a depth of 20 feet from the property line.



      (2)   Rear yard. No limitations.



      (3)   Side yard. No limitations.



   (I)   Maximum height. No structure shall exceed 75 feet.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 941, passed 6-6-2017)



§ 152.027  I-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of this district is to provide space for
certain commercial and a wide range of industrial uses. Residential and other
similar uses are prohibited from this district in order to limit
environmental effects associated with certain commercial and industrial uses.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures. The following shall
be permitted as uses by right:



      (1)   Wholesale, storage, and warehouse uses;



      (2)   Agricultural uses, excluding livestock confinement
facilities/operations; and



      (3)   Industrial and manufacturing uses which comply with
appropriate state and federal regulations.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted:



      (1)    Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to
the permitted principal uses and structures and to permitted special uses and
structures permitted as exceptions, when in accordance with the provisions of
§ 152.041;



      (2)   Offices, retail stores, and watchperson's living
quarters incidental to and on the same site with an industrial use.



   (D)   Permitted special uses. A building or premises may be used for
the following purposes in the I-2 Industrial District if a special permit for
the use has been obtained in accordance with §§ 152.075 and 152.076:



      (1)   A sexually oriented business as defined in § 132.04 of
this code may be granted as a special permitted use if granted pursuant to
§§ 152.075 or 152.076;



      (2)   Recycling center;



      (3)   Sanitary landfill, in conformance with the provisions of
§ 152.062;



      (4)   Sanitary transfer station;



      (5)   Salvage or junk yard, in conformance with the provisions
of § 152.061;



      (6)   Commercial kennels;



      (7)   Alternative energy systems not exceeding 25KW which
utilizes biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar and/or wind sources in
conformance with "Net Metering" as defined in Neb. RS 70-2001 to 70-2005; and



      (8)   Alternative energy systems that exceed 25 KW and are
recognized by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission as a Qualifying
Facility (QF). The system shall not adjoin any residential zone.



   (D)   Minimum lot requirements. No limitations.



   (E)   Minimum yard and height requirements.



      (1)   Front yard. There shall be a minimum front yard of not
less than a depth of 20 feet from the property line.



      (2)   Rear yard. No limitations.



      (3)   Side yard. No limitations.



      (4)   Maximum height. No limitations.



   (F)   Prohibited uses and structures. All residential dwellings of
any kind shall be prohibited in the I-2 Industrial District.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 941, passed 6-6-2017)



§ 152.028  GB GREENBELT/CONSERVATION DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. The intent and purpose of this district is to provide
for the retaining of natural growth of a particular area, to preserve the
natural environment and resources from destructive land uses, to preserve
certain locations which have a historical value, to protect natural spawning
grounds, feeding grounds, and wildlife habitats, and to protect natural
watercourses, drainage basins, and sloughs which are necessary to safeguard
the health, safety, and welfare of the people.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures. The following shall
be permitted as uses by right:



      (1)   Forests and production of woodland products, including
portable sawmills for cutting timber grown on the premises;



      (2)   Public and private parks, recreational areas, hunting
and fishing preserves, board docks, piers, landings, and campsites;



      (3)   Utility lines within rights-of-way and within ten feet
of public road right-of-way; and



      (4)   Pasture and range land.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following
accessory uses and structures shall be permitted: accessory uses and
structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to
uses and structures permitted as exceptions.



   (D)   Permitted special uses. A building or premise may be used for
the following purposes in the Greenbelt/Conservation District if a special
permit for the use has been obtained in accordance with §§ 152.075 and
152.076:



      (1)   Campgrounds and recreational vehicle camps;



      (2)   Golf courses, country clubs, and appurtenant pro shops,
restaurants, and liquor sales subject to local chapter;



      (3)   Utility substations;



      (4)   Signs subject to § 152.056;



      (5)   Flood control channels; water pumping stations and
reservoirs; irrigation ditches and canal right-of-way; settling and water
conservation recharging basins; parkways; and



      (6)   Single-family and mobile home dwellings.



   (E)   Conditions for special permits. Notwithstanding the
requirements of §§ 152.075 and 152.076, the following regulations shall
apply as minimum requirements for granting special permits in the
Greenbelt/Conservation District:



      (1)   No land or water area shall be filled, dredged, or
drained, nor shall any natural stream or floodway be encroached upon without
prior submission of a report to the Zoning Board of Adjustment and to the
appropriate Natural Resource District or Districts which specifies in detail
the impact of the proposal on the natural environment;



      (2)   No woodlands shall be cleared for cultivation, or other
purposes; provided, that this provision shall not prohibit the harvesting of
woodland products on a sustained-yield basis; and



      (3)   Provided, however, that exceptions to the foregoing
conditions may be authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment for navigation
channels, drainage channels, roads, clearings, or other improvements
necessary for the protection of existing uses or the proper development of
adjacent properties, provided that the works or improvements shall be so
limited that they will not tend to destroy or materially change the natural
conditions of rivers, woodlands, swamp, marsh, shallows, or other wetlands.



   (F)   Prohibited uses and structures. All other uses and structures
which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as special uses shall
be prohibited from the Greenbelt/Conservation District.



   (G)   Minimum lot requirements. The minimum lot area for
single-family and mobile home dwellings shall be 30 acres.



   (H)   Minimum yard requirements.



      (1)   Front yard. There shall be a minimum front yard of not
less than a depth of 75 feet from the centerline of a federal aid-primary or
federal aid-secondary designated street or highway or 35 feet from the
property line, whichever is greater. On all other streets or highways, there
shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of 60 feet from the
center line of the street or highway, or 25 feet from the property line,
whichever is greater; and further, these yard requirements shall apply to any
yard abutting a public street or highway regardless of the lot being an
interior or corner lot;



      (2)   Rear yard. There shall be a minimum yard of not less
than a depth of 50 feet;



      (3)   Side yard. Side yards shall not be less than 15 feet; and



      (4)   Distance between structures. The minimum distance
between principal structures used for human habitation shall be 90 feet.



   (I)   Maximum lot coverage. No limitations.



   (J)   Maximum height. No limitations.



   (K)   Sign regulations. All signs shall be in conformance with the
regulations provided herein and with the provisions of § 152.056.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.029  P PUBLIC USE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. The intent and purpose of this district is to provide
for essentially mapping purposes which will identify real property of
one-half acre or more presently owned and used by any governmental entity,
including local, state, or federal governmental units, and put to some form
of public use. This district is not intended to be applied to land that is
used by governmental entities on an easement or leased basis if title to the
land is in private ownership.



   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures.



      (1)   A building or premises owned by any governmental entity,
including local, county, state, federal governmental units and their
subdivisions, and in some form of public use, shall be permitted to be
located in the P Public Use District. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to land in private ownership, even if leased to or the subject of
an easement to a governmental entity, or to describe the future location of
public uses.



      (2) Alternative energy systems not exceeding 25KW which utilizes
biomass. geothermal, hydropower, solar and/or wind sources in conformance
with "Net Metering" as defined in Neb. RS 70-2001 to 70-2005.



      (3)   Alternative energy systems that exceed 25 KW and are
recognized by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission as a Qualifying
Facility (QF). The system shall not adjoin any residential zone.



   (C)   Area regulations. The P Public Use District shall have a
minimum district size of one-half acre.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 941, passed 6-6-2017)



§ 152.030  AHA AIRPORT HAZARD AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent.  The intent of this district is to protect the safe
use of public airports and their airport hazard area, within the city and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, by limiting the location and height of
structures within the operation, approach, transition and turning zones
around airports which are registered with the Nebraska Department of
Aeronautics, as designated on the Official Zoning Map of Gothenburg, Nebraska.



      (1)   Designated public airport.  The designated public
airport for which these regulations have been prepared is the Gothenburg
Regional Airport located in Sections 14 and 15 Township 11 Range 25, Dawson
County, Nebraska.



      (2)   Airport hazard area description.  In accordance with
Neb. RS 3-303, every political subdivision that has adopted a comprehensive
plan and zoning regulations, and has an airport hazard area within the area
of its zoning jurisdiction, must adopt, administer, and enforce the
regulations in this section for such airport hazard area.



   (B)   Definitions.  For purposes of this subchapter the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AIRPORT.  Any area of land or water designed and set aside that
is used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of aircraft and
utilized or to be utilized in the interest of the public for such purposes;
includes any related buildings and facilities. AIRPORT includes only
public-use airports with state or federally approved airport layout plans and
military airports with military service-approved military layout plans.



      AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure or tree or use of land which
obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or
taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking
off of aircraft; that penetrates any approach, operation, transition, or
turning zone.



      AIRPORT HAZARD AREA. Any area of land or water upon which an
airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided in the act,
but such area shall not extend in any direction a distance in excess of three
miles from the adjacent boundary of an airport; the limits provided for
approach, operation, transition, and turning zones.



      AIRPORT LAYOUT PLAN.  A scaled drawing of existing and proposed
land, buildings, and facilities necessary for the operation and development
of an airport prepared in accordance with state rules and regulations and
federal regulations and guidelines.



      APPROACH ZONE.  A zone that extends from the end of each
operation zone and is centered along the extended runway centerlines.



      ELECTRIC FACILITY.  An overhead electrical line, including poles
or other supporting structures, owned or operated by an electric supplier as
defined in Neb. RS 70-1001.01, for the transmission or distribution of
electrical power to the electric supplier's customers.



      EXISTING RUNWAY.  An instrument runway or a visual runway that
is paved or made of turf that has been constructed or is under construction.



      INSTRUMENT RUNWAY.  An existing runway with precision or
non-precision instrument approaches as developed and published by the Federal
Aviation Administration or an existing or proposed runway with future
precision or non-precision instrument approaches reflected on the airport
layout plan. After the effective date of the Airport Zoning Act, an airport
shall not designate an existing or proposed runway as an instrument runway if
the runway was not previously designated as such without the approval of the
airport's governing body after a public hearing on such designation.



      OPERATION ZONE.  A zone that is longitudinally centered on each
existing or proposed runway.



      PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation, company, association, joint-stock association, or body
politic and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar
representative thereof.



      POLITICAL SUBDIVISION.  Any municipality, city, village, or
county.



      PROPOSED RUNWAY. An instrument runway or a visual runway that has
not been constructed and is not under construction but that is depicted on
the airport layout plan that has been conditionally or unconditionally
approved by, or has been submitted for approval to, the Federal Aviation
Administration.



      RUNWAY.  A defined area at an airport that is prepared for the
landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.



      STRUCTURE. Any object constructed or installed by man, including,
but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead
transmission or distribution lines.



      TRANSITION ZONE. A zone that extends outward at a right angle to
the runway centerline and upward at a rate of one foot vertically for every
seven feet horizontally. The height limit of a transition zone begins at the
height limit of the adjacent approach zone or operation zone and ends at a
height of 150 feet above the highest elevation on the existing or proposed
runway.



      TREE.  Any object of natural growth.



      TURNING ZONE'S OUTER LIMIT.  The area located at a distance of
three miles as a radius from the corners of the operation zone of each runway
and connecting adjacent arcs with tangent lines, excluding any area within
the approach zone, operation zone, or transition zone. The height limit of
the turning zone is 150 feet above the highest elevation on the existing or
proposed runway.



      VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway intended solely for the operation of
aircraft using visual approach procedures, with no straight-in instrument
approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an airport
layout plan approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, a military
service-approved military layout plan, or any planning documents submitted to
the Federal Aviation Administration by a competent authority.



   (C)   Airport zones.  The following are intended for use with this
specific overlay zoning district.  Airport hazard area consists of approach
zones, operation zones, transition zones and turning zones.



      (1)   Approach zones extend from the end of each operation
zone and are centered along the extended runway centerlines. The zones
dimensions are:



         (a)   Instrument runways:



            1.   Length and width: The approach zones extend
from the operation zone to the limits of the turning zone, measured along the
extended runway centerline. The approach zones are 1,000 feet wide at the end
nearest the runway and expand uniformly so that at a point on the extended
runway centerline ten miles from the operation zone where it is 16,840 feet
wide.



            2.   Height limit: The height limit of the
approach zones begins at the elevation of the operation zone and rises one
foot vertically for every 50 feet horizontally (50:1) up to a maximum of 150
feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end. At three miles from
such operation zone, the height limit resumes sloping one foot vertically for
every 50 feet horizontally and continues to the ten-mile limit.



         (b)   Visual runways:



            1.   Length and width: The approach zones extend
from the operation zone to the limits of the turning zone, measured along the
extended runway centerline. The approach zones are 500 feet wide at the end
nearest the runway and expand uniformly so that at a point on the extended
runway centerline three miles from the operation zone, the approach zone is
3,700 feet wide.



            2.   Height limit: The height limit of the
approach zones begins at the elevation of the operation zone and rises one
foot vertically for every 40 feet horizontally (40:1) up to a maximum of 150
feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.



       (2)   Operation zones are longitudinally centered on each
existing or proposed runway:



         (a)   Length:



            1.   For existing and proposed paved runways, the
operation zones begin and end 200 feet beyond the end of each runway.



            2.   For existing and proposed turf runways, the
operation zones begin and end at the runway ends.



            3.   For existing and proposed instrument runways,
the operation zone is 1,000 feet wide, with 500 hundred feet on either side
of the runway centerline.



            4.   For all other existing and proposed runways,
the operation zone is 500 feet wide, with 250 feet on either side of the
runway centerline.



         (b)   Height limit: The height limit of the operation
zones is the same as the nearest point on an existing or proposed runway or
the surface of the ground, whichever is higher.



      (3)   Transition zones extend outward at right angles to the
runway centerline and upward at a rate of one foot vertically for every seven
feet horizontally (7:1). The height limit of these zones begins at the height
limit of the adjacent operation zones or approach zones. The transition zones
end at a height of 150 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.



      (4)   Turning zones extend three miles as a radius from the
corners of the operation zone of each runway and connecting adjacent arcs
with tangent lines, excluding any area within the approach zone, operation
zone, or transition zone. The height limit of the turning zones is 150 feet
above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.



   (D)   Height restrictions.  No building, transmission line, pole,
tower, chimney, wires, or other structure or appurtenance of any kind or
character shall hereafter be erected, constructed, repaired, or established,
nor shall any tree or other object of natural growth be allowed to grow,
above the heights described in division (C) above.



   (E)   Airport zoning map and location. The boundaries, operation
zones, approach zones, transition zones, and turning zones of the airport are
indicated on the Airport Zoning Map, which is attached hereto and made a part
hereof by reference. A copy of the Airport Zoning Regulations and Airport
Zoning Map shall at all times be on file in the office of the Zoning
Administrator and City Clerk.



   (F)   Permit requirements, exceptions, application forms and fees.



      (1)   Anyone wishing to erect, construct, reconstruct, repair,
or establish any building, transmission line, communication line, pole,
tower, smokestack, chimney, wires, or other structure or appurtenance thereto
of any kind or character; or to plant or replant any tree or other object of
natural growth which, when mature, would violate the requirements of division
(C) above, within the Airport Hazard Area must first obtain a permit from
Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   Exception. Within the turning zones, no permit shall be
required for any construction, reconstruction, repair, or planting of
anything which, when completed, or, in the case of natural growth, when
mature, does not exceed 75 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway
end.



      (3)   Application form. Application for a permit as required
under these regulations shall be made on a form to be available in the office
of the Zoning Administrator and shall indicate the approximate location,
ground elevation with reference to the end of the nearest runway or landing
strip and height of the proposed structure or planting (mean sea level
elevation).



      (4)   Permit fee. The fee for each permit issued shall be
established by the City Council as indicated on the fee schedule annually
adopted by the City Council.



   (G)   Non-conforming structures.



      (1)   Within the Airport Hazard Area, no non-conforming
building, transmission line, pole, tower, chimney, wires, or other structure
or appurtenance of any kind or character or object of natural growth, and
no  such structures or objects of natural growth have been torn down,
destroyed, have deteriorated or decayed to an extent of 50% or more of their
original condition, or abandoned for a period of 12 months or more, shall
hereafter be replaced, substantially reconstructed, repaired, altered,
replanted, or allowed to grow, as the case may be, to a height above the
heights permitted by these regulations. Transmission lines and other
communication lines shall be interpreted as all poles, wires, guys and all
other equipment necessary for the operation and maintenance of same within
the regulated zone.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (G)(3) below for certain
electric facilities, all such airport zoning regulations adopted under the
Airport Zoning Act shall provide that before any non-conforming structure or
tree may be replaced, substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to
grow higher, or replanted, a permit authorizing any replacement, alteration,
repair, reconstruction, growth, or replanting must be secured from the
administrative agency authorized to administer and enforce the regulations. A
permit shall be granted under this division if the applicant shows that the
replacement, alteration, repair, reconstruction, growth, or replanting of the
non-conforming structure, tree, or non-conforming use would not result in an
increase in height or a greater hazard to air navigation than the condition
that existed when the applicable regulation was adopted. For non-conforming
structures other than electric facilities, no permit under this division
shall be required for repairs necessitated by fire, explosion, act of God, or
the common enemy or for repairs which do not involve expenditures exceeding
more than 60% of the fair market value of the non-conforming structure, so
long as the height of the non-conforming structure is not increased over its
preexisting height.



      (3)   An electric supplier owning or operating an electric
facility made non-conforming by the adoption of airport zoning regulations
under the Airport Zoning Act may, without a permit or other approval by the
political subdivision adopting such regulations, repair, reconstruct, or
replace such electric facility if the height of such electric facility is not
increased over its preexisting height. Any construction, repair,
reconstruction, or replacement of an electric facility, the height of which
will exceed the preexisting height of such electric facility, shall require a
permit from the political subdivision adopting such regulations. The permit
shall be granted only upon a showing that the excess height of the electric
facility will not establish or create an airport hazard or become a greater
hazard to air navigation than the electric facility that previously existed.



   (H)   Marking of non-conforming structures.  Whenever the Zoning
Administrator determines that a specific structure or object in the Airport
Hazard Area exceeds the height restrictions and existed prior to the
promulgation of these regulations, the owner(s) and/or the lessor(s) of the
premises on which the structure or object is located shall be notified in
writing by the Zoning Administrator. The owner(s) and lessor(s) shall, within
a reasonable time, permit the marking and lighting of the structure or
object. The Zoning Administrator shall specify the required marking and
lighting, consistent with these regulations entitled "Marking and Lighting of
Structures". The cost of marking or lighting shall not be assessed against
the owner or lessor of said premises.



   (I)   Administrative agency; enforcement.  The Zoning Administrator
shall administer and enforce these regulations and shall be the
administrative agency provided for in Neb. RS 3-319, and shall have all the
powers and perform all the duties of the administrative agency as provided in
the Airport Zoning Act.



   (J)   Variance from regulations.



      (1)   Any person desiring to erect any structure, increase the
height of any structure, permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use his
or her property in a manner inconsistent with the airport zoning regulations
adopted under this regulation may apply to the Board of Zoning Adjustment for
a variance from the zoning regulations in question. Such variances shall be
allowed only if the Board of Zoning Adjustment makes the same findings for
the granting of variances generally as set forth in Neb. RS 19-907 through
19-912.01, except that if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed
structure or alteration of a structure does not require any modification or
revision to any approach or approach procedure as approved or written by the
Federal Aviation Administration on either an existing or proposed runway and
the applicant provides signed documentation from the Federal Aviation
Administration that the proposed structure or alteration of the structure
will not require any modification or revision of any airport minimums, such
documentation may constitute evidence of undue hardship and the Board of
Zoning Adjustment may grant the requested variance without such findings. Any
variance may be allowed subject to any reasonable conditions that the Board
of Zoning Adjustment may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this
regulation.



      (2)   In granting any permit under or variance from any
airport zoning regulation adopted under this regulation, the administrative
agency or Board of Zoning Adjustment may, if it deems such action is
advisable to effectuate the purposes of the regulation and reasonable in the
circumstances, so condition such permit or variance as to require the owner
of the structure or tree in question to permit the political subdivision, at
its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and
lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport
hazard.



   (K)   Zoning Board of Adjustment. The City of Gothenburg Board of
Zoning Adjustment shall be the Board of Zoning Adjustment with respect to
these regulations. Said Board shall have and exercise the powers conferred by
Neb. RS 3-320 et. seq. and such other powers and duties as are conferred and
imposed by law.



   (L)   Permitted principal uses and structures.  Any use or
structure that is permitted in the primary zoning district where this
district is overlain, provided all buildings, structures and other obstacles
comply with the height restrictions established in division (C) above.



   (M)   Special uses.  Any special use that is permitted in the
primary zoning district where this district is overlain where such special
use has been duly authorized by the City Council in accordance with the
requirements and procedures specified in this regulation, provided all
buildings, structures and other obstacles comply with the height restrictions
set forth in division (C) above.



   (N)   Accessory structures.  Any accessory use or structure that is
permitted in the primary zoning district where this district is overlain,
provided all buildings, structures and other obstacles comply with the height
restrictions established in division (C) above.



   (O)   Conflicting regulations.  In the event of any conflict
between any airport zoning regulations adopted under this regulation and any
other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with
respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other
matter, and whether such other regulations were adopted by the political
subdivision which adopted the airport zoning regulations or by some other
political subdivision, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall
govern and prevail.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS



§ 152.040  INTERSECTION VISIBILITY.



   On a corner lot in all districts, except C-1, Central Business
District, a sight triangle shall be provided where no obstruction between a
height of three and one-half and ten feet shall exist. The triangle shall be
formed from the center line of the intersecting streets for a distance of 90
feet. (See Appendix A: Illustrations)



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.041  ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Uses for dwelling. Accessory buildings shall not be used for
dwelling purposes unless specifically permitted.



   (B)   Front yard. No accessory building shall be located between the
front building line of principal building and the front property line.



   (C)   Accessory buildings not a part of the main structure may be
located in the required rear yard and eaves shall not be closer than two feet
to any side or rear lot line. A garage which is entered from an alley should
not be located closer than ten feet to the alley line. A freestanding or
metal carport shall only be allowed in the rear yard as an accessory use
structure.



   (D)   Accessory buildings, if not attached, must be located six or
more feet from the main structure if it creates a fire hazard or would
subject the residential structure to a potential fire, such as a detached
fireplace, barbecue ovens, flammable liquid storage, and the like.



   (E)   Maximum size of accessory buildings within an R-1, R-2, R-3
and R-4 Zoning District are as follows:



      (1)   For lots of one acre or less:



         (a)   There shall be a maximum of three accessory
buildings.



         (b)   The area allowed for each detached accessory
structure is 720 total square feet, or 75% of the total lot coverage of the
permitted principal use, whichever is greater; up to the maximum allowable
lot coverage.



         (c)   Maximum height of any part of the detached
accessory structure shall not exceed that of the principal structure, or
twenty (20) feet, whichever is higher.



      (2)   For lots larger than one acre:



         (a)   There shall be a maximum of three accessory
buildings.



         (b)   The cumulative building area allowed for all
detached accessory structures is 1,200 total square feet, or 75% of the total
lot coverage of the permitted principal use, whichever is greater; up to the
maximum allowable lot coverage.



         (c)   Maximum height of the detached accessory garage
shall not exceed one and one-half times the height of the principal
structure, or the height requirement within the applicable district,
whichever is less.



   (F)   Accessory buildings larger than 120 square feet shall comply
with §152.063 Residential Design Standards and shall be built to match or
closely resemble the principal structure's exterior finish in roofing
materials and pitch.



   (G)   No roll-offs, trailers, vehicles, shipping or storage
containers. Commercial boxes, or similar structures shall be permitted or
modified to be used as accessory buildings in the R-l and R-2 Zones.



   (H)   A temporary POD/temporary storage permit shall be required in
the R-l and R-2 Zones and may be permitted by application to the City Clerk.
Fees for the permit shall be established by City Council resolution. Permits
shall be for a period not to exceed 30 days, however the permit may be
renewed for a second 30-day period upon approval of the Building Inspector.



   (I)   Accessory buildings which are attached to or not located more
than six feet from the main structure shall comply with the height, front,
side, and rear yard requirements of the main building.



   (J)   (1)   All accessory buildings require a building permit.



      (2)   All accessory buildings must follow the proper setbacks
and other requirements of the accessory building zoning regulations.



      (3)   All accessory buildings on nonpermanent foundations must
be anchored down in some way to the ground. (Example: Rods driven through the
skids into the ground; mobile home tie downs with straps going over the top
of the building secured to anchors driven into the ground.)



   (K)   All antenna/satellite dishes shall be located in the rear yard
and comply with setback requirements for accessory uses.



   (L)   The restrictions set forth in divisions (E) and (F) above may
be waived by the granting of a special use permit.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 932, passed 11-1-2016)



§ 152.042  BUILDING PROJECTIONS.



   Every part of any required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed
by a building, except:



   (A)   Eaves may project into a front or rear yard 36 inches,
exclusive of gutters.



   (B)   Eaves may project into a side yard 24 inches, or two-fifths of
the required side yard, whichever projection is greater, exclusive of gutters.



   (C)   Ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, vertical
solar screens, and ornamental features may project 12 inches.



   (D)   Porches as provided for in § 152.063(D).



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.043  HEIGHT REGULATION EXCEPTIONS.



   The height limitations contained in this chapter shall not apply to
spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, domes,
chimneys, grain elevators and accessory agricultural structures, or other
appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not
intended for human occupancy, except as provided for in § 152.030.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.044  ACCESS TO STRUCTURES REQUIRED.



   Every building hereafter erected or moved, with the exception of
nonresidential agricultural related structures in the AG General Agricultural
District, shall be on a lot adjacent a public street, and all structures
shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for
servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.045  RESIDENTIAL UTILITY AND LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to occupy a residential structure or any
building for living purposes that does not have an approved waste disposal
system.



   (B)   No waste absorption field (septic tank, cess pools, and the
like) shall be constructed any closer than 25 feet from any adjacent property
line.



   (C)   There shall be no waste absorption field located closer than
50 feet from any other residential structure.



   (D)   There shall be no waste absorption field located closer than
50 feet from a water well; provided, however, where geology and subsurface
conditions and topography would indicate that seepage could reach the well
supply, a greater distance shall be required.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.046  TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.



   Temporary structures incidental to construction work, but only for the
period of the work, are permitted in all districts; however, basements and
cellars shall not be occupied for residential purposes until the building is
completed.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.047  PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The minimum of off-street parking places to be provided on
lots in all districts except C-1, Central Business District, shall be as
shown in the following list:



 


Use

 

Parking Spaces Required






Single- and two-family dwellings

 

1.0 per dwelling unit




Rooming houses, dormitories, convalescent homes

 

0.4 times the maximum lawful number of occupants




Multi-family dwellings

 

1.5 per dwelling unit




Hotels

 

1.0 per room in addition to spaces required for restaurant facilities




Mobile homes

 

1 per mobile home




Retail stores and service

 

1 per 350 square feet of floor space establishments and outdoor sales space




Offices

 

1 per 400 square feet of floor space




Other commercial and industrial uses

 

0.75 times the maximum number industrial uses of employees on the premises at
any one time




Bed and breakfast guest house

 

1 space per 2 rental guest rooms





 



   (B)   Where calculation in accordance with the foregoing list
results in requiring a fractional space, any fraction less than one-half
shall be disregarded and any fraction of one-half or more shall require one
space.



      (1)   In Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4, required off-street
parking shall be provided on the lot on which is located the use to which the
parking pertains. In other districts, parking may be provided either on the
same lot or on an adjacent or other lot, provided the lot on which the use
requiring them is located are not separated by more than 300 feet at their
closest points, measured along a street or streets.



      (2)   Where off-street parking is located on a lot other than
the lot occupied by the use which requires it, site plan approval for both
lots is required.



(Ord. 905, passed -20-2015)



§ 152.048  REQUIRED LOADING SPACES.



   Except in District C-1, every lot used for commercial or industrial
purposes shall be provided with an off-street loading space that will
accommodate semi-trailers and tractors. The place shall have access to a
public alley or public street. In District C-1, every lot used for commercial
or industrial purposes shall be provided with a loading space having access
to a public alley or, if there is no alley, to a public street.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.049  INDUSTRIAL USE PERFORMING STANDARDS.



   (A)   General. These performance standards shall apply as minimum
standards in those districts where compliance with the standards is required.



   (B)   Limited industrial performance standards. To be permitted
industrial use in the I-1 Industrial District, whether as a permitted use or
through a special permit, the use must meet the following performance
standards.



      (1)   Physical appearance. All operations shall be carried on
within an enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in
operable condition may be stored in the open. Normal daily wastes of an
inorganic nature may be stored in containers not in a building when the
containers are not readily visible from the street.



      (2)   Fire hazard. No operation shall involve the use of
highly flammable gases, acid, liquids, grinding processes or other inherent
fire hazards. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of
normal heating fuels, motor fuels, and welding gases when handled in
accordance with city regulations.



      (3)   Noise. No operation shall be carried on which involves
noise in excess of the normal traffic noise of the adjacent street at the
time of the daily peak hour of traffic volume. Noise shall be measured at the
property line and when the level of the noise cannot be determined by
observation with the natural senses, suitable instrument may be used and
measurement may include break-downs into a reasonable number of frequency
ranges.



      (4)   Sewage and liquid wastes. No operation shall be carried
on which involves the discharge into a sewer, water course, or the ground of
liquid wastes of any radioactive nature, or liquid wastes of a chemical
nature which are detrimental to normal sewage plant operation or corrosive
and damaging to sewer pipes and installations.



      (5)   Air contaminants.



         (a)   Air contaminants and smoke shall be less dark than
designated Number One on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United
States Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a density designated as Number
One shall be permitted for one four-minute period in each hour.



         (b)   Particulate matter of dust as measured at the
point of emission by any generally accepted method shall not be emitted in
excess of 0.2 grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of 500°F,
except for a period of four minutes in any one-half hour, at which time it
may equal, but not exceed 0.6 grains per cubic foot as corrected to a
temperature of 500°F.



         (c)   Due to the fact that the possibilities of air
contamination cannot reasonably be comprehensively covered in this section,
there shall be applied the general rule that there shall not be discharged
from any sources whatsoever such quantity as to cause injury, detriment,
nuisance or annoyance to any considerable number of persons or to the public
in general, or to cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage
to business, vegetation, or property.



      (6)   Odor. The emissions of odors that are generally agreed
to be obnoxious to any considerable number of persons shall be prohibited.



      (7)   Gases. The gases sulphur dioxide, hydrogen sulphide, and
carbon monoxide shall not exceed five parts per million. All nitrous fumes
shall not exceed one part per million. Measurements shall be taken at the
property line of the particular establishment involved.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.050  ADJUSTMENT OF FRONT YARD REQUIREMENT.



   The front yards located within the same zoning district may be adjusted
in the following circumstances.



   (A)   Where any 40% of the frontage in the same zoning district is
developed with two or more buildings that have a front yard of less depth
than herein required, then where a building is to be erected on a lot that is
within 100 feet of existing main buildings on either or both sides, the
minimum front yard shall be a line drawn between the two closest front
corners of the adjacent main buildings.



   (B)   In the case of corner lots, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine the front yard requirements, subject to the following limitations:



      (1)   At least one front yard shall be provided having the
full depth required generally in the district; and



      (2)   The other front yard on the lot must align with existing
main buildings but may be reduced to no less than half of the full depth
required in the district.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.051  ASSIGNMENT OF STREET ADDRESS.



   Street addresses shall be assigned by the City Clerk and the Chief of
Police according to the E-911 addressing system.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.052  REPLACING NONSTANDARD ACCESSORY BUILDING ON NARROW LOT.



   In the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Residential Districts, a new or
replacement accessory building may be erected on the site of an existing
detached accessory building constructed on or before July 14, 1961, on a lot
of record with a lot width of less than 50 feet, although the site does not
meet the required minimum setback from a side or rear lot line(s), provided:



   (A)   The new replacement accessory building does not extend beyond
the perimeter of the existing accessory building; and



   (B)   The new or replacement accessory building shall otherwise
comply with all applicable city ordinances.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.053  RESERVED.



§ 152.054  RESERVED.



§ 152.055  HOME OCCUPATION STANDARDS; INCONSPICUOUS HOME OCCUPATION.



   (A)   Standards for home occupations.



      (1)   Home occupations shall not occupy more than 30% of the
total floor area of the main building, or if located in an accessory
building, shall not occupy more than 15% of the total lot area.



      (2)   The operation shall not substantially increase traffic
in the area.



      (3)   There shall be no offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odors, heat, or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line.



      (4)   The use shall be carried on by the inhabitants living
there, plus no more than one person in addition to members of the family.



      (5)   Signs and other advertising shall comply with the
provisions of § 152.056.



      (6)   There shall be no exterior storage on the premise of
material or equipment used as part of the home occupation.



      (7)   A home occupation shall provide additional parking area
to accommodate all needs created by the home occupation, and shall be subject
to review by the Planning Commission and City Council. The parking area shall
not intrude on the required setbacks and side yard areas.



   (B)   Standards for inconspicuous home occupations.



      (1)   Inconspicuous home occupations shall not occupy more
than 30% of the total floor area of the dwelling which the inconspicuous home
occupation is located. Thirty percent shall be calculated by including all
storage of merchandise, machinery, equipment, and waiting rooms.



      (2)   The inconspicuous home occupation shall not increase
traffic in the area where located, and shall not require any additional
parking spaces.



      (3)   There shall be no offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odor, heat, or glare noticeable beyond the confines of the dwelling. No
manufacturing of any nature whatsoever shall be allowed in a dwelling which
qualifies for a inconspicuous home occupation.



      (4)   The inconspicuous home occupation shall be carried on by
the inhabitants living in the dwelling. No other person may be employed in
the occupation.



      (5)   No signage shall be allowed to be displayed on the
exterior of the dwelling.



      (6)   No exterior storage shall be allowed on the premises of
material or equipment used as a part of the inconspicuous home occupation.



      (7)   The inconspicuous home occupation shall not create
demand for more than two additional parking spaces. All additional parking
must be accommodated without an intrusion on any required setbacks of front
yard, rear yard or side yard. All parking accommodations shall be subject to
the review of the Planning Commission and the City Council.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.056  SIGN REGULATION.



   (A)   Intent and applicability.



      (1)   The following regulations shall govern the locations,
areas, heights, and types of signs permitted within the zoning jurisdiction
of this chapter.



      (2)   All signs hereafter constructed, erected, printed or
otherwise established, moved, altered, or changed shall comply with these
regulations.



      (3)   After the effective date of this chapter, no sign shall
be erected, enlarged, constructed, or otherwise installed without first
obtaining a sign permit. A sign permit shall be legally issued only when in
compliance with these regulations.



      (4)   No necessary sign, advertising display or structure,
poster, or device shall be erected, moved, enlarged, maintained, or
reconstructed except as expressly permitted by this section; provided,
however, that state, county, and municipal signs and traffic signs installed
for public purposes are exempt from these requirements.



      (5)   Nonconforming signs existing at the time of enactment of
this chapter may be repaired or maintained, but may not be otherwise
established, moved, altered, or changed except in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   On- and off-site on interstate or federal-aid primary
highways. The erection or maintenance of any advertising sign, display, or
device which is visible to the traveled way of the National System of
Interstate and Defense Highways, and the system of federal-aid primary roads
of the state as defined by the State Department of Roads, is hereby
prohibited unless in compliance with the regulations set forth in Rules and
Regulations Relating to the Control of Advertising in Areas Adjacent to the
Interstate and Federal Aid Primary Highways, as amended. Primary highways
within zoning jurisdiction are highways.



   (C)   Prohibited signs. Signs shall not be erected or maintained in
a manner so as to obscure, or otherwise physically interfere with, an
official traffic sign, signal, or device, or in a manner so as to obstruct or
interfere with a driver's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting
traffic. This shall also mean pedestrian traffic on sidewalks. All road signs
shall be maintained in a neat and presentable condition.



   (D)   District regulations.



      (1)   AG and Agriculture AG 1 Agriculture District. No
regulations apply other than those outlined herein.



      (2)   R-1 (under permitted special uses § 152.020(D)), R-2,
R-3, and R-4 Residential Districts.



         (a)   Signs permitted in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts
shall be attached to or within five feet of the main structure or building.



         (b)   Only one sign, not illuminated, less than four by
eight or 32 square feet in area for each dwelling.



         (c)   Only one sign, not illuminated, may be approved by
special use permit advertising a home occupation under § 152.075.



         (d)   Any temporary sign, not illuminated, less than six
square feet in area, advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the property.



      (3)   C-1 Central Business District.



         (a)   Illuminated or nonilluminated signs identifying
the character of the establishment. No one sign which lies flat or across the
face of a building shall exceed 100 square feet in area.



         (b)   Signs which protrude outward from a building must
do so at a 90 degree angle from the face of the building for a distance not
to exceed six feet, and shall not exceed 24 square feet in area.



      (4)   C-2 Highway Commercial District. Illuminated or
nonilluminated signs identifying the character of the establishment. No one
sign which is freestanding and not attached to a building or structure shall
exceed 100 square feet in area. Protruding signs must be at a 90 degree angle
from the face of the building for a distance not to exceed eight feet, and
shall not exceed 50 square feet in area.



      (5)   Industrial Districts (I-1 and I-2).  In I-1 and I-2
Districts, identification and advertising signs are permitted, except that
each sign shall be limited to 250 square feet in area, and the sign shall
only identify the industry and be on property where the industry is located.



      (6)   Bed and breakfast guest houses.



         (a)   Only one sign per establishment.



         (b)   Sign shall be nonilluminated.



         (c)   Sign face shall not exceed four square feet.



         (d)   Sign shall be located no closer than five feet
from any property line, and shall not obstruct the view of traffic
approaching a street intersection nor extend onto public right-of-way.



         (e)   A wall or projecting sign affixed to a building
shall not have the top of the sign project higher than ten feet from grade.



         (f)   Freestanding or pole signs shall not exceed four
feet in height from the top of the sign to grade.



   (E)   Temporary signs. Temporary, freestanding signs are authorized
in any zoning district for a period not to exceed 30 days. The sign must not
be permanently attached to a structure or fence and may not exceed a height
of five feet, or a width of three feet. No temporary sign shall be placed in
a location that obstructs the vision of a driver of an automobile or truck. A
permit shall not be required for a temporary sign. No temporary signs shall
be permitted on the public street right-of-way, parks, alleys, or other
public areas.



   (F)   Discontinuation of use. In the event the use or need of a sign
shall cease, the sign shall be removed promptly and the area restored to a
condition free from refuse and rubbish. After 30-days notice and failure to
do so, the city shall remove the sign and assess the charges to the owner.



   (G)   Sign permits.



      (1)   No sign shall be constructed, erected, remodeled,
relocated, or expanded until a sign permit for the sign has been obtained,
authorized, and signed by the Zoning Administrator, excluding general
maintenance. The requirement shall pertain to permanent signs only. A fee, to
be set by the City Council, shall be required to process the sign permit
application. In addition, information pertinent to sign characteristics and
dimensions must be presented to the Zoning Administrator with sufficient time
to determine compliance with the chapter.



      (2)   A sign exceeding zoning regulations may be erected if a
special permit for the use has been obtained in accordance with §§ 152.075
and 152.076.



   (H)   Awnings and/or canopies.



      (1)   Awnings and/or canopies extending into the city
right-of-way shall be permitted as a part of sign permit.



      (2)   Any awnings and/or canopies extending into the city
right-of-way shall follow the code reference of § 30.134 of this code, as
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.057  FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES.



   (A)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, fences,
walls and hedges may be permitted in any required yard, provided that no
fence, wall or hedge along the sides or front edge of any front yard shall be
over three and one-half feet in height.  Additionally, on a corner lot in a
Residential District, a sight triangle shall be provided such that nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet and ten
feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area
bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points
along said street lines 90 feet from the point of the intersections.  The
following regulations shall apply to the construction of fences.



      (1)   No solid fence shall be constructed closer to the street
than the property line.



      (2)   No fence erected in a required front yard shall
materially obstruct public view.  Permitted types of fences shall include
split rail, chain link, PVC vinyl or other similar material.  No component
of a front yard fence shall exceed three and one-half feet in height, nor
shall any structural member exceed 36 inches in cross-sectional area.



      (3)   No fence shall be constructed which will constitute a
traffic hazard as identified in the site triangle of a corner lot (see above).



      (4)   No fence shall be constructed in such a manner or be of
such design as to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or animals by intent
of its construction or by inadequate maintenance.



      (5)   No component of a fence along the perimeter of a
property within Residential Districts, except fences erected upon public or
parochial school grounds or in public parks and in public playgrounds, shall
be constructed of a height greater than six feet, except for the provisions
of division (A)(10) below.



      (6)   All fences shall conform to the construction standards
of the building code and other applicable ordinances and resolutions.



      (7)   In commercial and industrial districts, maximum height
of fences shall be eight feet.  When industry standards for certain types of
businesses require fences of greater heights, the Zoning Administrator at his
direction, may allow greater heights.



      (8)   All fences shall be constructed in such a manner that
the good or "finished side" of the fence faces neighboring property.  The
"finished side" shall be defined as the side of the fence without support
posts, brackets, etc.



      (9)   All fences constructed in the city shall comply with the
provision of this section and obtain a building permit.



      (10)   All permanent in ground outdoor swimming pools shall be
enclosed by a fence or wall at least six feet, but not more than eight feet
in height with a gate or gates which can be securely locked.



      (11)   In districts AG, C-1, C-2, I-1, I-2, R-3, and R-4, the
three and one-half feet height restriction between the front set back line
and the street right-of-way line may be waived if a special permit for the
use has been obtained in accordance with §§ 152.075 and 152.076. No special
use permit may allow a fence height in the area in excess of six feet.



      (12)   No fence shall be constructed in any district which is
in violation of § 92.25 of this code, as amended from time to time.



      (13)   A patio may have a privacy fence or railings that may
raise a maximum of six feet from the floor of the patio, provided that the
patio meets with the rear and side yard setbacks of the principal use.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.058  MANUFACTURED HOMES.



   All manufactured homes located outside mobile home parks shall meet the
following standards.



   (A)   The home shall have no less than 900 square feet of floor area.



   (B)   The home shall have no less than an 18-foot exterior width.



   (C)   The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two
and one-half inches of each for each 12 inches of horizontal run.



   (D)   The exterior material shall be of a color, material and scale
comparable with those existing in residential site-build, single-family
construction.



   (E)   The home shall have a non-reflective roof material which is or
simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile or rock.



   (F)   The home shall have wheels, axles, transporting lights and
removable towing apparatus removed.



   (G)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to supersede any valid
restrictive covenants of record.



   (H)   The home must meet building, electrical, and/or mechanical
code requirements adopted by the city.



   (I)   In addition to any other foundation that may be required
within the structure, the home shall be placed on a permanent foundation of
concrete block or poured reinforced concrete or other comparable foundation
below any exterior wall of the home.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Am. Ord. 927, passed 12-15-2015)



§ 152.059  TOWERS.



   (A)   Intent and applicability.



      (1)   The following regulations shall govern the locations,
areas, heights, and types of towers permitted within the zoning jurisdiction
of this chapter.



      (2)   All towers hereafter constructed, erected, or otherwise
established, moved, altered or changed shall comply with these regulations.



      (3)   After the effective date of this chapter, no tower shall
be erected, moved, enlarged, constructed, reconstructed, or otherwise
installed without first obtaining a tower permit. A tower permit shall be
legally issued only when in compliance with these regulations; provided,
however, that the state, county, and city towers installed for public
purposes are exempt from these requirements.



      (4)   Nonconforming towers existing at the time of enactment
of this chapter may be repaired or maintained, but may not be otherwise
established, moved, altered, or changed except in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   District regulations.



      (1)   AG Agricultural District. Towers allowed under
regulations as provided for in division (C) below.



      (2)   AG 1 Agricultural Residential District. Towers allowed
under regulations as provided for in division (C) below.



      (3)   R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts. Towers
shall not be allowed.



      (4)   C-1 Central Business, C-2 Highway Commercial Districts.
Towers allowed under regulations as provided for in division (C) below.



      (5)   I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts. Towers allowed under
regulations as provided for in division (C) below.



      (6)   P Public Use Districts. Towers allowed under regulations
as provided for in division (C) below.



   (C)   Tower regulations.



      (1)   All radio, television, microwave, cellular, or other
towers more than 50 feet shall not be constructed, erected, remodeled,
relocated, or expanded without the receipt of a special use permit as
provided for under §§ 152.075 and 152.076.



      (2)   All radio, television, or other towers less than 50 feet
and for nonbusiness or personal use shall not be considered towers for the
purposes of this chapter. Any tower less than 50 feet used for commercial
purposes shall be considered a tower as provided for under division (C)(1)
above.



      (3)   Freestanding towers over 50 feet shall be located so
that the distance from the base of the tower to any adjoining property line
or the supporting structure of a separate neighboring tower is a minimum of
100% of the tower height; except that any tower located adjacent to a
residential area shall have a distance of 100% of the tower height, or 200
feet setback from the adjoining property, whichever is greater.



      (4)   The tower installation shall be designed to be
aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the built environment of
the city. The city encourages efforts to hide towers or restrict their
visibility from public right-of-way or neighboring properties. Associated
support building shall be designed with materials that are consistent with
those in the surrounding neighborhood. Metal exteriors shall generally not be
permitted for accessory support buildings.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.060  WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   In order to balance the need for clean, renewable energy
resources with the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the city, the city finds these regulations are necessary in
order to ensure that all wind energy conversion systems (CWECS) are
appropriately designed, sited, and installed.



      (2)   These regulations pertaining to all wind energy
conversion systems are intended to respond to equipment available at the time
of adoption.  The city recognizes that this is an emerging technology and
that new means of collecting wind energy, including but not limited to
vertical axis wind turbine generators are under development.  Accordingly,
these standards will be reviewed and may be amended as technology advances.



   (B)   Types of wind energy systems.



      (1)   Small wind energy conversion system (SWECS).  A wind
energy conversion system which has a rated capacity of up to 25 kilowatts and
which is incidental and subordinated to another use of the same parcel.  A
system is considered a small wind energy system only if it supplies
electrical power for site use, except that when a parcel on which the system
is installed also received electrical power supplied by a utility company,
access electrical power generated and not presently needed for onsite use may
be sold back to the utility company.  (25 Kilowatt limit approved by the
Gothenburg Planning Commission to increase to a maximum of 100 Kilowatts with
Nebraska State Legislature authorization by future amendment.)



      (2)   Commercial wind energy conversion system (CWECS).  A
single wind conversion tower or multiple towers comprising a large conversion
system or wind farm.  (This CWECS is not permitted with the planning
jurisdiction of the city.



   (C)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AGGREGATED PROJECT. Those projects that are developed and
operated in a coordinated fashion, but which have multiple entities
separately owning one or more of the individual CWECS within a larger
project. Associated infrastructure such as power lines and transformers that
service the facility may be owned by a separate entity but are also included
as part of the aggregated project.



      FALL ZONE. The area, defined as the furthest distance from the
tower base, in which a tower will collapse in the event of a structural
failure.



      FEEDER LINE. Any power line that carries electrical power from
one or more wind turbines or individual transformers associated with
individual wind turbines to the point of interconnection with the electric
power grid, in the case of interconnection with the high voltage transmission
systems the point of the interconnection shall be the substation serving the
WECS.



      HEIGHT, HUB. The height above grade of the fixed portion of the
tower, including the generation unit, measured to the hub or center point of
the rotor blade diameter.



      HEIGHT, TOTAL SYSTEM. The height above grade of the system,
including the generating unit and measured the highest vertical extension of
any rotor blades or rotors.



      METEOROLOGICAL TOWER.



         (a)   For the purposes of wind energy conversion
systems, meteorological towers are those which are erected primarily to
measure wind speed and direction plus other data relevant to locating a CWECS.



         (b)   Meteorological towers do not include towers and
equipment used by airports, the Nebraska Department of Transportation or
other similar applications to monitor weather conditions.



      ROTOR DIAMETER.  The diameter of the circle created by the outer
most point of the rotor blades of the windmill. (See diagram
below)[IMAGE][IMAGE]



      SHADOW FLICKER.  Strobe effect that occurs when sun is
horizontal to rotor blades, which causes repetitive intermittent shadows that
can affect people on nearby properties.



      SUBSTATIONS. Any electrical facility utilized to convert
electricity produced by a commercial wind energy conversion system for
interconnection with high voltage transmission lines.



      TOWER. The vertical component of a wind energy conversion system
that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.



      TRANSMISSION LINE. The electrical power lines that are high
voltage transmission lines carrying electricity over medium to long distances
rather than directly interconnecting and supplying electric energy to retail
customers.



      WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS).  An aggregation of parts
including the base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, and
configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical or
electrical energy, e.g. wind charger, windmill, or wind turbine.



      WIND TURBINE GENERATOR. The component of a wind energy system
that transforms mechanical energy from the wind into electrical energy.



   (D)   Small wind energy conversion system.  A small wind energy
conversion system (SWECS) is a facility used for the production of a maximum
of 25 kilowatts of electrical energy supplied by the wind. The facility may
include a tower, wind turbine(s) and any transmission lines. The SWECS is
primarily used to generate energy for use by its owner. A small wind energy
facility shall be sited and designed to minimize adverse visual impacts on
neighboring properties.  To be used in conformance with Neb. RS §§ 70-2001
through 70-2005, regarding Net Metering. (25 Kilowatt limit approved by the
Gothenburg Planning Commission to increase to a maximum of 100 Kilowatts with
Nebraska State Legislature authorization by future amendment.)



      (1)   General site and design standards



         (a)   Located on a lot or parcel of at least one-half
acre;



         (b)   Shall be permitted by an approved special use
permit to be issued in the AG, AG 1, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4, C-1 or C-2, I-1
or I-2, or P Zoning Districts.



         (c)   SWECS shall maintain a minimum setback distance
from any property line a distance equal to the height of the total system of
the windmill. Adjoining property owners (second or third additional
farm/ranch single dwelling units for the purpose of housing relatives or
permanent agriculture workers) participating in the same or aggregated
project shall have no setback requirements between adjoining properties.



         (d)   SWECS shall maintain a minimum setback distance
from any public road, or highway of at least 1.1 times the total system
height of the windmill from the public road or highway right-of-way.



         (e)   In no case shall a WECS be located within any
required setback or in any front yard area.



         (f)   Turbines and towers shall be of tubular design and
if painted or coated, shall be of a non-reflective white, grey, or other
neutral color and shall not used to display advertising.



         (g)   SWECS shall not be artificially lighted unless
such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).



         (h)   All electrical wires associated with a small wind
energy system other than the wires necessary to connect the wind generator to
the tower wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the
grounding wires shall be located underground.



         (i)   The minimum distance between the ground and any
part of the rotor blade system shall be 30 feet.



         (j)   All ground mounted electrical and control
equipment must be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access. A tower
may not have step bolts or a ladder within eight feet of the ground that is
readily accessible to the public.



         (k)   The owner of a small wind energy facility shall
minimize or mitigate any interference with electromagnetic communications,
such as radio, telephone or television signals caused by the facility.



         (l)   Construction access must be re-graded and
re-vegetated to minimize environmental impacts.



         (m)   Any SWECS application must include an agreement
that addresses decommissioning and abandonment of the facility. The agreement
must at a minimum provide for reuse or dismantlement of the facility at the
owner's expense.



      (2)   Application requirements.



         (a)   A survey map at an appropriate scale identifying:



            1.   Site boundary;



            2.   Adjacent public right-of-ways;



            3.   Existing structures;



            4.   Proposed small wind energy system and
accessory structures; adjacent ownership and existing residences;



            5.   Any overhead utility lines.



         (b)   A report from a licensed engineer containing:



            1.   Small wind system specifications including
manufacturer and model; rotor diameter, tower height, tower type
(freestanding or guyed);



            2.   Documentation to establish that the tower has
sufficient structural integrity for the proposed use at the proposed location;



            3.   Certification that the small wind energy
system complies with all applicable state construction and electrical codes
and the National Electrical Code.



         (c)   Compliance with FAA Regulations, including any
Documentation required by the FAA certifying approval of proposed location
when located within the three-mile planning jurisdiction of any airport or
within the approach path of any municipal airport runway extending a distance
of ten miles from the edge of the runway.



         (d)   Signed letter of notification by the property
owner submitted to the Electrical Supplier/Purchaser, Dawson County
Assessor's Office, and City of Gothenburg Zoning Administrator, signifying
utility service is approved.



         (e)   Require proof of insurance on application.



   (E)   Commercial/utility wind energy system. A wind energy
conservation system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated
control, or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity equal to, or
greater than 100 kW and which is intended to primarily supply on-site energy
or for distribution into the electrical grid.



      (1)   Requirements. Commercial/utility grade wind energy
systems shall not be allowed with the zoning jurisdiction of the city.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.061  SALVAGE OR JUNK YARD.



   (A)   Salvage or junkyard operations and related facilities shall
only be allowed by special permit in the AG and I-2 Zoning Districts under
the following conditions:



      (1)   Located on a tract of land at least one-fourth mile from
a residential or agricultural farm residence.



      (2)   The operation shall be conducted wholly within a
noncombustible building or within an area completely surrounded on all sides
by a visual obscuring fence, wall or hedge.  The fence, wall or hedge shall
be of uniform height (at least eight feet high) and uniform texture and color
shall be so maintained by the proprietor as to insure maximum safety to the
public and preserve the general welfare of the neighborhood.  The fence,
wall or hedge shall be installed in such a manner as to retain all scrap;
junk or other material within the yard and no scrap, junk or other material
shall protrude above the fence.



      (3)   No junk shall be loaded, unloaded or otherwise placed,
either temporarily or permanently, outside the enclosed building, hedge fence
or wall, or within the public right-of-way.



      (4)   Any other requirement deemed appropriate and necessary
by the City Council for the protection of the general health, safety and
welfare.



   (B)   In making any decision granting a special use permit, the City
Council shall impose such restrictions, terms, time limitations, landscaping,
improvement of off-street parking lots, and other appropriate safeguards as
required protecting adjoining property.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.062  LANDFILLS AND SANITARY LANDFILLS.



   (A)   Private landfill operations shall only be allowed by special
permit in the AG Agriculture District upon prior approval of the Nebraska
Department of Health and Human Services and with conformance to the following
conditions:



      (1)   Located on a tract of land at least one-quarter mile or
(1,320) feet from a residential or agricultural farm residence.



      (2)   The operation shall be conducted wholly within an area
completely surrounded on all sides by a fence, wall or hedge.  The fence,
wall or hedge shall be of uniform height (at least eight feet high) and
uniform texture and color shall be so maintained by the proprietor as to
insure maximum safety to the public and preserve the general welfare of the
neighborhood.  The fence, wall or hedge shall be installed in such a manner
as to retain all material within the yard and no material shall protrude
above the fence.



      (3)   No material shall be loaded, unloaded or otherwise
placed, either temporarily or permanently, outside the enclosed building,
hedge fence or wall, or within the public right-of-way.



      (4)   Any other requirement deemed appropriate and necessary
by the City Council for the protection of the general health and welfare.



      (5)   Special use permits granted under this section shall be
subject to annual review and renewal by the City Council.



   (B)   In making any decision granting a special use permit, the City
Council shall impose such restrictions, terms, time limitations, landscaping,
improvement of off-street parking lots, and other appropriate safeguards as
required protecting adjoining property.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.063  RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Primary entrance shall be on the street side, not a side yard.



   (B)   An attached garage shall not exceed 50% of the square footage
of the main level of the residence, or up to one thousand square feet,
whichever is greater.



   (C)   The cladding of the exterior walls shall use building
materials, textures and colors appropriate to the architectural style of
those structures generally used throughout the neighborhood. Allowable
materials are brick, stone, stucco, log or wood, metal or vinyl siding. All
metal siding shall be non-reflective and shall be altered to have a brick,
stone, stucco, log or wood grain or similar appearance. Synthetic materials
manufactured to replicate the fore mentioned materials are also allowable
upon review by the Zoning Administrator.



   (D)   No dwelling shall be constructed or converted from a
pre-fabricated structure, metal building, pole barn or similar storage
building, originally designed for use as an accessory building.



   (E)   A front porch may extend into the required front yard setback
up to a maximum of six feet. However, any portion of a front porch that
extends into the required front yard shall not be enclosed by walls, windows
or screens.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 932, passed 11-1-2016)



§ 152.064  COMMERCIAL DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Compliance with all codes and ordinances adopted by the city
is required.  All property located within the core of downtown Gothenburg,
defined as the area between Avenue "D" and Avenue "G", from 8th Street
(Highway 30) to 11th Street, shall meet the following design standards. 
Street facing facades are limited to the following:



      (1)   Facade elements.  Materials used for street facing
facades building shall be similar to those used on adjacent buildings. 
Primary construction materials historically used in the downtown shall be
used similarly in new construction as follows:



         (a)   Brick:  Varying colors, sizes and textures of
brick exhibited in existing buildings.



         (b)   Wood:  Best utilized for architectural elements
such as pilasters, cornices or decorative raised panels and trim.  The use
of wood as a general siding material is discouraged due to maintenance
requirements.



         (c)   Concrete block:  Best utilized in combination
with other materials such as brick or stone.  The use of concrete block as
the only building material is strongly discouraged.



         (d)   Metal flashing and architectural elements: 
Metal, painted or exposed, utilized as architectural elements such as
"pressed tin" cornices and moldings.



         (e)   Structural steel:  Exposed structural pre-formed
steel fulfills aesthetic purposes at lintels and columns in a manner similar
to existing historic structures.



         (f)   Stucco:  Any materials similar in texture and
perception are recommended only as an accent element to a facade.  Although
a couple of buildings are nearly 100% stucco covered today, it was not the
historically accurate facade exterior.  Modern buildings should utilize
stucco in combination with other materials.



   (B)   All other areas in the C-1 District that are not located
within the core of downtown Gothenburg, as above, shall have at a minimum a
three and one-half foot high base comprised of non-reflective exterior siding
which is or simulates wood, stucco, or masonry.  Non-reflective exterior
siding comprised of metal, aluminum or vinyl siding or preformed panels can
be utilized above the base on the exterior of street facing facades. 
However, metal siding shall utilize concealed fasteners to install the siding
to the building.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



SPECIAL USE PERMIT



§ 152.075  GENERAL AUTHORITY.



   The City Council may authorize, by special permit after public hearing,
any of the following buildings or uses designated in this chapter as
permitted special uses.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.076  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   General. The application shall be in writing, filed with the
City Clerk, state the proposed location and use of the property, and other
relevant matters as may be requested by the City Council. Upon receipt of the
application, the City Clerk shall forward the application to the Planning
Commission for its recommendation. Upon hearing, the Planning Commission
shall forward its recommendation to the City Council, as soon as is
practicable. Upon hearing, the City Council may allow or deny the application
in whole or in part, or prescribe conditions for the use of the property. No
special use permit shall become effective until after separate public
hearings are held by both the Planning Commission and the City Council in
relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard. Notice of the purpose, time, and place of the
hearing shall be given by publication thereof in a paper of general
circulation.



(Neb. RS 19-904)



   (B)   Notice. In addition to the publication of the notice herein
prescribed, a notice of the purpose, time, and place of the hearing shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property on which the action is
pending. The notice shall not be less than 18 inches in height and 24 inches
in width with a white or yellow background and black letters not less than
one and one-half inches in height. The posted notice shall be so placed upon
the premises so that it is easily visible from the street nearest the
premises, and shall be so placed at least ten days prior to the date of each
hearing. If the record title owners of any lots included in the proposed
change be nonresidents of the municipality, then a written notice of the
hearing shall be mailed by certified mail to them addressed to their last
known address at least ten days prior to the hearing.



(Neb. RS 19-905)



   (C)   Criteria. Except as otherwise provided herein, no special use
permit shall be granted by the City Council, without an affirmative vote of a
majority of all members of the City Council and unless the proposed use is
found to:



      (1)   Be compatible with and similar to the use permitted in
the district;



      (2)   Not be a matter which should require rezoning of the
property;



      (3)   Not be detrimental to adjacent property;



      (4)   Not tend to depreciate the value of the surrounding
structures or property;



      (5)   Be compatible with the stated intended use of the
district;



      (6)   Not change the character of the district; and



      (7)   Be in accordance with the comprehensive plan.



   (D)   Protest against the special use permit. In case of a protest
against the special use permit, signed by the owners of 20% or more either of
the area of the lots included in the proposed change, or of those immediately
adjacent on the sides and in the rear thereof extending 300 feet therefrom,
and of those directly opposite thereto extending 300 feet from the street
frontage of the opposite lots, the special use permit shall not become
effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of
the City Council.



(Neb. RS 19-905)



   (E)   Expansion of nonconforming uses. In all districts, a special
permit may be granted to authorize the issuance of a building permit to
permit the enlargement, extension, conversion, reconstruction, or structural
alteration of any building located upon premises, uses of which constitute a
nonconforming use. In consideration of applications for special permits, the
following criteria shall be given specific consideration:



      (1)   Effects on adjacent property, traffic, city utility
service needs;



      (2)   Density of land use zoning for the subject property and
adjacent property; and



      (3)   The degree of hardship upon the applicant which would be
caused by failure to grant a permit.



   (F)   Bed and breakfast guest houses. The following additional
regulations shall apply as minimum requirements for granting special use
permits for bed and breakfast guest houses in the R-1 and R-2 Residential
Districts:



      (1)   Parking as required in § 152.047;



      (2)   Signs as required in § 152.056;



      (3)   A maximum of four rooms or suite of rooms are available
for use as transient lodging; and



      (4)   The remainder of the dwelling shall be used and occupied
as a residence by the host family.



   (G)   Special use permits; expirations. Every permit issued by the
City Council under the provisions of this section shall expire, if the
special use authorized by the permit is not commenced within 365 days from
the date of the approval of the permit; or if the special use authorized by
the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 365 days after the
special use has commenced. For the purposes of commencement in regard to a
new special use permit, this shall mean any work towards use of the permit
(including the application for a building permit; construction of a new
building and/or remodeling of an existing building; or any work that shows
significant progress towards the use of the permit). This section shall apply
to all special use permits issued after July 19, 2005.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT



§ 152.090  CREATION; MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Board of Zoning Adjustment is hereby continued, and
members of the Board on the effective date of this chapter shall continue to
serve for the remainder of their appointed terms. The members of the Board
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.



   (B)   One member only of this Board shall be appointed from
membership of the Planning Commission and the loss of membership on the
Planning Commission by the member shall also result in the immediate loss of
membership on the Board of Zoning Adjustment.



   (C)   The Board shall consist of five regular members, plus one
additional member designated as an alternate who shall attend and serve only
when one of the regular members is unable to attend for any reason, each to
be appointed for a term of three years and removable for cause by the City
Council upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired terms of any member whose terms becomes vacant.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.091  MEETINGS.



   Meeting of the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be held at the call of
the Chairperson and at times as the Board may determine. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating the fact, and shall
keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which
shall be immediately filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a
public record.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.092  POWERS.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall, subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards as specified in these regulations have the
following powers:



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any
zoning regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures;



      (2)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of
any regulation, requests for interpretation of any maps, or for decisions
upon other special questions upon which the Board is authorized by any
regulation to pass; and



      (3)   Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness,
or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of the
chapter, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of the piece of
property, the strict application of any enacted regulation under this chapter
would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or
exceptional and undue hardships upon, the owner of the property, to
authorize, upon appeal relating to the property, a variance from strict
application so as to relieve difficulties or hardships, if the relief may be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantially impairing the intent and purpose of these zoning regulations,
but no variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that:



         (a)   The strict application of the regulation would
produce undue hardship;



         (b)   The hardship is not shared generally by other
properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity;



         (c)   The authorization of the variance will not be of
substantial detriment to adjacent property, and the character of the district
will not be changed by the granting of the variance; and



         (d)   The granting of the variance is based upon reasons
of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for
purposes of convenience, profit, or caprice.



(Neb. RS 19-910)



   (B)   No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that
the condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of
the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably
practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an
amendment to this zoning chapter.



   (C)   In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board may, in
conformity with the provisions of the sections, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from, and may make an order, requirement, decision, or determination
as shall be proper, and to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members of the
Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any
regulation or to effect any variation in the regulation.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.093  VARIANCE REQUEST PROCEDURE.



   The procedures to be followed by the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall
be as follows.



   (A)   Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or
by any officer, department, governmental agency affected by any decision of
the Zoning Administrator. The appeal shall be made within ten days from the
date of decision by any city officer or department. The appeal filed in
writing shall define the appeal being requested and the grounds therefor. The
officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment all the paper constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.



   (B)   The Chairperson of the Board shall set a hearing within 30
days of receipt of the appeal. The time, date, place of the hearing, and
description of the request shall be published in a local newspaper of general
circulation ten days prior to the actual hearing. The Board shall also notify
the interested parties in the case of the hearing date, time, and place.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.094  APPEAL FROM DECISION.



   Any person or persons, jointly or separately, aggrieved by any decision
of the Board of Zoning Adjustment, or any officer, departments, board or
bureau of the city, may seek review of the decision by the District Court for
the city in the manner provided by the laws of the state, and particularly by
Neb. RS 19-912.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 152.105  PROCEDURE FOR INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of
interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning
Administrator, and that the questions shall be first presented to the Board
of Zoning Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning
Administrator, and that recourse from the decisions of the Board of Zoning
Adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law, except as provided in
§§ 152.090 through 152.094.



   (B)   It is further the intent of this chapter that the duties of
the City Council in connection with the chapter shall not include hearing and
deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The
procedure for deciding the questions shall be as stated in this section and
this chapter, the City Council shall have only the duties of considering and
adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this chapter as
provided by law, and of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated
herein.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.106  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   An administrative official who shall be known as the Zoning
Administrator and who shall be designated by the Mayor and approved by the
City Council shall administer and enforce this chapter. He or she may be
provided with the assistance of other persons as the Mayor and Council may
direct.



   (B)   If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated, he or she shall notify in
writing the person responsible for the violations, indicating the nature of
the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she
shall order discontinuance of illegal work being done, or shall take other
action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent
violation of its provisions.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.107  CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.



   It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of
any (non-farm) building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter
created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged
in its use or structure, until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have
been issued therefore by the Zoning Administrator stating that the proposed
use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.108  FINAL INSPECTION.



   (A)   No permit for erection, alteration, moving or repair of any
building shall be issued until an application has been made for a certificate
of zoning compliance. Within three days after notification that a building or
premises is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the Zoning
Administrator to make a final inspection.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of
certificates of zoning compliance and a copy shall be furnished upon request
to any person. Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be
a violation of this chapter and punishable under § 152.999.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.109  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   General. The City Council may, from time to time, supplement,
change, or generally revise the boundaries or regulations contained in this
chapter by amendment. A proposal for the amendment may be initiated by the
City Council, Planning Commission, or upon application of the owner of the
property affected. A filing fee established by the City Council is required
for each application to be considered by the Planning Commission.



   (B)   Submission to Planning Commission.



      (1)   All proposed amendments shall first be submitted to the
Planning Commission for recommendation and report. Upon the development of
tentative recommendation, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
thereon and shall cause an accurate written summary to be made of
proceedings, and shall give notice in like manner as that required for the
original zoning recommendations. The notice shall fix the time and place for
the hearing and contain a statement regarding the proposed changes in
regulations or restrictions or in the boundary of any district.



      (2)   If the proposed amendment is not a general revision of
an existing provision of this chapter, and will affect specific property, it
shall be designated by legal description and general street location, and in
addition to the publication notice, written notice of the proposed amendment
shall be mailed to all owners of lands located within 300 feet of the area
proposed to be altered and an opportunity granted to interested parties to be
heard.



   (C)   Amendment consideration and adoption.



      (1)   The procedure for the consideration and adoption of any
proposed amendments shall be in like manner as that required for the
consideration and adoption of the chapter except herein before or herein
after modified. For action on zoning amendments, a quorum of the Planning
Commission is more than one-half of all the members. A vote either for or
against an amendment by a majority of all the Planning Commission members
present constitutes a recommendation of the Commission; whereas a vote either
for or against an amendment by less than a majority of the Planning
Commission present constitutes a failure to recommend.



      (2)   When the Planning Commission submits a recommendation of
approval or disapproval of the amendment, the City Council, if it approves
the recommendation, may either adopt the recommendation by chapter or take no
further action thereof as appropriate. In the event the Planning Commission
submits a failure to recommend, the City Council may take the action as it
deems appropriate. Upon receipt of a recommendation of the Planning
Commission which the City Council disapproves, the City Council shall return
the recommendation to the Planning Commission with a statement specifying the
basis for disapproval, and the recommendation shall be considered in like
manner as that required for the original recommendation returned to the
Planning Commission. If the amendment shall affect the boundaries of any
district, the chapter shall define the change or the boundary as amended,
shall order the Official Zoning Map to be changed to reflect the amendment,
and shall amend the section of the chapter incorporating the same and
reincorporate the Map as amended.



   (D)   Protest. Regardless of whether or not the Planning Commission
approves or disapproves a proposed zoning amendment or fails to recommend, if
a protest against the amendment be filed in the office of the City Clerk
within 14 days after the date of the conclusion of the public hearing
pursuant to the publication notice, duly signed and acknowledged by the
owners of 20% or more of any real property proposed to be rezoned, or by the
owners of 20% of the total area excepting public streets and ways, located
within or outside the corporate limits of the city and located within 300
feet of boundaries of the property proposed to be rezoned, the ordinance
adopting the amendment shall not be passed except by at least three-fourths
vote of all members of the City Council.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.110  COMPLAINT OF VIOLATION.



   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint. The complaint stating
fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. He or she shall record properly the complaint, immediately
investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   The owner or agent of a building or premises in or
upon which a violation of any provisions of this chapter has been committed
or shall exist or lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises
in or upon which the violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a Class V
misdemeanor. Each and every day that the violation continues after
notification shall constitute a separate offense.



      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from
taking the other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.



   (B)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained; or any building,
structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter the appropriate
authorities of the city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings
to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate the
violation; to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land; or
to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the
premises.



(Ord. 905, passed 1-20-2015)



APPENDIX A:  ILLUSTRATIONS



   BUILDING HEIGHT







   H = HEIGHT OF BUILDING



   G = GRADE



   REQUIRED YARDS — ILLUSTRATED











   BUILDINGS — PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY







   SIGHT TRIANGLE



   MINIMUM STANDARD







(Ord. 905, passed 1- 20-2015)



CHAPTER 153:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



Section



   153.01   Statutory authorization, findings of fact and purposes



   153.02   General provisions



   153.03   Development permit



   153.04   Establishment of zoning districts



   153.05   Standards for floodplain development



   153.06   Flood Fringe Overlay District (Including AO and AH Zones)



   153.07   Floodway Overlay District



   153.08   Variance procedures



   153.09   Nonconforming use



   153.10   Amendments



   153.11   Definitions



 



   153.99   Penalty



§ 153.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSES.



   (A)   Statutory authorization.  The Legislature of the State of
Nebraska has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to
adopt zoning regulations designed to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare. The Legislature, in Neb. RS 31-1001 to 31-1022 (as amended),
has further assigned the responsibility to adopt, administer, and enforce
floodplain management regulations to the county, city or village with zoning
jurisdiction over the flood-prone area. Therefore, the Mayor and City Council
of the City of Gothenburg, Nebraska, ordains as follows.



   (B)   Findings of fact. 



      (1)   Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation.  The
flood hazard areas of Gothenburg, Nebraska, are subject to inundation which
results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.



      (2)   General causes of the flood losses.  These flood losses
are caused by:



         (a)   The cumulative effect of obstructions in
floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities;



         (b)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses
vulnerable to floods or hazardous to others, which are inadequately elevated
or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



      (3)   Methods used to analyze flood hazards.  This chapter
uses a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a
series of interrelated steps.



         (a)   Selection of a regulatory flood which is based
upon engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood
factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the
depth of inundation. The base flood is selected for this chapter. It is
representative of large floods which are reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this chapter.
It is in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a 1%
chance of occurrence in any 1 year, as delineated on the Federal Insurance
Administration's Flood Insurance Study, and illustrative materials dated May
3, 2011 as amended.



         (b)   Calculation of water surface profiles based on a
hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and
overbank areas to convey the base flood.



         (c)   Computation of the floodway required to convey
this flood without increasing flood heights more than 1 foot at any point.



         (d)   Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within
which no obstruction is permitted which would cause any water surface
increase along the floodway profile.



         (e)   Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area
outside the floodway encroachment lines, but which still is subject to
inundation by the base flood.



   (C)   Statement of purpose.  It is the purpose of this chapter to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those
losses described in division (B)(1) above by applying the provisions of this
chapter to:



      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood
heights or velocities.



      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public
facilities which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the
time of initial construction.



      (3)   Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited
for intended purposes because of flood hazard.



      (4)   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property
owners in the community to purchase flood insurance in the National Flood
Insurance Program.



(Ord. 860, passed 3-1-2011)



§ 153.02  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Lands to which chapter applies.  This chapter shall apply to
all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Gothenburg identified on the
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) dated May 3, 2011 as numbered and unnumbered
A Zones (including AE, AO and AH Zones) and within the Zoning Districts FW
and FF established in § 153.04. In all areas covered by this chapter no
development shall be permitted except upon the issuance of a floodplain
permit to develop, granted by the City of Gothenburg or its duly designated
representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the City of
Gothenburg or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the
promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants
of the community and where specifically noted in §§ 153.05, 153.06 and
153.07.



   (B)   The Enforcement Officer.  The Zoning Administrator of the
community is hereby designated as the community's duly designated Enforcement
Officer under this chapter.



   (C)   Rules for interpretation of district boundaries.  The
boundaries of the Floodway and Flood Fringe Overlay Districts shall be
determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map or on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map or Floodway Map. Where interpretation is needed to the
exact location of the boundaries of the districts as shown on the official
zoning map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the Enforcement Officer shall
make the necessary interpretation. In such cases where the interpretation is
contested, the Board of Adjustment will resolve the dispute. The regulatory
flood elevation for the point in question shall be the governing factor in
locating the district boundary on the land. The person contesting the
location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
present his or her case to the Board of Adjustment and to submit his or her
own technical evidence, if he or she so desires.



   (D)   Compliance.  Within identified special flood hazard areas of
this community, no development shall be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.



   (E)   Abrogation and greater restrictions.  It is not intended by
this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existent easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall prevail. All other
ordinances inconsistent with this  chapter are hereby repealed to the extent
of the inconsistency only.



   (F)   Interpretation.  In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall
be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed
a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.



   (G)   Warning and disclaimer of liability.  The degree of flood
protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger
floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by
man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted
by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside Floodway and Flood
Fringe District boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will
be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City of Gothenburg or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this chapter
or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.



   (H)   Severability.  If any section, clause, provision or portion
of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected
thereby.



   (I)   Appeal.  Where a request for a permit to develop or a
variance is denied by the Zoning Administrator, the applicant may apply for
such permit or variance directly to the Board of Adjustment.



(Ord. 860, passed 3-1-2011)



§ 153.03  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   Permit required.  No person, firm or corporation shall
initiate any floodplain development or substantial improvement or cause the
same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for development as
defined in § 153.11.



   (B)   Administration.



      (1)   The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Duties of the Zoning Administrator shall include, but
not be limited to:



         (a)   Review all development permit applications to
assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.



         (b)   Review applications for proposed development to
assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal,
state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.



         (c)   Review all subdivision proposals and other
proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding.



         (d)   Notify adjacent communities and the Nebraska
Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.



         (e)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying
capacity is not diminished.



         (f)   Verify, record and maintain record of the actual
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved structures in special flood
hazard areas.



         (g)   Verify, record and maintain record of the actual
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which new or substantially
improved structures have been floodproofed.



         (h)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
structure the Zoning Administrator shall be presented certification from a
registered professional engineer or architect.



   (C)   Application for permit.  To obtain a floodplain development
permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form
furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall:



      (1)   Identify and describe the development to be covered by
the floodplain development permit.



      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed development is
to be done by lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar
description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed
building or development.



      (3)   Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed
development is intended.



      (4)   Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed
construction.



      (5)   Be signed by the permittee or his or her authorized
agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.



      (6)   Give such other information as reasonably may be
required by the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 860, passed 3-1-2011)



§ 153.04  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.



   Along watercourses where a floodway has been established, the mapped
floodplain areas are hereby divided into the 2 following districts: a
Floodway Overlay District (FW) and a Flood Fringe Overlay District (FF) as
identified in the Flood Insurance Study [and accompanying map(s)]. Within
these districts all uses not meeting the standards of this chapter and those
standards of the underlying zoning district shall be prohibited.



(Ord. 860, passed 3-1-2011)



§ 153.05  STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   No permit for development shall be granted for new
construction, substantial improvements and other development(s) including the
placement of manufactured homes within all numbered and unnumbered A zones
(including AE, AO, and AH zones) unless the conditions of this section are
satisfied.



   (B)   All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the FIRM are
subject to inundation of the base flood; however, the water surface elevation
was not provided. The unnumbered A zones shall be subject to all development
provisions of § 153.06.  If Flood Insurance Study data is not available,
the community shall utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data
currently available from federal, state or other sources.



   (C)   Until a floodway has been designated, no development or
substantial improvement may be permitted within special flood hazard areas
unless the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed development or
substantial improvement, when combined with all other existing and reasonably
anticipated developments or substantial improvements, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 1 foot at any location as
shown on the Flood Insurance Study.



   (D)   New construction, subdivision proposals, substantial
improvements, prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes and
other developments shall require:



      (1)   Design or anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy.



      (2)   New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary
sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters,
and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or
contamination.



      (3)   Construction with materials resistant to flood damage,
utilizing methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.



      (4)   All utility and sanitary facilities be elevated or
floodproofed up to the regulatory flood protection elevation.



   (E)   Storage of material and equipment.



      (1)   The storage or processing of materials that are in time
of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human,
animal or plant life is prohibited.



      (2)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if
not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent
flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available
after flood warning.



   (F)   Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, be required to assure that:



      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;



      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage;



      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure
to flood hazards; and



      (4)   Proposals for development (including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivision) of 5 acres or 50 lots, whichever is
lesser, include within such proposals the base flood elevation.



(Ord. 860, passed 3-1-2011)



§ 153.06  FLOOD FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT (INCLUDING AO AND AH ZONES).



   (A)   Permitted uses.  Any use permitted in § 153.07 shall be
permitted in the Flood Fringe Overlay District. No use shall be permitted in
the district unless the standards of § 153.05 are met.



   (B)   Standards for the Flood Fringe Overlay District.



      (1)   Require new construction or substantial improvements of
residential structures to have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above 1 foot above the base flood elevation.



      (2)   Require new construction or substantial improvements of
non-residential structures to have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above 1 foot above the base flood elevation or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to be floodproofed so that below
that level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
standards of this subdivision are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Zoning Administrator as set forth in § 153.03(B)(2)(g).



      (3)   Require for all new construction and substantial
improvements that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: a minimum of 2 openings
having a total net area of not less than 1 square inch for every square foot
of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all
openings shall be not higher than 1 foot above grade. Openings may be
equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.



      (4)   Appurtenant structures used exclusively for storage of
motor vehicles, and storage of other items readily removable in the event of
a flood warning may have their lowest floor below 1 foot above the base flood
elevation provided the structure meets the requirements as set forth in
division (B)(3) above and provided that no utilities are installed in the
structure except elevated or floodproofed electrical fixtures. If the
structure is converted to another use, it must be brought into full
compliance with the minimum standards governing such use.



      (5)   Within AH zones adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around
and away from proposed structures.



      (6)   Manufactured homes.



         (a)   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist
floatation, collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be
anchored in accordance with local building codes or FEMA guidelines. In the
event that over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following
specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:



            1.   Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the
4 corners of the manufactured home, with 2 additional ties per side at
intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long
requiring 1 additional tie per side;



            2.   Frame ties be provided at each corner of the
home with 5 additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured
homes less than 50 feet long requiring 4 additional ties per side;



            3.   All components of the anchoring system be
capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and



            4.   Any additions to the manufactured home be
similarly anchored.



         (b)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed
or substantially improved within special flood hazard areas on the
community's FIRM on sites:



            1.   Outside of a manufactured home park or
subdivision;



            2.   In a new manufactured home park or
subdivision;



            3.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision; or



            4.   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as
the result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above 1 foot above the base
flood elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system in accordance with the provisions of division (B)(6)(a)
above.



         (c)   Require that manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision within special flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM that
are not subject to the provisions of division (B)(6)(b) above be elevated so
that either:



            1.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at or above 1 foot above the base flood elevation; or



            2.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade; and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the
provisions of division (B)(6)(a) above.



      (7)   Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the special
flood hazard areas on the community's official map shall either:



         (a)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;



         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or



         (c)   Meet the permit requirements and the elevation and
anchoring requirements for manufactured homes of this chapter. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security
devices, and has no permanently attached additions.



      (8)   Located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in § 153.02(A) are areas designated as AO Zones. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply
within AO Zones:



         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements
of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as 1 foot above
the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet
if no depth number is specified).



         (b)   All new construction and substantial improvements
of non-residential structures shall:



            1.   Have the lowest floor elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as 1 foot above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number
is specified); or



            2.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any
space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
153.03(B)(2)(g).



         (c)   Adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.



(Ord.860, passed 3-1-2011)



§ 153.07  FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  Only uses having a low flood-damage
potential and not obstructing flood flows shall be permitted within the
Floodway District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance. The following are recommended uses for the Floodway District:



      (1)   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture,
nurseries, forestry;



      (2)   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and
play areas;



      (3)   Non-residential areas such as loading areas, parking and
airport landing strips;



      (4)   Public and private recreational uses such as golf
courses, archery ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves.



   (B)   Standards for the Floodway Overlay District. New structures
for human habitation are prohibited. All encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other development must be
prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer or
architect is provided demonstrating that the development shall not result in
any increase in water surface elevations along the floodway profile during
occurrence of the base flood discharge. These uses are subject to the
standards of §§ 153.05 and 153.06.  In Zone A unnumbered, obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any flood elevation and floodway data available
through federal, state or other sources or § 153.05(F)(4) in meeting the
standards of this section.



(Ord. 860, passed 3-1-2011)



§ 153.08  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment as established by the City of
Gothenburg shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.



   (C)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as
provided in Neb. RS 19-912.



   (D)   In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment
shall consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:



      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable;



      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



         (a)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and



         (b)   The costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems,
and streets and bridges.



   (E)   Conditions for variances.



      (1)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction
and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of ½ acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items set forth in
divisions (E)(2) through (6) below have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the ½ acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.



      (2)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation
of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.



      (3)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels along the floodway profile during
the base flood discharge would result.



      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



      (6)   This application shall be given a written notice over
the signature of a community official that:



         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and



         (b)   Such construction below the base flood level
increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained
with the record of all variance actions as required by this chapter.



(Ord. 860, passed 3-1-2011)



§ 153.09  NONCONFORMING USE.



   (A)   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was
lawful before the passage or amendment of the ordinance, but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to
the following conditions:



      (1)   If such use is discontinued for 24 consecutive months,
any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. The
Utility Department shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of
instances of nonconforming uses where utility services have been discontinued
for a period of 24 months.



      (2)   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances
shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.



   (B)   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more
than 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred
except that if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety
codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued
designation.



(Ord. 860, passed 3-1-2011)



§ 153.10  AMENDMENTS.



   The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this chapter
may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to
reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of
1973, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a
public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
of Gothenburg. At least 10 days shall elapse between the date of this
publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be
provided to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



The regulations of this chapter are in compliance with the National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations as published in Title 44 of the Code of Federal
Regulations and the 1983 Nebraska Flood Plain Management Act.



(Ord. 860, passed 3-1-2011)



§ 153.11  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Zoning Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE.  A structure on the same parcel of property as
the principal structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  A designated AO or AH zone on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.  (For the purposes of determining rates)
structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective
date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM'S effective before that
date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before
the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;



      (2)   The usual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  That area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway,
that on the average is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that
has a 1% chance of flood occurrence in any 1 year).



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the flood hazard boundaries
and the zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source (see FLOODING).



   FLOODWAY or REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than 1 foot.



   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate
for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater
than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions,
such as wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into 2 or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
the floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.



   OVERLAY DISTRICT.  A district in which additional requirements act in
conjunction with the underlying zoning district(s). The original zoning
district designation does not change.



   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND.  At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure is above ground.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. [For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)]
includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that
is principally above ground.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before start of construction
of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.



   VARIANCES. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   VIOLATION. A failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.



(Ord. 860, passed 3-1-2011)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special
exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not more than $200, and in addition, shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Gothenburg
or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action is as
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. 860, passed 3-1-2011)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES




[Reserved]




PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Nebraska Revised Statutes





References to Prior Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO NEBRASKA REVISED STATUTES



 

Neb. RS Cite
 
Code Section




3-303
 
152.030


3-320 et seq.
 
152.030


3-501 through 3-514
 
31.21


7-2202
 
30.033


9-701
 
131.08


9-1305
 
52.002


10-101 through 10-143
 
32.12


10-606 through 10-612
 
32.12


11-101
 
30.002


11-104
 
30.001


11-105
 
30.001


11-109
 
30.001


11-110
 
30.001


11-111
 
30.001


11-112
 
30.001


11-113
 
30.001


11-114
 
30.001


11-115
 
30.001


11-116
 
30.001


11-117
 
30.001


11-118
 
30.001


Chapter 11, Article 1
 
31.56


12-301
 
95.01


12-401 through 12-403
 
31.19


12-403
 
95.02


13-310
 
92.02


13-312
 
92.02


13-314
 
92.02


13-403
 
30.135


13-503
 
32.01


13-504
 
32.28


13-505
 
32.28


13-506
 
32.29


13-507
 
32.29


13-508
 
32.30


13-509
 
32.30


13-509.01
 
32.27


13-509.02
 
32.27


13-510
 
32.33


13-511
 
32.34


13-518 to 13-522
 
32.29, 32.30


13-518 through 13-522
 
32.34


13-606
 
32.02


13-609
 
32.14


13-903
 
32.05


13-1802
 
31.57


13-2020
 
51.02—51.04, 51.06—51.08


13-2023
 
51.06, 51.07


13-2026
 
51.06, 51.07


13-2027
 
51.05


16-247
 
10.15


16-691.01
 
32.11


16-714 through 16-716
 
32.10


17-102
 
30.063, 30.107, 30.108


17-103
 
30.107


17-104
 
30.016, 30.063, 30.107


17-106
 
30.067


17-107
 
30.030, 30.032, 30.036, 30.041, 30.043, 30.044


17-108.02
 
30.015, 30.030, 30.150


17-110
 
30.015


17-111
 
30.015


17-112
 
30.015


17-113
 
30.015


17-114
 
30.015


17-117
 
30.015


17-118
 
30.036


17-119
 
30.041


17-121
 
30.036, 31.17, 93.01


17-124
 
30.037


17-129
 
131.02


17-135
 
111.02


17-147
 
30.038, 31.35


17-148
 
30.016


17-149
 
53.002, 53.015


17-150
 
30.039


17-405
 
30.039


17-415 through 17-426
 
151.130


17-426
 
151.999


17-502
 
30.003


17-503
 
30.132


17-503.01
 
30.132


17-505
 
10.99, 30.016, 30.038, 30.085


17-511
 
92.23


17-522
 
92.02, 92.04


17-523
 
92.04


17-524
 
92.02, 92.23


17-525
 
33.04, 110.02, 110.03, 110.99


17-526
 
90.001, 90.015—90.018, 90.035, 90.036, 90.042, 90.043, 90.056, 90.057


17-531
 
52.002


17-534
 
52.002


17-536
 
52.076


17-537
 
52.015, 52.016, 52.018, 52.019, 52.031


17-538
 
50.04


17-539
 
52.030


17-540
 
32.11, 52.060


17-542
 
50.02, 52.017, 52.061


17-547
 
90.002, 90.030


17-548
 
90.038


17-549
 
91.35


17-550
 
91.23


17-555
 
93.17


17-556
 
91.35, 131.01, 131.02


17-557
 
72.025, 92.01


17-557.01
 
30.133


17-558
 
92.16


17-559
 
92.16


17-567
 
30.131, 92.17, 92.24


17-568
 
30.039, 151.001


17-568.01
 
30.039, 32.03


17-568.02
 
32.03


17-602
 
30.116


17-604
 
30.001, 30.030, 30.032, 30.041, 30.043, 30.044


17-605
 
30.032


17-606
 
30.033


17-607
 
32.09


17-608
 
32.11


17-609
 
32.11


17-610
 
30.040


17-612
 
30.150


17-613
 
30.088—30.090, 32.03


17-614
 
30.090


17-616
 
30.060


17-701
 
32.25


17-702
 
32.08, 33.01


17-703
 
32.06


17-706
 
32.31


17-708
 
32.04


17-710
 
32.07


17-714
 
32.05


17-715
 
32.05


17-718
 
31.35


17-720
 
32.10


17-803
 
32.11


17-901
 
53.016


17-902
 
53.016, 54.02—54.05, 54.09


17-902 through 17-904
 
54.01


17-906
 
54.01


17-909
 
54.01


17-919
 
30.039


17-925.01
 
50.04, 53.002, 53.105


17-941
 
95.03


17-948
 
94.15


17-948 through 17-952
 
94.01


17-949
 
94.16—94.18


17-951
 
94.15


17-952
 
94.15


17-953
 
30.135, 31.35


17-954
 
30.135


17-1001
 
150.001, 150.002, 150.004—150.006


17-1002
 
151.130


17-1003
 
151.130


18-132
 
91.20, 150.001, 150.002, 150.004—150.006


18-412.01
 
32.03


18-503
 
50.04, 53.016


18-1001 to 18-1006
 
30.132


18-1208
 
33.04


18-1214
 
33.02


18-1216
 
32.06


18-1720
 
10.99, 51.09, 90.999, 92.25, 92.99, 93.15—93.17, 93.19, 93.20, 93.99,
113.99, 130.99, 150.095—150.098, 150.100, 150.999


18-1722
 
10.99, 90.999, 92.99, 93.99, 113.99, 130.99, 150.095—150.098, 150.100,
150.999


18-1722.01
 
150.095—150.098, 150.100


18-1729
 
72.067


18-1736
 
72.046, 72.045


18-1737
 
72.046, 72.047, 72.052


18-1738
 
72.045, 72.048


18-1738.01
 
72.048


18-1738.02
 
72.048


18-1739
 
72.046, 72.047, 72.049


18-1740
 
72.050


18-1741
 
72.051


18-1741.01
 
72.045, 72.053


18-1741.04
 
72.053


18-1741.06
 
72.053


18-1743
 
150.065


18-1748
 
53.080


18-1755
 
30.135


18-1756
 
32.03


18-1757
 
70.10


18-1801 through 18-1805
 
32.12


18-2101.01
 
31.22


18-2101 through 18-2154
 
31.22


18-2438
 
30.062


18-2803
 
32.35


18-2804
 
32.02, 32.35


18-2805
 
32.35


18-2806
 
32.35


18-2807
 
32.35


18-2808
 
32.35


19-613
 
30.107


19-901
 
31.24, 150.002


19-901 et seq.
 
31.16, 31.24


19-901 to 19-914
 
31.24


19-901 to 19-915
 
31.24


19-902
 
91.20, 150.001, 150.004—150.006


19-903
 
31.16


19-903 to 19-904.01
 
31.24


19-904
 
152.076


19-905
 
152.076


19-907 - 19-912.01
 
152.030


19-907
 
31.24


19-908
 
31.16, 31.24


19-909
 
31.24


19-910
 
31.24, 152.092


19-912
 
31.24, 152.094, 153.08


19-916
 
31.16


19-919
 
151.130


19-922
 
91.20, 150.001, 150.002, 150.004—150.006


19-924 through 19-933
 
31.16


19-926
 
31.16


19-927
 
31.16


19-928
 
31.16


19-929
 
31.16


19-929(3)
 
31.24


19-930 to 19-933
 
31.16


19-1101
 
30.033


19-1102
 
30.032


19-1103
 
30.033


19-1104
 
30.032


19-1301
 
32.08


19-1302
 
32.08


19-1303
 
32.08


19-1304
 
32.08


19-1404
 
54.03—54.06, 54.09—54.11


19-2301
 
72.010


19-2428 through 19-2431
 
92.23


19-2701
 
52.015, 53.015, 54.02


19-2902
 
32.02


19-2903
 
32.02


19-2904
 
32.02


19-2905
 
32.02


19-2906 through 19-2909
 
32.02


19-3001 to 19-3052
 
30.105


Chapter 19, Article 9, § 19-901
 
152.002


23-186
 
33.02


25-505.01
 
30.119


25-1801
 
50.99


28-318
 
131.07


28-431
 
96.01, 96.05


28-512
 
54.13, 95.05


28-519
 
72.010, 91.04


28-801
 
131.07


28-830
 
131.07


28-831
 
131.07


28-833
 
131.08


28-906
 
90.033


28-907
 
91.08


28-908
 
91.02, 91.03, 91.06


28-1008
 
90.001


28-1009
 
90.999


28-1009.02
 
90.071


28-1009.03
 
90.071


28-1012
 
90.070


28-1013.01
 
90.071


28-1013.02
 
90.071


28-1101 through 28-1104
 
131.08


28-1107 through 28-1113
 
131.08


28-1117
 
131.08


28-1229
 
91.35


28-1233
 
91.35


28-1233(3)
 
91.35


28-1321
 
92.25, 93.16


28-1418
 
131.05


28-1419
 
131.05


28-1420 through 28-1429
 
110.04


28-1420
 
110.04


28-1421
 
110.04


28-1423
 
110.04


28-1424
 
110.04


28-1425
 
110.04


28-1426
 
110.04


28-1427
 
131.05


28-1428
 
110.04


28-1429
 
110.04


28-1465
 
31.57


28-1466
 
31.57


28-1472
 
31.57


28-1601
 
131.08


Chapter 28, Article 3
 
111.22


Chapter 28, Article 4
 
111.22


Chapter 28, Article 7
 
111.22


Chapter 28, Article 8
 
111.22


Chapter 28, Article 10
 
111.22


Chapter 28, Article 11
 
111.22


Chapter 28, Article 12
 
111.22


29-215
 
31.57


29-422
 
70.10


29-422 to 29-429
 
90.070


29-424
 
70.10


29-426
 
72.068


29-429
 
70.10


29-4001 - 29-4019
 
131.06


29-4003
 
131.06


31-1001 - 31-1022
 
153.01


32-101 to 32-1551
 
30.105, 30.106


32-109
 
30.015


32-110
 
30.116


32-115
 
30.116


32-404(1)
 
30.105


32-404(2)
 
30.106


32-533
 
30.107


32-553
 
30.107


32-554
 
30.107


32-556
 
30.105, 30.106


32-557
 
30.107, 30.109


32-558
 
30.111, 30.117


32-559
 
30.113


32-560
 
30.017


32-561
 
30.017


32-562
 
30.119


32-567 to 32-570
 
30.119


32-568
 
30.017


32-569
 
30.017


32-603
 
30.015


32-604
 
30.015


32-606
 
30.120


32-607
 
30.120


32-608
 
30.114, 30.115


32-615
 
30.115


32-616
 
30.115


32-617
 
30.115


32-618
 
30.115


32-621
 
30.115


32-622
 
30.120


32-625
 
30.120


32-625(2)
 
30.115


32-627
 
30.115, 30.120


32-628
 
30.115


32-629
 
30.115, 30.119


32-630
 
30.115, 30.119


32-710
 
30.115


32-802
 
30.112


32-811
 
30.110


32-1033
 
30.111, 30.117


32-1301
 
30.119


32-1302
 
30.119


32-1303
 
30.119


32-1304
 
30.119


32-1305
 
30.119


32-1306
 
30.119


32-1307
 
30.119


32-1308
 
30.119


32-1309
 
30.119


33-139.01
 
31.37


35-101 through 35-103
 
31.37


35-102
 
30.038


35-106
 
33.04


35-108
 
30.038, 31.37


35-520
 
91.09


37-1254.01
 
31.57


37-1254.02
 
31.57


39-662
 
Ch. 73, Sch. II


39-663
 
Ch. 73, Sch. II


39-705
 
92.25


43-248
 
131.07


45-104.01
 
92.23


45-601 through 45-622
 
32.13


45-623
 
32.13


48-1503
 
32.03


49-801(16)
 
10.05


49-1408
 
30.151


49-1425
 
30.151


49-1499.04
 
30.151


49-14,102
 
30.151


49-14,103.01
 
30.151


49-14,103.02
 
30.151


49-14,103.03
 
30.151


49-14,103.05
 
30.151


49-14,103.06
 
30.151


51-201
 
94.30


51-201 to 51-219
 
31.15


51-202
 
31.15, 94.30


51-204
 
31.15


51-205
 
94.32


51-207
 
94.31


51-209
 
94.35


51-211
 
94.30, 94.33, 94.34


51-214
 
94.32


51-215
 
32.08


51-216
 
32.08


53-103.01 - 53.103.42
 
111.01


53-116.01
 
111.24


53-118
 
111.47


53-124
 
111.23, 111.26


53-124.01
 
111.23


53-124.12
 
111.26


53-124.15
 
111.45


53-125
 
111.22


53-131
 
111.23


53-132
 
33.04, 111.23


53-133
 
111.23, 111.45


53-134
 
111.23


53-134.03
 
111.23, 111.47, 111.52


53-134.04
 
111.30


53-135
 
111.25


53-135.01
 
111.23, 111.25


53-148
 
111.26


53-148
 
111.26


53-167.02
 
111.53


53-167.03
 
111.53


53-168.06
 
111.20


53-175
 
111.21


53-177
 
111.45


53-177.01
 
111.45


53-178
 
111.46


53-179
 
111.48


53-180
 
111.02


53-183
 
111.49


53-184
 
111.51


53-186
 
111.03


53-186(2)
 
111.03


53-186.01
 
111.03


53-194.03
 
111.21


53-1,101
 
111.28


53-1,102
 
111.29


53-1,115
 
111.30


53-1,121
 
111.04


54-601
 
90.037


54-602
 
90.037


54-603
 
90.015—90.017


54-605
 
90.032


54-606
 
90.001


Chapter 60, Article 6
 
70.01


60-113
 
72.047


60-169
 
96.01


60-301
 
33.02


60-323
 
72.009


60-376
 
96.01, 96.08


60-606 through 60-676
 
70.01


60-680
 
70.03, 70.05—70.09, 71.01, 72.001—72.004, 72.007, 72.008, 72.010, 72.065,
72.066, Ch. 73, Sch. I


60-681
 
70.02, 70.12


60-683
 
70.09


60-1901
 
96.01


60-1902
 
96.01


60-1903
 
96.01


60-1903.01
 
96.01, 96.05


60-1904
 
96.01


60-1905
 
96.01, 96.06


60-1906
 
96.01, 96.07


60-1907
 
96.01


60-1908
 
96.01


60-1909
 
96.01, 96.07


60-1911
 
96.01


60-2401
 
72.068


60-2402
 
72.068


60-3,113
 
72.046


60-4,163
 
31.57


60-4,164
 
31.57


60-6,119 through 60-6,121
 
70.06


60-6,165
 
72.065


60-6,166
 
72.005, 72.006, 91.05


60-6,167
 
72.001, 72.007


60-6,183
 
91.08


60-6,184
 
91.07


60-6,196
 
31.57


60-6,197
 
31.57


60-6,211.01
 
31.57


60-6,211.02
 
31.57


60-6,211.08
 
111.03


60-6,250
 
92.20


60-6,288 through 60-6,294
 
150.080


60-6,294
 
92.20


60-6,296
 
150.081


60-6,315
 
71.01


60-6,317
 
71.01


60-6,318
 
71.01


60-6,355
 
70.11


66-489
 
33.04


66-489.02
 
33.04


66-4,140
 
33.04


66-4,145
 
33.04


66-4,146
 
33.04


70-624.04
 
30.151


70-1001.01
 
152.030


70-1601 et seq.
 
50.03


70-2001 through 70-2005
 
152.018 - 152.027, 152.029


71-605
 
95.04


71-1557
 
152.003


71-1572 through 71-1580
 
31.20


71-1908-1918
 
152.003


71-4401
 
90.001


71-4406
 
90.055


71-4408
 
90.038


71-4412
 
90.015


71-4603
 
96.01


73-101 et seq.
 
32.03


77-1702
 
32.14


77-1725
 
150.081, 150.100


77-2201
 
30.033


77-2209
 
30.033


77-2210
 
30.033


77-2337
 
32.08


77-2341
 
32.11


77-2362
 
32.09


77-2363
 
32.09


77-2364
 
32.09


77-2365.01
 
32.09, 32.10


77-2366
 
32.09, 32.10


77-2386
 
32.09


77-2602
 
33.04


77-2704.24
 
33.04


77-2701 through 77-27,135.01
 
33.03


77-27,142 through 77-27,148
 
33.03


77-4008
 
33.04


81-145 through 81-162
 
32.03


81-201
 
90.001


81-502
 
91.20


81-506
 
30.038, 31.42


81-512
 
30.038, 31.39


81-520.01
 
91.24


81-829.65
 
31.57


81-1444
 
31.56


81-2005
 
70.09


84-712
 
30.032


84-712 et seq.
 
10.16


84-1201 through 84-1220
 
30.032


84-1407 to 84-1414
 
30.057


84-1408
 
30.056


84-1408 to 84-1414
 
30.062


84-1409
 
30.056


84-1409(1)
 
30.055


84-1409(2)
 
30.055


84-1410
 
30.057


84-1411
 
30.056, 30.058, 30.061


84-1412
 
30.059, 30.062


84-1413
 
30.056, 30.059, 30.060


86-704
 
33.04




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code Section
 
2009 Code Section




1-101
 
30.015


1-102
 
30.016


1-103
 
30.016


1-104
 
30.016


1-105
 
30.017


1-106
 
30.017


1-201
 
30.030


1-202
 
30.030


1-203
 
30.031


1-204
 
30.032


1-205
 
30.032


1-206
 
30.033


1-209
 
30.035


1-210
 
30.036


1-211
 
30.037


1-212
 
30.038


1-213
 
30.039


1-214
 
30.039


1-215
 
30.040


1-216
 
30.041


1-217
 
30.042


1-218
 
30.043


1-219
 
30.044


1-220
 
30.034


1-301
 
30.001


1-302
 
30.002


1-401
 
30.003


1-501
 
30.055


1-502
 
30.055


1-503
 
30.056


1-504
 
30.057


1-505
 
30.058


1-506
 
30.059


1-507
 
30.060


1-508
 
30.061


1-509
 
30.062


1-510
 
30.065


1-511
 
30.063


1-512
 
30.064


1-513
 
30.066


1-514
 
30.067


1-515
 
30.068


1-516
 
30.069


1-517
 
30.070


1-518
 
30.070


1-519
 
30.071


1-520
 
30.071


1-521
 
30.072


1-522
 
30.072


1-523
 
30.072


1-524
 
30.072


1-525
 
30.072


1-526
 
30.072


1-527
 
30.072


1-601
 
30.085


1-602
 
30.086


1-603
 
30.087


1-604
 
30.088


1-605
 
30.089


1-606
 
30.089


1-607
 
30.090


1-608
 
30.090


1-701
 
30.105


1-702
 
30.106


1-703
 
30.107


1-704
 
30.108


1-705
 
30.109


1-706
 
30.110


1-707
 
30.111


1-708
 
30.112


1-709
 
30.113


1-710
 
30.114


1-711
 
30.115


1-712
 
30.116


1-713
 
30.117


1-714
 
30.118


1-715
 
30.119


1-812
 
33.01


1-824
 
33.02


1-825
 
33.03


1-826
 
33.03


1-901
 
30.150


1-902
 
30.151


1-1001
 
30.999


2-101
 
31.01


2-201
 
31.15


2-202
 
31.16


2-204
 
31.17


2-205
 
31.18


2-206
 
31.19


2-207
 
31.20


2-208
 
31.20


2-209
 
31.20


2-210
 
31.20


2-211
 
31.21


2-212
 
31.22


2-213
 
31.23


2-301
 
31.99


3-101
 
52.002


3-102
 
52.001


3-103
 
52.015


3-104
 
52.016


3-105
 
52.017


3-106
 
52.018


3-107
 
52.060


3-108
 
52.061


3-109
 
52.019


3-110
 
52.019


3-111
 
52.075


3-112
 
52.076


3-113
 
52.030


3-114
 
52.016


3-115
 
52.031


3-116
 
52.077


3-117
 
52.032


3-118
 
52.033


3-201
 
53.002


3-202
 
53.001


3-203
 
53.015


3-204
 
53.016


3-205
 
53.016


3-206
 
53.017


3-207
 
53.017


3-208
 
53.106


3-209
 
53.105


3-210
 
53.031


3-211
 
53.031


3-212
 
53.045


3-213
 
53.030


3-214
 
53.045


3-215
 
53.046


3-216
 
53.047


3-217
 
53.048


3-218
 
53.049


3-219
 
53.049


3-220
 
53.049


3-221
 
53.060


3-222
 
53.061


3-223
 
53.062


3-224
 
53.063


3-225
 
53.064


3-226
 
53.065


3-227
 
53.067


3-228
 
53.066


3-229
 
53.066


3-230
 
53.080


3-231
 
53.081


3-232
 
53.081


3-233
 
53.082


3-234
 
53.083


3-235
 
53.084


3-236
 
53.085


3-237
 
53.086


3-238
 
53.086


3-239
 
53.087


3-240
 
53.089


3-241
 
53.090


3-242
 
53.088


3-243
 
53.088


3-244
 
53.088


3-245
 
53.999


3-301
 
54.01


3-302
 
54.03


3-303
 
54.02


3-304
 
54.03


3-305
 
54.04


3-306
 
54.05


3-307
 
54.06


3-308
 
54.07


3-309
 
54.08


3-310
 
54.09


3-311
 
54.10


3-312
 
54.11


3-313
 
54.12


3-314
 
54.13


3-315
 
54.14


3-316
 
54.15


3-317
 
54.16


3-318
 
54.18


3-319
 
54.17


3-320
 
54.19


3-321
 
54.20


3-401
 
50.02


3-402
 
50.03


3-403
 
50.05, 50.99


3-404
 
50.01


3-405
 
50.04


3-501
 
31.35


3-502
 
31.36


3-503
 
31.37


3-504
 
31.38


3-505
 
31.38


3-506
 
31.39


3-507
 
31.40


3-508
 
31.41


3-509
 
31.42


3-601
 
31.55


3-602
 
31.56


3-603
 
31.57


3-701
 
94.01


3-702
 
94.02


3-703
 
94.03


3-801
 
94.15


3-802
 
94.16


3-803
 
94.17


3-804
 
94.18


3-901
 
94.30


3-902
 
94.31


3-903
 
94.32


3-904
 
94.33


3-905
 
94.34


3-906
 
94.35


3-1001
 
95.01


3-1002
 
95.02


3-1003
 
95.03


3-1004
 
95.04


3-1005
 
95.05


3-1101
 
31.99, 52.999, 53.999, 54.99, 94.99, 95.99


4-101
 
93.01


4-102
 
93.02


4-103
 
93.03


4-201
 
51.01


4-202
 
51.02


4-203
 
51.03


4-204
 
51.04


4-205
 
51.05


4-206
 
51.06


4-207
 
51.07


4-208
 
51.08


4-209
 
51.09


4-301
 
93.15


4-302
 
93.15


4-303
 
93.19


4-304
 
93.17


4-305
 
93.20


4-401
 
52.045


4-402
 
52.046


4-403
 
52.047


4-404
 
52.048


4-405
 
52.049


4-501
 
52.999, 93.99


4-502
 
52.999, 93.99


5-101
 
70.01


5-102
 
70.01


5-201
 
70.02


5-202
 
70.03


5-203
 
70.03


5-204
 
70.04


5-205
 
70.05


5-206
 
70.06


5-301
 
70.07


5-302
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


5-303
 
Ch. 73, Sch. II


5-304
 
70.08


5-305
 
70.08


5-307
 
70.09


5-308
 
70.09


5-309
 
70.09


5-310
 
70.10


5-401
 
71.01


5-501
 
72.001


5-502
 
72.001


5-503
 
72.002


5-504
 
72.003


5-505
 
72.004


5-506
 
72.005


5-507
 
72.006


5-508
 
72.007


5-509
 
72.007


5-510
 
72.007


5-511
 
72.008


5-512
 
72.009


5-513
 
72.010


5-514
 
72.010


5-515
 
72.025


5-515.01
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


5-515.02
 
72.026


5-515.03
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


5-515.04
 
72.027


5-515.05
 
72.028


5-515.06
 
72.029


5-515.07
 
72.030


5-515.08
 
72.031


5-516
 
72.046


5-517
 
72.047


5-518
 
72.045


5-519
 
72.048


5-520
 
72.048


5-521
 
72.049


5-522
 
72.050


5-523
 
72.051, 72.999


5-524
 
72.052


5-525
 
72.053


5-526
 
72.011


5-527
 
72.065


5-528
 
72.066


5-529
 
72.067


5-530
 
72.068


5-601
 
72.999


6-101
 
90.001


6-102
 
90.001


6-103
 
90.015


6-104
 
90.016


6-105
 
90.017


6-106
 
90.001


6-107
 
90.030


6-108
 
90.032


6-110
 
90.033


6-111
 
90.034


6-112
 
90.035


6-113
 
90.036


6-114
 
90.037


6-115
 
90.018


6-118
 
90.055


6-119
 
90.056


6-120
 
90.057


6-122
 
90.042


6-123
 
90.002


6-124
 
90.043


6-201
 
90.030


6-203
 
90.070


6-204
 
90.999


6-204.01
 
90.071


6-205
 
90.044


6-206
 
90.030


6-301
 
130.03


6-302
 
130.03


6-303
 
131.01


6-304
 
131.01


6-305
 
131.02


6-306
 
93.16


6-307
 
92.25


6-308
 
93.18


6-309
 
93.35


6-310
 
130.04


6-311
 
130.04


6-312
 
130.05, 130.99


6-313
 
131.03


6-314
 
131.04


6-315
 
96.01, 96.05—96.07


6-316
 
96.08


6-317
 
130.01, 130.02


6-318
 
131.05, 131.99


6-319
 
130.07


6-320
 
131.06


6-321
 
130.06


6-401
 
90.999, 92.99, 93.99, 130.99, 131.99


6-402
 
90.999, 92.99, 93.99, 130.99, 131.99


7-101
 
91.01


7-102
 
91.03


7-103
 
91.04


7-104
 
91.02


7-105
 
91.05


7-106
 
91.06


7-107
 
91.07


7-108
 
91.08


7-109
 
91.09


7-201
 
91.20


7-201.1
 
91.21


7-202
 
91.22


7-203
 
91.23


7-204
 
91.24


7-205
 
91.24


7-301
 
91.35


7-401
 
91.99


8-101
 
30.130


8-102
 
30.131


8-103
 
30.132


8-104
 
30.133


8-105
 
30.133


8-106
 
30.134


8-107
 
30.135


8-108
 
30.135


8-109
 
30.135


8-201
 
92.01


8-203
 
92.02


8-204
 
92.03


8-205
 
92.04


8-302
 
92.15


8-303
 
92.16


8-304
 
92.17


8-305
 
92.18


8-306
 
92.19


8-307
 
92.19


8-308
 
92.21


8-309
 
92.20


8-310
 
92.22


8-311
 
92.23


8-401
 
92.24


8-501
 
30.999, 92.99


9-101
 
150.020


9-102
 
150.021


9-103
 
150.022


9-201
 
150.035


9-202
 
150.036


9-203
 
150.037


9-204
 
150.038


9-206
 
150.040


9-207
 
150.040


9-208
 
150.039


9-301
 
150.055


9-302
 
150.056


9-303
 
150.057


9-304
 
150.058


9-305
 
150.058


9-306
 
150.059


9-307
 
150.060


9-308
 
150.061


9-309
 
150.062


9-310
 
150.063


9-311
 
150.064


9-312
 
150.067


9-313
 
150.065


9-314
 
150.066


9-401
 
150.081


9-402
 
150.081


9-403
 
150.081


9-404
 
150.080


9-501
 
150.095


9-502
 
150.096


9-503
 
150.097


9-504
 
150.098


9-505
 
150.099


9-506
 
150.100


9-601
 
150.001


9-701
 
150.002


9-702
 
150.003


9-801
 
150.004


9-802
 
150.005


9-901
 
150.006


9-1101
 
150.999


9-1102
 
150.999


10-117
 
111.48


10-401
 
113.01


10-402
 
113.02


10-403
 
113.02


10-404
 
113.03


10-405
 
113.04


10-406
 
113.04


10-407
 
113.05


10-408
 
113.06


10-409
 
113.07


10-410
 
113.99


10-501
 
110.01


10-502
 
110.02


10-503
 
110.03


10-504
 
110.99


10-701
 
110.99


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Section
 
Code Section




628
 
7-11-1995
 
 
 
151.001—151.004, 151.015, 151.017, 151.030—151.032, 151.045—151.054,
151.065—151.068, 151.080—151.085, 151.100—151.102, 151.115—151.117,
151.130, 151.999


636
 
12-19-1995
 
 
 
10.05


678
 
7-15-1997
 
 
 
150.002


679
 
7-15-1997
 
 
 
150.004


682
 
8-19-1997
 
 
 
33.03


687
 
11-4-1997
 
 
 
130.99, 131.99


688
 
1-20-1998
 
 
 
94.03


721
 
4-6-1998
 
 
 
111.48


703
 
5-19-1998
 
 
 
150.060


719
 
2-16-1999
 
 
 
91.20


750
 
1-16-2001
 
 
 
72.026—72.031, Ch. 74, Sch. I


752
 
1-16-2001
 
 
 
52.032


760
 
9-18-2001
 
 
 
150.001


761
 
9-18-2001
 
 
 
150.004


763
 
9-18-2001
 
 
 
150.005


766
 
11-6-2001
 
 
 
30.108


776
 
8-20-2002
 
 
 
52.002, 52.016—52.018, 52.031, 52.033, 52.077


777
 
8-20-2002
 
 
 
150.058, 150.059


790
 
7-6-2004
 
 
 
150.060


796
 
7-19-2005
 
 
 
150.001, 150.004, 150.005


798
 
10-4-2005
 
 
 
110.01


800
 
10-18-2005
 
 
 
50.01—50.04, 50.99, 52.001, 52.002, 52.015—52.019, 52.030—52.033,
52.060, 52.061, 52.075—52.077, 53.001, 53.002, 53.015—53.017, 53.030,
53.031, 53.045—53.049, 53.060—53.067, 53.080—53.090, 53.105, 53.106,
53.999, 54.01—54.20


804
 
3-17-2006
 
 
 
31.23


814
 
3-6-2007
 
 
 
91.20


815
 
3-6-2007
 
 
 
91.21


816
 
6-19-2007
 
Art. 3
 
151.001


816
 
6-19-2007
 
110
 
151.002


816
 
6-19-2007
 
120
 
151.002


816
 
6-19-2007
 
130
 
151.003


816
 
6-19-2007
 
140
 
151.004


816
 
6-19-2007
 
150
 
151.004


816
 
6-19-2007
 
211
 
151.016


816
 
6-19-2007
 
212
 
151.016


816
 
6-19-2007
 
213
 
151.016


816
 
6-19-2007
 
214
 
151.016


816
 
6-19-2007
 
221
 
151.015


816
 
6-19-2007
 
221
 
151.017


816
 
6-19-2007
 
222
 
151.015, 151.017


816
 
6-19-2007
 
411
 
151.030


816
 
6-19-2007
 
412
 
151.030


816
 
6-19-2007
 
413
 
151.030


816
 
6-19-2007
 
421
 
151.031


816
 
6-19-2007
 
423
 
151.031


816
 
6-19-2007
 
424
 
151.031


816
 
6-19-2007
 
425
 
151.031


816
 
6-19-2007
 
426
 
151.031


816
 
6-19-2007
 
427
 
151.031


816
 
6-19-2007
 
428
 
151.031


816
 
6-19-2007
 
431
 
151.032


816
 
6-19-2007
 
432
 
151.032


816
 
6-19-2007
 
433
 
151.032


816
 
6-19-2007
 
434
 
151.032


816
 
6-19-2007
 
435
 
151.032


816
 
6-19-2007
 
510
 
151.045


816
 
6-19-2007
 
511
 
151.046


816
 
6-19-2007
 
512
 
151.047


816
 
6-19-2007
 
513
 
151.048


816
 
6-19-2007
 
520—522
 
151.049


816
 
6-19-2007
 
530
 
151.050


816
 
6-19-2007
 
531
 
151.050


816
 
6-19-2007
 
532
 
151.050


816
 
6-19-2007
 
533
 
151.050


816
 
6-19-2007
 
534
 
151.050


816
 
6-19-2007
 
535
 
151.050


816
 
6-19-2007
 
536
 
151.050


816
 
6-19-2007
 
537
 
151.050


816
 
6-19-2007
 
538
 
151.050


816
 
6-19-2007
 
541
 
151.051


816
 
6-19-2007
 
542
 
151.051


816
 
6-19-2007
 
543
 
151.051


816
 
6-19-2007
 
544
 
151.051


816
 
6-19-2007
 
545
 
151.051


816
 
6-19-2007
 
546
 
151.051


816
 
6-19-2007
 
547
 
151.051


816
 
6-19-2007
 
551
 
151.052


816
 
6-19-2007
 
552
 
151.052


816
 
6-19-2007
 
560
 
151.053


816
 
6-19-2007
 
571
 
151.054


816
 
6-19-2007
 
572
 
151.054


816
 
6-19-2007
 
610
 
151.065


816
 
6-19-2007
 
611
 
151.065


816
 
6-19-2007
 
612
 
151.065


816
 
6-19-2007
 
613
 
151.065


816
 
6-19-2007
 
614
 
151.065


816
 
6-19-2007
 
615
 
151.065


816
 
6-19-2007
 
616
 
151.065


816
 
6-19-2007
 
617
 
151.065


816
 
6-19-2007
 
618
 
151.065


816
 
6-19-2007
 
619
 
151.065


816
 
6-19-2007
 
620
 
151.065


816
 
6-19-2007
 
621
 
151.065


816
 
6-19-2007
 
622
 
151.065


816
 
6-19-2007
 
631
 
151.066


816
 
6-19-2007
 
632
 
151.066


816
 
6-19-2007
 
641
 
151.067


816
 
6-19-2007
 
642
 
151.067


816
 
6-19-2007
 
643
 
151.067


816
 
6-19-2007
 
644
 
151.067


816
 
6-19-2007
 
645
 
151.067


816
 
6-19-2007
 
646
 
151.067


816
 
6-19-2007
 
647
 
151.067


816
 
6-19-2007
 
648
 
151.067


816
 
6-19-2007
 
649
 
151.067


816
 
6-19-2007
 
650
 
151.067


816
 
6-19-2007
 
660
 
151.068


816
 
6-19-2007
 
710
 
151.080


816
 
6-19-2007
 
720
 
151.081


816
 
6-19-2007
 
730
 
151.082


816
 
6-19-2007
 
740
 
151.083


816
 
6-19-2007
 
750
 
151.084


816
 
6-19-2007
 
760
 
151.085


816
 
6-19-2007
 
810
 
151.100


816
 
6-19-2007
 
820
 
151.101


816
 
6-19-2007
 
830
 
151.102


816
 
6-19-2007
 
910
 
151.115


816
 
6-19-2007
 
920
 
151.116


816
 
6-19-2007
 
930
 
151.117


816
 
6-19-2007
 
1010
 
151.130


816
 
6-19-2007
 
1020
 
151.999


821
 
11-20-2007
 
 
 
131.06


822
 
1-8-2008
 
 
 
150.039, 150.057, 150.058, 150.067, 150.081


827
 
3-4-2008
 
 
 
150.001—150.005


828
 
3-4-2008
 
 
 
150.003


830
 
5-6-2008
 
 
 
130.99


837
 
8-5-2008
 
 
 
30.034


840
 
1-6-2009
 
 
 
52.003


845
 
5-5-2009
 
 
 
51.20—51.25


848
 
6-2-2009
 
 
 
94.04


851
 
8-4-2009
 
110
 
151.002


851
 
8-4-2009
 
120
 
151.002


851
 
8-4-2009
 
130
 
151.003


851
 
8-4-2009
 
140
 
151.004


851
 
8-4-2009
 
150
 
151.004


851
 
8-4-2009
 
211
 
151.016


851
 
8-4-2009
 
212
 
151.016


851
 
8-4-2009
 
213
 
151.016


851
 
8-4-2009
 
214
 
151.016


851
 
8-4-2009
 
221
 
151.015, 151.017


851
 
8-4-2009
 
222
 
151.015, 151.017


851
 
8-4-2009
 
Art. 3
 
151.001


851
 
8-4-2009
 
411
 
151.030


851
 
8-4-2009
 
412
 
151.030


851
 
8-4-2009
 
413
 
151.030


851
 
8-4-2009
 
421
 
151.031


851
 
8-4-2009
 
422
 
151.031


851
 
8-4-2009
 
423
 
151.031


851
 
8-4-2009
 
424
 
151.031


851
 
8-4-2009
 
425
 
151.031


851
 
8-4-2009
 
426
 
151.031


851
 
8-4-2009
 
427
 
151.031


851
 
8-4-2009
 
428
 
151.031


851
 
8-4-2009
 
431
 
151.032


851
 
8-4-2009
 
432
 
151.032


851
 
8-4-2009
 
433
 
151.032


851
 
8-4-2009
 
434
 
151.032


851
 
8-4-2009
 
435
 
151.032


851
 
8-4-2009
 
510
 
151.045


851
 
8-4-2009
 
511
 
151.046


851
 
8-4-2009
 
512
 
151.047


851
 
8-4-2009
 
513
 
151.048


851
 
8-4-2009
 
520—522
 
151.049


851
 
8-4-2009
 
530
 
151.050


851
 
8-4-2009
 
531
 
151.050


851
 
8-4-2009
 
532
 
151.050


851
 
8-4-2009
 
533
 
151.050


851
 
8-4-2009
 
534
 
151.050


851
 
8-4-2009
 
535
 
151.050


851
 
8-4-2009
 
536
 
151.050


851
 
8-4-2009
 
537
 
151.050


851
 
8-4-2009
 
538
 
151.050


851
 
8-4-2009
 
541
 
151.051


851
 
8-4-2009
 
542
 
151.051


851
 
8-4-2009
 
543
 
151.051


851
 
8-4-2009
 
544
 
151.051


851
 
8-4-2009
 
545
 
151.051


851
 
8-4-2009
 
546
 
151.051


851
 
8-4-2009
 
547
 
151.051


851
 
8-4-2009
 
551
 
151.052


851
 
8-4-2009
 
552
 
151.052


851
 
8-4-2009
 
560
 
151.053


851
 
8-4-2009
 
571
 
151.054


851
 
8-4-2009
 
572
 
151.054


851
 
8-4-2009
 
610
 
151.065


851
 
8-4-2009
 
611
 
151.065


851
 
8-4-2009
 
612
 
151.065


851
 
8-4-2009
 
613
 
151.065


851
 
8-4-2009
 
614
 
151.065


851
 
8-4-2009
 
615
 
151.065


851
 
8-4-2009
 
616
 
151.065


851
 
8-4-2009
 
617
 
151.065


851
 
8-4-2009
 
618
 
151.065


851
 
8-4-2009
 
619
 
151.065


851
 
8-4-2009
 
620
 
151.065


851
 
8-4-2009
 
621
 
151.065


851
 
8-4-2009
 
622
 
151.065


851
 
8-4-2009
 
631
 
151.066


851
 
8-4-2009
 
632
 
151.066


851
 
8-4-2009
 
641
 
151.067


851
 
8-4-2009
 
642
 
151.067


851
 
8-4-2009
 
643
 
151.067


851
 
8-4-2009
 
645
 
151.067


851
 
8-4-2009
 
646
 
151.067


851
 
8-4-2009
 
647
 
151.067


851
 
8-4-2009
 
648
 
151.067


851
 
8-4-2009
 
649
 
151.067


851
 
8-4-2009
 
650
 
151.067


851
 
8-4-2009
 
660
 
151.068


851
 
8-4-2009
 
710
 
151.080


851
 
8-4-2009
 
720
 
151.081


851
 
8-4-2009
 
730
 
151.082


851
 
8-4-2009
 
740
 
151.083


851
 
8-4-2009
 
750
 
151.084


851
 
8-4-2009
 
760
 
151.085


851
 
8-4-2009
 
810
 
151.100


851
 
8-4-2009
 
820
 
151.101


851
 
8-4-2009
 
830
 
151.102


851
 
8-4-2009
 
910
 
151.115


851
 
8-4-2009
 
920
 
151.116


851
 
8-4-2009
 
930
 
151.117


851
 
8-4-2009
 
1010
 
151.130


851
 
8-4-2009
 
1020
 
151.999


851
 
8-4-2009
 
1110
 
151.145


851
 
8-4-2009
 
App. A
 
Ch. 151, App. A


860
 
3-1-2011
 
 
 
153.01 - 153.11, 153.99


861
 
4-19-2011
 
 
 
111.48


862
 
4-19-2011
 
 
 
131.06


863
 
5-3-2011
 
 
 
70.11


865
 
5-17-2011
 
 
 
130.20


867
 
8-2-2011
 
 
 
150.006


874
 
5-15-2012
 
 
 
94.03


879
 
12-18-2012
 
 
 
132.01 - 132.21, 132.99


881
 
1-15-2013
 
 
 
52.050


883-1
 
7-16-2013
 
 
 
151.070


884
 
9-17-2013
 
 
 
150.038, 150.060


888
 
5-6-2014
 
 
 
150.200 - 150.205


889
 
5-6-2014
 
 
 
93.19, 93.99


893
 
9-2-2014
 
 
 
72.004


896
 
11-4-2014
 
 
 
150.001 - 150.005


904
 
12-16-2014
 
 
 
151.050


905
 
1-20-2015
 
 
 
152.001 - 152.004, 152.015 - 152.030, 152.040 - 152.064, 152.075, 152.076,
152.090 - 152.094, 152.105 - 152.110, 152.999, App. A


907
 
3-17-2015
 
 
 
30.115


908
 
3-17-2015
 
 
 
33.04


909
 
3-17-2015
 
 
 
30.114


910
 
3-17-2015
 
 
 
131.07


911
 
3-17-2015
 
 
 
30.015


912
 
3-17-2015
 
 
 
111.49


913
 
3-17-2015
 
 
 
131.05


914
 
3-17-2015
 
 
 
110.04


915
 
3-17-2015
 
 
 
96.01


918
 
4-21-2015
 
 
 
152.020


919
 
6-2-2015
 
 
 
94.05


921
 
8-18-2015
 
 
 
131.01


922
 
10-6-2015
 
 
 
91.23


923
 
10-6-2015
 
 
 
91.24


924
 
10-6-2015
 
 
 
130.20


925
 
12-1-2015
 
 
 
150.001, 150.002, 150.004 - 150.007


927
 
12-15-2015
 
 
 
152.058


930
 
4-9-2016
 
 
 
30.133


931
 
8-16-2016
 
 
 
152.001, 152.016


932
 
11-1-2016
 
 
 
152.003, 152.041, 152.063


933
 
11-15-2016
 
 
 
152.019


941
 
6-6-2017
 
 
 
152.018 - 152.027, 152.029


943
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
111.20


944
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
111.23


945
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
111.22


946
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
111.21


947
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
111.46


948
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
30.107


949
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
131.09


950
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
131.08


951
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
92.05


952
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
131.07


953
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
93.17


954
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
70.12


955
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
93.35


956
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
90.001, 90.070, 90.999


957
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
30.115


958
 
9-19-2017
 
 
 
Ch. 73, Sch. II, III


959
 
12-5-2017
 
 
 
111.48


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 


