MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF KEARNEY, NEBRASKA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
Republished in 2018 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
OF 
KEARNEY, NEBRASKA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
  
Stan Clouse 
Mayor 
____________ 
Randy Buschkoetter 
Bruce Lear 
Bob Lammers 
Jonathan Nikkila 
City Council 
____________ 
Michael Morgan 
City Manager 
____________ 
Lauren Brandt 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Kearney, Nebraska. 
    The title organization and section numbers are unchanged and are the same as in the prior Code. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any subsequent amendments to the Code. 
    The Code has been conveniently arranged in titles and chapters, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume and the chapter number. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1  
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Carren Pastrana, Editor, and Denise Thompson, Proofreader, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Lauren Brandt, City Clerk, and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kearney, Nebraska. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kearney, Nebraska. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kearney, Nebraska. 2018. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance No. Date Adopted Included/Omitted Supplement No. 1 8232  4-24-2018 Included 8253  6-12-2018 Included 8266  8-14-2018 Included 8280  8-28-2018 Included 8285  9-11-2018 Included Supplement No. 2 8321  2-12-2019 Included 8323  2-12-2019 Included 8324  2-12-2019 Included 8329  2-26-2019 Included 8332  3-12-2019 Included 8333  3-12-2019 Included 8337  4-23-2019 Included 8342  5-14-2019 Included 8343  5-14-2019 Included 8344  5-14-2019 Included 8345  5-14-2019 Included  
Chapter 1 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Cities of the first class generally, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-101 et seq.; § 18-101 et seq.; city manager plan, § 19-601 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1-101 - CITY CODE; HOW DESIGNATED AND CITED 
    All ordinances embraced in the following Chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Kearney, Nebraska," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Kearney City Code." 
(Code 1958, 1.1; Code 1980, 1-1) 
State Law reference- Revision, publication of ordinances, Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-247, 16-403 through 16-405; §18-131, 18-132; 19-3701. 
1-102 - CITY CODE; DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 
    In the construction of this Code and all other ordinances of the City, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council, or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    CITY: Shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Kearney, Nebraska." 
    CODE: Shall mean "The Code of the City of Kearney, Nebraska." 
    COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in the civil procedure statutes of Nebraska, is computed by excluding the day of the act, event, omission or default and including the last day unless the last day falls upon any legal holiday as defined by Section 25-2221 Nebraska Revised Statutes, as amended, or on Saturday or Sunday; in which case, the last day is also excluded. 
    COUNCIL: Shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City of Kearney, Nebraska. 
    COUNTY: Shall mean Buffalo County, Nebraska. 
    DAY: The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following. 
    DAYTIME, NIGHTTIME: "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise. 
    DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY: Whenever a provision appears in this Code requiring an officer of the City to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize such officer to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section expressly designate otherwise. 
    EASEMENT: A right, liberty, privilege or advantage without profit which the owner of one (1) parcel of land may have in the lands of another. A right in the owner of one (1) parcel of land, by reason of such ownership, to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general property right of the owner. 
    GENDER: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males. 
    IN THE CITY: Shall mean and include any territory within the corporate limits of this City and the police jurisdiction thereof and any other territory over which regulatory power has been conferred on the City by general or special legislative act except as otherwise specified. 
    INFRACTION: Where specified or declared in this Code, unless the context otherwise requires, "infraction" shall mean the violation of any law, ordinance, order, rule or regulation, not including those related to traffic. 
    JOINT AUTHORITY: Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is otherwise specifically declared. 
    LAW: Any statute, ordinance or regulation promulgated by the United States, the State, the County, the City or any agency thereof, as well as the rules and regulations of other bodies politic that may be appropriate. 
    MONTH: Shall mean a calendar month. 
    NUMBER: Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    OFFENSE: The doing of any act or thing prohibited or the failing to do any act or thing commanded to be done in this Code within the City is hereby declared to be an offense against the public peace, safety, morals and general welfare of the people of the City. 
    OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the City. 
    OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, ETC.: Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the City by title only, i.e., "President," "Mayor," "Clerk," "Manager," "Chief of Police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of this City. 
    OR, AND: "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the context of the provision requires it. 
    OWNER: Shall, when applied to a building or land, include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    PERSON: Shall include and be applied to a firm, partnership, association, corporation, organization, club, society, group acting as a unit, or body politic and corporate, as well as to an individual. 
    PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include money, goods, chattels, evidences of debt, things in action, and any other species of property except real property. 
    PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Shall mean the next before and the next after, respectively. 
    PROPERTY: Shall include real, personal and mixed property. 
    PUBLIC PLACE: Any public way, park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto; any public lake or stream; and any place or business open to the use of the public in general, open to public view or to which the public has access. 
    PUBLIC WAY: Any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare. 
    REAL PROPERTY: Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    REASONABLE TIME: In all cases where any section of this Code or City ordinance shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty or compliance with such notice. 
    RESIDENCE: The place adopted by a person as his/her place of habitation and to which, whenever he/she is absent, he/she has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed to be his/her residence. 
    ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    SHALL, MAY: The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is discretionary. 
    SIDEWALK: Shall mean any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK: Includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his/her own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when one (1) witness shall sign his/her own name thereto. 
    STATE: Shall be construed to mean the State of Nebraska. 
    STREET: Shall mean and include public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges, public ways and approaches thereto and other public thoroughfares in the City devoted to public use. 
    TENANT, OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall mean any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    TENSE: Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future as well as the past or present. 
    TO: Means "to and including" when used in reference to a series of sections of this Code or when reference is made to the Nebraska Revised Statutes. 
    TRAFFIC INFRACTION: As used in this Code unless the context otherwise requires, shall mean the violation of any provisions of Chapter 8 of this Code or of any law, ordinance, order, rule or regulation, regulating or related to traffic, which is not otherwise declared or specified to be a misdemeanor or an infraction. 
    WEEK: Consists of seven (7) consecutive days. 
    WRITING: Includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
    YEAR: Shall mean a calendar year except where otherwise provided. 
(Code 1958, 1.2; Code 1980, 1-2; Ord. No. 5057, 1, 9-26-89) 
1-103 - CITY CODE; WHEN SECTION 1-102 DOES NOT APPLY 
    The rules of construction and definitions set forth in section 1-102 shall not be applied to any section of this Code or City ordinance which shall contain any express provision, excluding such construction or definition, or when the subject matter or context of such provisions or ordinances may be repugnant thereto. 
(Code 1980, 1-3) 
1-104 - CITY CODE; PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1958, 1.3; Code 1980, 1-4) 
1-105 - CITY CODE; INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE 
    All standard codes, rules, regulations and other subject matter herein or hereafter properly incorporated by reference, together with subsequent amendments thereto pursuant to State law, and future incorporations by reference shall be kept and preserved in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Code 1980, 1-5) 
1-106 - CITY CODE; PARENTHETICAL AND REFERENCE MATTER 
    The matter in parentheses at the ends of sections in this Code is for information only and is not a part of this Code. Citations to ordinances indicate only the source of such section. Reference matter not in parentheses is for information only and is not a part of this Code. 
(Code 1980, 1-6) 
1-107 - CITY CODE; CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1958, 1.6; Code 1980, §1-7) 
1-108 - CITY CODE; REFERENCE TO; CONFLICTS 
    In addition to the rules of construction and definitions specified in this Article, the following rules shall be observed in the construction of this Code: 
A.  All references to Chapters, Articles or sections are to the Chapters, Articles and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
B.  If the provisions of different Chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each Chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such Chapter. 
C.  If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same Chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in numerical order shall prevail unless such construction would be inconsistent with the meaning of such Chapter. 
(Code 1980, 1-8) 
1-109 - CITY CODE; POLICE POWER EXTENDED TO CITY PROPERTY 
    The police power of the City is hereby extended to include all lands or property owned or leased by the City or any agency of the City, and the general ordinances of the City shall be applicable on such property. 
(Code 1980, 1-9) 
1-110 - CITY CODE; ALTERATION 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby; provided that supplementation of this Code by authorized persons shall be permitted. 
(Code 1980, 1-10) 
1-111 - CITY CODE; GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful for an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision or the failure to perform any such act shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court; and such violator may be committed to the City or County jail until such fine and costs of prosecution are paid. 
    Each day any such violation or failure to perform such act shall continue shall constitute a separate offense unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 1958, 1.7; Ord. No. 2939, 1, 2-13-79; Code 1980, 1-11) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of ordinances, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-246, 24-517. 
1-112 - CITY CODE; INFRACTION; PENALTIES 
    Any person found guilty of an infraction when a penalty is not otherwise specified shall: 
A.  For the first (1st) offense, be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
B.  On a second (2nd) conviction for the same infraction within a two-year period, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00); 
C.  On a third (3rd) or subsequent conviction for the same infraction within a two-year period be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any person charged with commission of an infraction which was committed more than two (2) years after such person's last conviction for the same infraction shall be charged as though the most recent infraction was a first offense. 
(Ord. No. 5057, 2, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 1-11.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 29-436 
1-113 - CITY CODE; TRAFFIC INFRACTION; PENALTY 
    Any person who is found guilty of a traffic infraction when a penalty is not otherwise specified shall be fined: 
A.  Not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first (1st) offense; 
B.  Not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a second (2nd) offense within a one-year period; and 
C.  Not more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) for a third (3rd) and subsequent offense within a one-year period. Any person charged with commission of a traffic infraction which was committed more than one (1) year after such person's last conviction for the same traffic infraction shall be charged as though the most recent traffic infraction was a first offense. 
(Ord. No. 5057, 3, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 1-11.2; Ord. No. 6185, 10-8-96) 
1-114 - CITY CODE; PENALTY NOT EXCLUSIVE 
    The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this Code shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of any license, franchise or permit issued or granted under the provisions of this Code. 
    In the event that any violation of this Code is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this Code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the City in addition to the imposition of a fine or imprisonment. 
(Code 1980, 1-12) 
1-115 - CITY CODE; CITY LIMITS 
    The City limits of the City shall be in all cases as shown by the registered plats in the office of the Register of Deeds of the County, and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to maintain a plat in his/her office showing the City Limits and all additions and changes which shall be made from time to time. 
(Code 1958, 1.15; Code 1980, 1-13) 
1-116 - CITY CODE; DATUM LINE OR BENCHMARK 
    The datum line or benchmark from which points on the grades of sewers and streets and other grades and improvements are to be reckoned is hereby established at a level plane one hundred (100) feet below a point on a copper plug imbedded in a cement base located on the southwest corner of the lot in the City is located at the corner of Central Avenue and Twenty-Fourth (24th) Street in the City. This point is the convex-top-point of the copper plug. 
(Code 1958, 1.23; Code 1980, 1-14) 
1-117 - CITY CODE; EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1958, 1.4; Code 1980, 1-15) 
1-118 - CITY CODE; SEVERABILITY OF PARTS 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1958, 1.5; Code 1980, 1-16) 
1-119 - CITY CODE; AMENDMENTS, EFFECT 
    Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Kearney, Nebraska," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(Code 1980, 2-59) 
1-120 - CITY CODE; LANGUAGE 
    Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of the City of Kearney, Nebraska, is hereby amended to read as follows: ..." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1980, 2-60) 
1-121 - CITY CODE; NEW MATERIAL 
(a)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of the City of Kearney, Nebraska, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation as the case may be), to be numbered _____, which reads as follows: ..." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  In lieu of subsection (a) hereof, when the Council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, which the council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: "It is the intention of the City Council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of the City of Kearney, Nebraska, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(Code 1980, 2-61) 
1-122 - CITY CODE; REPEAL 
    All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1980, 2-62) 
1-123 - CITY CODE; SUBJECT TO GENERAL PENALTY 
    In case of the amendment by the Council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-111 of this Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
(Code 1980, 2-63) 
1-124 - CITY CODE; SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE 
(a)  By contract or by City personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the Council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
1.  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
2.  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
3.  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary, to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
4.  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
5.  Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1980, 2-64) 
ARTICLE 2. - CITY COUNCIL 

1-201 - CITY COUNCIL; POWERS 
    The Governing Body of the City shall be the City Council, which shall exercise all the powers which have been or may be conferred upon the City by the Constitution and laws of the state. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-611 
1-202 - NUMBER; ELECTION 
    There shall be five (5) Council Members who shall be elected from the City at large in even numbered years. Council members shall serve for a term of four years and until their successors are elected and have qualified. The term of office of all such members shall commence on the first regular meeting of such board in December following their election. 
(Code 1958, 2.6-1; Code 1980, 2-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-612 
1-203 - QUALIFICATIONS 
    Members of the Council shall be residents and registered voters of the City and shall hold no other employment with the City. They shall be permitted to hold other elective office as provided by state law. Any Council Member who ceases to possess any of the qualifications required by this section or who has been convicted of a crime while in office shall forthwith forfeit such office. 
(Ord. No. 6222, 1-28-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-613 
1-204 - VACANCY; HOW FILLED 
    Vacancies in the City Council shall be filled in accordance with Neb. Rev. Stat. 32-560, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 6207, 12-23-96) 
State Law reference- Vacancies, Neb. Rev. Stat. Chapter 32, Article 5, Subsection (c) 
1-205 - APPOINTIVE OR ELECTED OFFICIAL; COMPENSATION; NO CHANGE DURING TERM OF OFFICE 
    The annual compensation of the Mayor/President and a Council Member shall be payable quarterly in equal installments, and shall be fixed by the Council. The emoluments of any appointive or elective officer shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which such officer was elected or appointed, except that when there are officers elected or appointed to the Council, or a board or commission having more than one (1) member and the terms of one (1) or more members commence and end at different times, the compensation of all members of such Council, board, or commission may be increased or diminished at the beginning of the full term of any member thereof. No person who shall have resigned or vacated any office shall be eligible to the same during the time for which such person was elected or appointed when, during the same time, the emoluments have been increased. For each absence from regular meetings of the Council, unless authorized by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all members thereof, there shall be deducted a sum equal to two percent (2%) of such annual salary. Absence from five (5) consecutive regular meetings shall operate to vacate the seat of a member, unless the absence is excused by the Council by resolution setting forth such excuse and entered upon the journal. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-616 
1-206 - ORGANIZATION; MAYOR/PRESIDENT; POWERS 
    At the first regular meeting in December following the general election in every even-numbered year, the Council shall meet in the Council Chambers at City Hall and the newly elected Council Members shall assume the duties of their office. The Council shall elect one (1) of its members as president, who shall be ex officio mayor, and another as vice president, who shall serve in the absence of the president. In the absence of the president and the vice president, the Council may elect a temporary chairperson, President Pro Tempore. In all official and unofficial proceedings, the President may be referred to as Mayor. The president shall preside over the Council, and have a voice and vote in its proceedings, but no veto. He/she shall be recognized as the official head of the City for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process, and by the Governor for military purposes. In addition, he/she shall exercise such other powers and perform such duties as are conferred upon the Mayor/President of the City. 
(Ord. No. 5747, 4-12-1994; Ord. No. 7861, 12-10-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-617 
1-207 - CITY MANAGER; APPOINTMENT; INVESTIGATORY POWERS OF COUNCIL 
    The Council shall appoint a City manager, and a City clerk, but no member of the Council shall be chosen as manager or as city clerk. Neither the Council nor any of its committees or members shall dictate the appointment of any person to office or employment by the City Manager or in any manner seek to prevent him/her from exercising his/her own judgment in the appointment of officers and employees in the administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager, and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City Manager, either publicly or privately. The Council, or a committee thereof, may investigate the affairs of any department or the official acts and conduct of any City officer. It shall have power to administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers and may punish for contempt any person failing to obey its subpoena or refusing to testify. No person shall be excused from testifying, but his/her testimony shall not be used against him/her in any criminal proceeding other than for perjury. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-618 
1-208 - DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICES; CONTROL 
    The Council shall have authority, subject to the provisions of Sections 19-601 to 19-648 R.R.S., inclusive, to create and discontinue departments, offices and employments, and by ordinance or resolution to prescribe, limit or change the compensation of such officers and employees. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-620 
1-209 - MEETINGS; WHERE HELD 
    All meetings of the Council shall be held at the Council Chambers in the City Hall, unless moved to a different location by the City Council. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(1); Code 1980, 2-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-615 
1-210 - MEETINGS 
    Regular Council meetings shall be held on the second (2nd) and fourth (4th) Tuesdays in each month, at 5:30 o'clock p.m., except for the month of December when Regular Council meetings shall be held on the second (2nd) and third (3rd) Tuesday of the month. If the same falls upon a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the preceding or following day, as the Council determines appropriate. The Mayor/President, any two (2) Council Members or the City Manager may call special meetings of the Council. The Mayor/President, any two (2) Council Members or the City Manager may call emergency meetings upon at least six (6) hours' written notice. The meetings of the Council and sessions of committees of the Council shall be public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum, but a majority vote of all the members elected shall be required to pass any measure or elect to any office. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(1) & (2); Code 1980, 2-18 & 2-19; Ord. No. 6209, 12-23-96; Ord. No. 7140, 12-28-2004; Ord. No. 7861, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 8324 , § 1, 2-12-2019) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-615; Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1408, et seq.; Emergency meetings without notice, Neb. Rev. Stat. 84-1411(4) 
1-211 - ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the conduct of the meetings of the Council shall be governed and controlled by the latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Code 1980, 2-20) 
1-212 - QUORUM, VOTING 
    Three (3) members of the Council shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of all members elected shall be required to pass any measure or elect to any office. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(3); Code 1980, 2-21) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-401 
1-213 - CALL TO ORDER 
    At the hour appointed for a Council meeting, the Clerk shall proceed to call the roll of members, and announce whether a quorum be present. Upon the appearance of a quorum, the Council shall be called to order by the Mayor/President, if present. Should the Mayor/President be absent, the Council shall be called to order by the Vice President of the Council. In the absence of both Mayor/President and Vice President, one (1) of the Council Members present shall be elected president pro tempore. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(4); Code 1980, 2-22) 
1-214 - ORDER OF BUSINESS 
    Upon being called to order, the Council shall proceed to business which shall be conducted in the following order: 
I.  Routine business: 
1.  Invocation (Mayor/President or designee of Kearney Ministerial Association); 
2.  Pledge of Allegiance; 
3.  Roll call; 
4.  Oral communication - Recognition of visitors; 
II.  Unfinished business; 
III.  Public hearing(s); 
IV.  Consent agenda. To include, as a minimum, the following: 
1.  Minutes of previous meeting; 
2.  Claims; 
V.  Consent agenda - Ordinances; 
VI.  Regular agenda; 
VII.  Reports; 
VIII.  Adjournment. 
    The City Manager or his/her duly appointed designee shall be responsible for the preparation of the agenda. Anyone wishing to address the Council during "Oral Communications" must contact the City Clerk not later than 24 hours prior to the scheduled commencement of the meeting, must clearly state the subject to be discussed during "Oral Communications" and will be allowed no more than five (5) minutes speaking time per meeting during "Oral Communications." 
    Any item on the consent agenda may, at the request of any single Council Member, be removed from the consent agenda and considered as a separate item under the regular agenda section of the agenda. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(4); Ord. No. 3431, 1, 9-8-81; Ord. No. 4050, 1, 11-8-88; Ord. No. 4067, 1, 2-14-89; Code 1980, 2-23; Ord. No. 5615, 6-8-93) 
1-215 - REFERRAL TO PASSED ORDER OF BUSINESS 
    The Mayor/President may refer to any order of business after passing it on the agenda if there are no objections by any member of the Council. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(5); Code 1980, 2-24) 
1-216 - PRESERVATION OF ORDER, DECORUM 
    The Mayor/President shall preserve order and decorum at Council meetings and shall decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the Council. When a member is called to order, he/she shall remain silent until the point is decided. While the Mayor/President is putting the question, no member shall leave the council room. When two (2) or more members at once attempt to speak at a meeting, the Mayor/President shall name the member who is first to speak. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(6); Code 1980, 2-25) 
1-217 - RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS; VOTING REQUIRED 
    All resolutions and motions shall be reduced to writing before being acted upon if so required by any member of the Council. Every member who is present at a meeting when a question is stated by the presiding officer shall vote thereon unless excused by a majority of the Council present or having excused themselves due to a conflict of interest. The Council Member shall state clearly the basis or reason of the conflict of interest. No motion shall be put or debated unless it be seconded. When seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer before it shall be debatable. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(11); Code 1980, 2-29) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-404 
1-218 - RECORDATION OF PROPONENT'S NAME 
    In all cases where a motion or a resolution is entered on the minutes of the Council, the name of the member moving or introducing the same shall be entered also. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(13); Code 1980, 2-31) 
1-219 - RECORDATION OF VOTE 
    The yeas and nays upon any question shall be taken and entered on the minutes. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(14); Code 1980, 2-32) 
1-220 - REMOVAL OF MOTION, ETC. 
    A resolution, ordinance or motion may be withdrawn by the mover, with the consent of the member who seconded it, before the same shall be voted upon. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(16); Code 1980, 2-33) 
1-221 - QUESTIONS ON BLANK SUMS, TIME 
    When a blank is to be filled and different sums of money or times are proposed, the question shall be put on the largest sum and longest time. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(17); Code 1980, 2-34) 
1-222 - MOTION TO RECONSIDER 
    A motion to reconsider shall be in order when made by a member voting with the majority, but such motion to reconsider must be made before the expiration of the third (3rd) regular meeting after the consideration of the same question. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(18); Code 1980, 2-35) 
1-223 - PRIVILEGED MOTIONS 
    When a question is under debate, no motion shall be made, entertained or seconded, except the following privileged motions: 
A.  The previous question; 
B.  To lay on the table; 
C.  To adjourn. 
    Each of such privileged motions shall be decided without any debate. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(19); Code 1980, 2-36) 
1-224 - SUSPENSION OF RULES 
    Any rule of the Council may be suspended by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members present. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(20); Code 1980, 2-37) 
1-225 - CENSURE OF MEMBERS 
    The Council may reprimand or censure its members for any breach of trust or disorderly behavior. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(15); Code 1980, 2-38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1408, et seq. 
1-226 - EXPIRATION OF TABLED MATTERS 
    Any motion, resolution, ordinance or other matter under consideration, with the specific exception of claims filed against the City, tabled by a motion of the Council, if not subsequently removed from the table and acted upon by the Council prior to the adjournment of the third (3rd) regular meeting following the meeting at which the matter was tabled, shall be automatically extinguished and voided. Claims presented to the Council may be tabled indefinitely. 
(Code 1980, 2-40; Ord. No. 5026, 1, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 5157, 1, 8-28-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1408, et seq. 
1-227 - MEMBERS SEATED 
    Council members may remain seated at all times during the meeting unless required to rise to speak by the presiding officer. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1408, et seq. 
ARTICLE 3. - APPOINTED OFFICIALS 

1-301 - CITY MANAGER; HOW CHOSEN; QUALIFICATIONS; SALARY 
    The chief executive officer of the City shall be a City manager, who shall be responsible for the proper administration of all affairs of the City. The City Manager shall be chosen by the Council for an indefinite period, solely on the basis of administrative qualifications, and need not be a resident of the City or state when appointed. He/she shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council, and receive such salary as it shall fix by resolution. During the absence or disability of the City Manager, the Council shall designate an emergency chain of command of subordinate officers who the City Manager may appoint while he/she is temporarily absent or disabled to perform the duties of the office. 
(Code 1958, 2.24; Code 1980, 2-100) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-645 
1-302 - CITY MANAGER; POWERS AND DUTIES 
    The powers and duties of the City Manager shall be (1) to see that the laws and ordinances are enforced, (2) to appoint and remove all heads of departments and all subordinate officers and employees in the departments in both the classified and unclassified service, which appointments shall be upon merit and fitness alone, and in the classified service all appointments and removals shall be subject to the civil service provisions of the Civil Service Act, (3) to exercise control over all departments and divisions thereof that may be created by the Council, (4) to attend all meetings of the Council with the right to take part in the discussion, but not to vote, (5) to recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he/she may deem necessary or expedient, (6) to prepare the annual budget and keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City, and (7) to perform such other duties as may be required of him/her by ordinance or resolution of the Council. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-646 
1-303 - CITY MANAGER; INVESTIGATORY AND INQUISITIONAL POWERS 
    The City Manager may investigate at any time the affairs of any department or the conduct of any officer or employee. The City Manager, or any person or persons appointed by him/her for the purpose, shall have the same power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers and other evidence, and to punish for contempt, which has herein been conferred upon the Council. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-647 
1-304 - CITY CLERK 
    It shall be the duty of the City Clerk or his/her designee to attend every meeting of the Council and keep a correct journal of the proceedings thereof. Whenever required by the Mayor/President, two (2) members of the Council, or the City Manager, the City Clerk shall deliver a notice to the members of the Council of any special meeting thereof, and shall notify any and all committees of the Council of the business entrusted to them. 
    The Clerk shall keep and carefully preserve all papers and books which may come into his/her possession as Clerk, filing and arranging them in a manner convenient for reference. 
    The Clerk shall have custody of all laws and ordinances and shall keep the seal of the City and duly attest thereby the Mayor/President's signature to all ordinances and all deeds and papers required to be attested, when ordered by the Council. 
    The Clerk shall keep a register of all licenses granted and the purpose for which they were issued, and report to the Council at every meeting. At the beginning of each month, he/she shall, if required by the Council, furnish the Police Department with a true copy of the register of all licenses then in force. He/she shall issue licenses and collect license fees connected therewith as provided by the laws of Nebraska or the City. 
    Within thirty (30) days after any meeting of the Council, the Clerk shall prepare and publish the proceedings of the Council in a legal newspaper, or more than one (1) legal newspaper if directed by the Council. The charge for said publication shall not exceed the rates provided by law. The publication charge shall be paid and allowed as other claims against the General Fund. 
    Wherever the Clerk is required to issue licenses, occupation tax receipts, or permits, the Director of Finance and Administration shall collect the amount required to be paid by the applicant therefor. 
    The Clerk shall have such additional duties and receive such salary as the Council may prescribe. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-317, § 19-1102 through 19-1104 
1-305 - CITY CLERK; PUBLICATION OF CLAIMS 
    The City Clerk shall publish the official proceedings of each meeting, including the amount of each claim allowed, the purpose of the claim, and the name of the claimant, except that the aggregate amount of all payroll claims may be included as one (1) item. Between July fifteenth (15th) and August fifteenth (15th) of each year, the employee job titles and the current annual, monthly, or hourly salaries corresponding to such job titles shall be published. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-1102 
1-306 - CITY ATTORNEY 
    The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Council and City officers. The City Attorney shall commence, and defend all suits and actions necessary to be commenced, or defended on behalf of the City, or that may be ordered by the Council. He/she shall attend meetings of the Council and give them his/her opinion upon any matter submitted to him/her, either orally or in writing as may be required. He/she shall draw all ordinances, contracts and other documents requested by the Mayor/President and Council. The Mayor/President and Council shall have the right to employ additional legal assistance and to pay for such legal assistance out of the funds of the City. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-319 
1-307 - CITY PHYSICIAN 
    The City Physician shall be a member of the Board of Health and shall perform all duties devolving upon him/her in such capacity. It shall be his/her duty, upon the request of a department chief, in all cases of injury to the person, in cases wherein a liability for such injury may be asserted against the City, to investigate such injury and the extent thereof and the circumstances and condition of the person so injured, and report the same in writing with such other particulars as may have come to his/her knowledge relating to such injury to the Mayor/President. He/she shall perform such other duties as may be required of him/her by the Mayor/President and Council. 
    The City Physician shall exercise special care with regard to the sanitary conditions of the City, and shall from time to time report to the Mayor/President and Council such measures and recommendations in relation thereto as he/she may deem proper. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-238, 16-308 
1-308 - APPOINTED OFFICIALS; MERGER OF OFFICES 
    The City Manager may, at his/her discretion, by ordinance combine and merge any elective or appointive office or employment, or any combination of duties of any such offices or employments, except Mayor/President and Council Member, with any other elective or appointive office or employment so that one (1) or more of such offices or employments or any combination of duties of any such offices or employments may be held by the same officer or employee at the same time. The offices or employments so merged and combined shall always be construed to be separate and the effect of the combination or merger shall be limited to a consolidation of official duties only. The salary or compensation of the officer or employee holding the merged or combined offices or employments shall not be in excess of the maximum amount provided by law for the salary or compensation of the office, offices, employment or employments so merged and combined. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-305 
ARTICLE 4. - BONDS AND OATHS 

1-401 - BONDS OR INSURANCE COVERAGE; MUNICIPAL OFFICERS; COUNCIL MEMBERS; FORM 
A.  All official bonds of officers of the City of Kearney shall be made payable to the City in which the officers giving such bonds shall be elected or appointed, in such penalty as the City Council may fix. In place of the individual bonds required to be furnished by municipal officers, a schedule, position, blanket bond or undertaking, or evidence of equivalent insurance may be given by municipal officers, or a single corporate surety fidelity, schedule, position, or blanket bond or undertaking, or evidence of insurance coverage covering all the officers, including officers required by law to furnish an individual bond or undertaking, may be furnished. The municipality may pay the premium for the bond or insurance coverage. The bond or insurance coverage shall be, at a minimum, an aggregate of the amounts fixed by law or by the City Council authorized by law to fix the amounts and with such terms and conditions as may be required. 
B.  Each Council Member, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, shall be required to give bond or evidence of equivalent insurance to the City. The bond shall be with two or more good and sufficient sureties or some responsible surety company. If by two sureties, they shall each justify that he or she is worth at least two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) over and above all debts and exemptions. Such bonds or evidence of equivalent insurance shall be in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and shall be conditioned for the faithful discharge of the duties of the Council Member giving such bond or insurance, and shall be further conditioned that if the Council Member shall vote for any expenditure or appropriation of money or creation of any liability in excess of the amount allowed by law, such Council Member, and the sureties signing such bond, shall be liable thereon. The bond shall be filed with the City Clerk and approved by the Mayor, and upon the approval, the City may pay the premium for such bond. Any liability sought to be incurred, or debt created in excess of the amount limited or authorized by law, shall be taken and held by every court of the state as the joint and several liability and obligation of the Council Member voting for and the Mayor approving such liability, obligation, or debt, and not the debt, liability, or obligation of the city. Voting for or approving of such liability, obligation, or debt shall be conclusive evidence of malfeasance in office for which such Council Member or Mayor may be removed from office. 
(Ord. No. 7496, 12-23-2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §§11-103 through 11-118, §16-219, §16-304 
1-402 - BONDS; CITY MANAGER AND DIRECTOR OF FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION 
    The City Manager shall give a bond in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and the Director of Finance and Administration shall give a bond in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or evidence of equivalent insurance. The premium of the Officers bond shall be paid by the City. 
(Ord. No. 7313, 12-12-2006; Ord. No. 7496, 12-23-2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-318 and §19-648 
1-403 - OATH; MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS 
    All officials of the City, whether elected or appointed, except when a different oath is specifically provided herein, shall, before entering upon their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath which shall be endorsed upon their respective bonds: 
    "I _______ do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Nebraska against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, and without mental reservation, or for the purpose of evasion; and that I will faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the office of _______ according to law, and to the best of my ability. And I do further swear that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am in this position I will not advocate, nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence. So help me God." 
    The affirmation of a person conscientiously scrupulous of taking an oath shall have the same effect. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §11-101, 11-101.03 
1-404 - OFFICIALS; PROPERTY 
    Every officer and employee of the City or of any of its boards, commissions or departments shall promptly and fully account for and deliver to his/her successor or as otherwise directed by the City Manager, all money, equipment and other property of the City which he/she has in his/her possession or has received from the City during his/her term of office or employment. 
ARTICLE 5. - CORPORATE SEAL 

1-501 - CORPORATE SEAL; DESCRIBED; WHERE KEPT 
    There shall be owned by the City and kept in the office of the City Clerk a common seal of the corporation having engraved thereon the words "City of Kearney, Buffalo County, Nebraska, Seal." 
(Code 1958, 1.21; Code 1980, 2-1) 
State Law reference- City seal, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-115 
1-502 - CORPORATE SEAL; USE 
    The City Clerk shall affix an impression of the corporate seal to all warrants, licenses, ordinances and all papers issued by order of the Mayor/President and Council, which are to be signed by the Mayor/President and countersigned by the City Clerk. 
(Code 1958, 1.22; Code 1980, 2-2) 
ARTICLE 6. - MEETINGS 

1-601 - MEETINGS; DEFINED 
    Meetings, as used in this Article, shall mean all regular, special, or called meetings, formal or informal, of a public body, for the purposes of briefing, discussion of public business, formation of tentative policy, or the taking of any action. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 84-1409(2) 
1-602 - MEETINGS; PUBLIC BODY DEFINED 
    Public Body, as used in this Article, shall mean: 
A.  The City Council, 
B.  All independent boards, commissions, bureaus, committees, councils, subunits, or any other bodies, now or hereafter created by the Constitution of Nebraska, statute or otherwise pursuant to law, ordinance or resolution, 
C.  Advisory committees of the bodies listed above, and 
D.  Any instrumentalities exercising essentially public functions. 
    This Article shall not apply to subcommittees of such bodies unless a quorum of the public body attends a subcommittee meeting, or unless such subcommittees hold hearings, make policy, or take formal action on behalf of their parent body. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 84-1409(1) 
1-603 - MEETINGS; PUBLIC 
    All public meetings shall be held in a building which shall be open to attendance by the public and in which the public body usually holds such meetings unless the publicized notice hereinafter required shall designate some other public building or other specified place. The advance publicized notice of all public convened meetings shall be transmitted to all members of the public body and to the public by a method designated by the public body. Such notice shall contain the time and specific place for each meeting and either an enumeration of the agenda subjects known at the time of the notice, or a statement that such an agenda kept continually current shall be available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk. The public body shall have the right to modify the agenda to include items of an emergency nature only at the public meeting when convened. The minutes of the public body shall include the record of the manner and advance time by which the advance publicized notice was given, a statement of how the availability of an agenda of the then known subjects was communicated, the time and specific place of the meetings, the names of each member of the public body present or absent at each convened meeting, and the substance of all matters discussed. The minutes of the public body shall be a written public record open to inspection by the public within ten (10) working days after a meeting or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever occurs earlier, upon request at any reasonable time during normal business hours at the office of the City Clerk. Any official action on any question or motion duly moved and seconded shall be taken only by roll call vote of the public body in open session. The record of the City Clerk shall show how each member voted, or that the member was absent and did not vote. 
    Formal actions taken at any public meeting not in conformity with the provisions of this section may be deemed to be void, or voidable by the District Court. Any official who shall knowingly violate or conspire to violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to any preliminary interview or recruitment of prospective officials or employees. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1408 through 84-1413 
1-604 - MEETINGS; CLOSED SESSIONS 
    Any public body may hold a closed session by the affirmative vote of a majority of its voting members if a closed session is clearly necessary for the protection of the public interest or for the prevention of needless injury to the reputation of an individual and if such individual has not requested a public meeting. Closed sessions may be held for, but shall not be limited to, such reasons as: 
A.  Strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining, real estate purchases, pending litigation, or litigation which is imminent as evidenced by communication of a claim or threat of litigation to or by the public body; 
B.  Discussion regarding deployment of security personnel or devices; 
C.  Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of criminal misconduct; or 
D.  Evaluation of the job performance of a person, etc. 
    Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting for discussion of the appointment or election of a new member to a public body. 
    The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open session. The vote of each member on the question of holding a closed session, the reason for the closed session, and the time when the closed session commenced and concluded shall be recorded in the minutes. The meeting shall be reconvened in open session before any formal action may be taken. 
    For purposes of this section, formal action shall mean a collective decision or a collective commitment or promise to make a decision on any question, motion, proposal, resolution, order or ordinance or formation of a position or policy. 
    Any member of any public body shall have the right to challenge the continuation of a closed session if the member determines that the session has exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a closed session if the member determines that the session has exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a closed session or if the member contends that the closed session is neither clearly necessary for (a) the protection of the public interest or (b) the prevention of needless injury to the reputation of an individual. Such challenge shall be overruled only by a majority vote of the members of the public body. Such challenge and its disposition shall be recorded in the minutes. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 84-1410 
1-605 - MEETINGS; EMERGENCY MEETINGS 
    When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without reasonable advance public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated in the minutes and any formal action taken in such meeting shall pertain only to the emergency. Such emergency meetings may be held by means of electronic or telecommunication equipment. The provisions of section 1-607 of this Article shall be complied with in conducting emergency meetings. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 84-1411 
1-606 - MEETINGS; VOTES 
    Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and seconded shall be by roll call vote of the public body in open session, and the record of the Clerk shall state how each member voted, or if the member was absent or not voting. The requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be satisfied by the City utilizing an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and nays of each member of the Council to be readily seen by the public. 
    The vote to elect leadership within a public body may be taken by secret ballot, but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be recorded in the minutes. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-503, 84-1413 
1-607 - MEETINGS; NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA 
    The City Clerk, Secretary, or other designee of each public body shall maintain a list of the news media requesting notification of meetings and shall make reasonable efforts to provide advance notification to them of the time and place of each meeting, and the subjects to be discussed at that meeting. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 84-1411 
1-608 - MEETINGS; PUBLIC PARTICIPATION 
    Subject to the provisions of this Article, the public shall have the right to attend and the right to speak at meetings of public bodies and all or any part of a meeting of a public body may be recorded by any person in attendance by means of a tape recorder or any other means of sonic reproduction or in writing. 
    Any public body may make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the conduct of persons attending its meetings and regarding their privilege to speak. A body is not required to allow citizens to speak at each meeting, nor may it forbid public participation at all meetings. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1408, 84-1412 
ARTICLE 7. - ORDINANCES 

1-701 - ORDINANCES; GRANT OF POWER 
    The Council shall have the responsibility of making all ordinances, by-laws, rules regulations, and resolutions, not inconsistent with the laws of the State, as may be necessary and proper for maintaining the peace, good government, and welfare of the City and its trade, commerce, and security. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-403, 16-404 
1-702 - ORDINANCES; RULES AND REGULATIONS 
    All ordinances shall be passed pursuant to such rules and regulations as the Council may provide. All ordinances may be proven by the certificate of the City Clerk under the seal of the City. The passage, approval, and publication or posting of any ordinance shall be sufficiently proven by a certificate under the seal of the City from the Clerk showing that such ordinance was passed and approved, and when and in what paper the same was published. The Municipal Code shall be received as evidence of the passage and legal publication of its contents in all courts without further proof. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-403 
1-703 - ORDINANCES; APPROPRIATION OF MONEY 
    All ordinances, resolutions, or orders for the appropriation or payment of money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence of a majority of all members elected to the Council. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-404 
1-704 - ORDINANCES; READING 
    Ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be read by the title on three (3) different days. This requirement may be suspended by three-fourths (3/4) vote of the Council, in such case said ordinance may be read by title or number and then moved for final passage. Three-fourths (3/4) of the Council may require any ordinance to be read in full before final passage under either process. 
(Code 1958, 2.5(4); Code 1980, 2-49) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-404 
1-705 - ORDINANCES; PUBLICATION 
    All ordinances of a general nature shall be published one (1) time within fifteen (15) days after they are passed in some newspaper in or of general circulation in the City, or in pamphlet form as provided in Section 1-709. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-405, 19-3701 
1-706 - ORDINANCES; STYLE 
    The style of all City ordinances shall be: 
    "Be it ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of Kearney, Nebraska." 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-405 
1-707 - ORDINANCES; TITLE 
    No ordinance shall contain a subject not clearly expressed in its title. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-404 
1-708 - ORDINANCES; EMERGENCY ORDINANCES 
    In the case of riot, infectious or contagious diseases, or other impending danger or any other emergency requiring its immediate operation, such ordinance shall take effect upon the proclamation of the Mayor/President, and the posting thereof in at least three (3) of the most public places in the City. Such emergency notice shall recite the emergency and be passed by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the Council, and entered upon the City Clerk's minutes. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-405 
1-709 - ORDINANCES; PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES IN PAMPHLET FORM 
    In all cases where an ordinance is passed and approved by the Mayor/President and Council and the ordinance provides that the same shall be published in pamphlet form, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to have the ordinances published in pamphlet form and to sign a certificate on the original ordinance certifying the day upon which he/she received the ordinance from the printer. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to place copies of the ordinance in the office of the City Clerk for distribution to the public. The City Clerk shall state in the paragraph of the minutes of the meeting showing the passage of the ordinance that copies of the ordinance upon publication in pamphlet form may be obtained by the public at the office of the City Clerk. The certificates on the published pamphlet shall certify that the ordinance was passed, state the sections of the general ordinance under which it will be known, that the ordinance is published by authority of the Mayor/President and Council and the date upon which the same will be first available to the public. 
(Code 1958, 2.6; Code 1980, 2-50) 
State Law reference- Publication in pamphlet form, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-247, 16-403, 16-405, 18-132 
ARTICLE 8. - ELECTIONS 

1-801 - ELECTIONS; MUNICIPAL 
    The City shall hold its municipal elections in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 32 of the Revised Statutes of Nebraska. 
(Code 1958, 2.4-2; Code 1980, 12-1) 
1-802 - ELECTIONS; INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 
    The City accepts and makes a part of this Code Chapter 18, Article 25 of the Revised Statutes of Nebraska relating to initiative and referendum. 
(Code 1958, 2.44; Code 1980, 2-51) 
ARTICLE 9. - FISCAL MANAGEMENT 

1-901 - FISCAL MANAGEMENT; FINANCIAL STATEMENT 
    The City Council shall cause to be published semi-annually a statement of the receipts of the City and the sources thereof and an itemized account of the expenditures and the financial condition of the City. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 13-501, 16-722 
1-902 - JUDGMENTS 
    Should any judgment be obtained against the City, the Mayor/President and the committee on finances, with the sanction of the Council, may borrow a sufficient amount to pay the same for a period of time not to extend beyond the close of the next fiscal year. The Council shall then add to the amount authorized to be raised in the general tax levy the sum and interest accrued of the judgment. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-706 
1-903 - PAYMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; INTEREST RATE ON DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS 
    All special assessments provided for by the laws of the state shall become due fifty (50) days after the date of levy and may be paid within that time without interest. If not so paid, they shall bear interest at a rate to be determined by resolution of the Council until the date of delinquency. Such assessments shall become delinquent in equal annual installments over such period of years as the Council may determine at the time of making the levy. Delinquent assessments shall bear interest at the maximum rate allowed by the laws of the State until paid and shall be collected in the usual manner for the collection of general taxes and shall be subject to the same penalty. 
(Ord. No. 3263, 1, 8-12-80; Ord. No. 3737, 1, 4-9-85; Code 1980, 2-4) 
1-904 - NOTICE OF ASSESSMENTS 
    Notice that special assessments are due shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to the last-known address of the person against whom such special assessments are assessed or the lending institution or the party responsible for paying such special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 5160, 1, 9-11-90; Code 1980, 2-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-4501 
ARTICLE 10. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

1-1001 - COMPENSATION; MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
    Salaries of officers and employees of the Municipality shall be in such amount as the Council shall fix by ordinance; provided, that after the Council has adopted a wage and salary schedule with appropriate employee classifications and wage ranges for each classification, by ordinance, such ordinance shall be sufficient for all changes in salary for City employees included thereunder without further ordinances being passed, approved, and published. All salaries shall be on file at the office of the City Clerk and available for public inspection at any reasonable time. 
(Code 1958, 2.65; Code 1980, 2-77) 
1-1002 - COMPENSATION; CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
    For purposes of this section, "Officer" shall mean (a) any member of any Board or Commission of the City, (b) any Appointed Official if such Municipal Official (i) serves on a Board or Commission which spends and administers its own funds and (ii) is dealing with a contract made by such Board or Commission, or (c) any elected City Official. Unless specified otherwise, volunteer firefighters shall not be considered officers for purposes of this section, with respect to their duties as firefighters. 
    No officer of the City shall be permitted to benefit from any contract to which the City is a party. The existence of such an interest in any contract renders the contract voidable by decree of a court of competent jurisdiction as to any person who entered into the contract or took assignment thereof with actual knowledge of the prohibited conflict. An action to have a contract declared void under this section may be brought by the City or by any resident thereof and must be brought within one (1) year after the contract is signed or assigned. Any such decree may provide for the reimbursement of any person for the reasonable value of all money, goods, material, labor, or services furnished under the contract, to the extent that the City has benefited thereby. The prohibition in this section shall apply only when the officer or his/her parent, spouse, or child (a) has a business with which the individual is associated or business association which shall mean a business: (1) in which the individual is a partner, director, or officer or (2) in which the individual or a member of the individual's immediate family is a stockholder of a closed corporation stock worth one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more at fair market value or which represents more than five percent (5%) equity interest, or is a stockholder of publicly traded stock worth ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more at fair market value or which represents more than ten percent (10%) equity interest or (b) will receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission as a result of the contract; provided however, if such officer (a) is an employee of the business involved in the contract and (b) has no ownership interest or will not receive a pecuniary fee such officer shall not be deemed to have an interest within the meaning of this section. 
    The provisions of this section shall not apply if the interested officer: 
A.  Makes a declaration on the record to the City responsible for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent of his/her interest, prior to official consideration of the contract; 
B.  Does not vote on the matter of granting the contract, except that if the number of members of the Board declaring an interest in the contract would prevent the Board, with all members present, from securing a quorum on the issue, then all members may vote on the matter; and 
C.  Does not act for the City as to inspection or performance under the contract in which he/she has an interest. 
    The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and selling of warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any City by a financial institution shall not be considered a contract under the provisions of this section. The ownership of less than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of a corporation shall not constitute an interest within the meaning of this section. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A through C above, if an officer's parent, spouse or child is an employee of the City, the officer may vote on all issues of the contract which are generally applicable to all employees or all employees within a classification and do not single out his/her parent, spouse, or child for special action. If an officer has the power to employ personnel and he/she hires his/her parent, spouse, or child, such officer shall disclose the hiring pursuant to subsections 1 through 5 below, except that if the parent, spouse, or child is already employed in the position at the time the officer takes office and such position does not change, no disclosure need be made. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any contract entered into with an interested officer shall be subject to applicable competitive bidding requirements and shall be fair and reasonable to the City. 
    The City Clerk shall maintain, separately from other records, a ledger containing the information listed in subsections 1 through 5 of this section about every contract entered into by the City in which an officer has an interest as specified above for which disclosure is made as provided in subsections A through C above. Such information shall be kept in the ledger for five (5) years from the date of the officer's last day in office and shall include the: 
1.  Names of the contracting parties; 
2.  Nature of the interest of the officer in question; 
3.  Date that the contract was approved by the City involved; 
4.  Amount of the contract; and 
5.  Basic terms of the contract. 
    The information supplied relative to the contract shall be provided to the Clerk not later than ten (10) days after the contract has been signed by both parties. The ledger kept by the Clerk shall be available for public inspection during the normal working hours of the office in which it is kept. 
    An open account established for the benefit of any City or entity thereof, with a business in which an officer has an interest, shall be deemed a contract subject to the provisions of this section. The statement required to be filed pursuant to this section shall be filed within ten (10) days after such account is opened. Thereafter, the Clerk shall maintain a running account of all amounts purchased on the open account. Purchases made from petty cash or a petty cash fund shall not be subject to the provisions of this section. 
    No officer, including volunteer firefighters and ambulance drivers, shall receive any pay or perquisites from the City other than his/her salary. The Council shall not pay or appropriate any money or other valuable thing to pay a person who is not an officer for the performance of any act, service, or duty, which shall come within the proper scope of the duties of any officer of the City. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 14-101; 16-502, §18-305 through 18-312, §49-14,101 through 49-14,103.03 
1-1003 - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; EMERGENCY SUCCESSION 
A.  In accordance with the terms and conditions of the Nebraska General Emergency Succession Act, sections 84-1101 to 84-1117, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, Supplement, 1959, hereinafter referred to as "act," the Mayor/President and Council declare that it is necessary and advisable to invoke the provisions of such act in the City. 
B.  The provisions of the act referred to in subsection A of this section are hereby invoked in this City; and, from and after the date of August 8, 1961, shall become and be binding upon the officers of the City, whether now in office or hereafter elected or appointed, including, but not necessarily limited to the following: Each member of the Council; each member of the Civil Service Commission; the City Manager; Chief of Police; Fire Administrator; Director of Finance and Administration; City Attorney; City Engineer; Water Department Superintendent and City Sanitation Officer. 
(Code 1958, 2.67; Code 1980, 2-78) 
1-1004 - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; INDEMNIFICATION 
A.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term "officer" shall include any elected or appointed official of the City; the term "employee" shall include all employees of the City, whether under civil service or not; and the term "malicious acts" shall mean the willful intentional doing of a wrongful act without justification or excuse in order to purposely injure another person. 
B.  Right to Indemnification. The City shall indemnify its officers and employees, including Council Members and its past officers, against any judgment or settlement for money damages and costs as a result of an act or omission occurring in the course and scope of employment or official performance of duty of such officer or employee, including Council Members (after January 1, 1983). Such official's, employee's, and Council Member's right to indemnification shall not exceed the amount subject to collection by a party directly from the said official, employee, or Council Member. 
C.  Applicability; Interpretation. The provisions of subsection B of this section shall not apply in the case of illegal or malicious acts in office or willful or wanton neglect of duty. This section shall not be interpreted as an expansion of any officer's, employee's or Council Member's personal liability. 
D.  Notice. The provisions of this section shall apply only where the City has been given notice of any actions brought against any City employee or officer based upon any action of such employee or officer within the scope of his/her authority as such. 
E.  Conflict of Interest. Nothing in this section or in any ordinance of the City, and nothing in any agreement with the City Attorney shall be construed to require the City Attorney to provide legal services in any manner which would cause the Attorney to be involved in a conflict of interest. 
F.  Defense in Actions. Among the duties of the City Attorney shall be that of representing as counsel, without charge to the persons involved, any City officer or employee in connection with any claim, suit for damages, or other action against such officer or employee of his/her public duties; provided that such employee or officer may have his/her own counsel to assist in the defense, at the expense of the employee or officer. In the event that the City Attorney is in a conflict, the Council may authorize and pay for retention of private counsel. 
G.  City's Defenses. Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving the City's defense of governmental immunity to it or its employees or officers in any action brought against the City or such officer or employee. 
(Ord. No. 4065, §1-7, 1-24-89; Code 1980, 2-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 13-1801 
1-1005 - REMOVAL OF COUNCIL MEMBERS; GROUNDS 
    Any elected officer of the City may be charged, tried and removed from office for official misconduct in the manner and for the causes following: 
A.  For habitual or willful neglect of duty; 
B.  For gross partiality; 
C.  For oppression; 
D.  For extortion; 
E.  For corruption; 
F.  For malfeasance in office; or 
G.  For conviction of a felony. 
(Code 1958, 2.7; Code 1980, 2-86) 
1-1006 - REMOVAL OF COUNCIL MEMBERS; CHARGES AND SPECIFICATION; NOTICE TO APPEAR 
    Any person may make a charge under the provisions of the preceding section in writing and under oath, specifying the nature of the misconduct or malfeasance and file the same with the City Clerk. Such charge and specifications shall be read at the first (1st) regular meeting of the Council, or at any special meeting called for that purpose, and a copy of such charge, certified by the Clerk, together with a notice to show cause at the meeting of the Council why he/she should not be removed from office, shall be served upon the officer so accused, at least five (5) days before the time fixed to show cause; provided, that any police officer of the City, without any complaint being filed against him/her as provided in this Article, may be summarily removed from office by the City Manager. 
(Code 1958, 2.8; Code 1980, 2-87) 
1-1007 - REMOVAL OF COUNCIL MEMBERS; SERVICE OF NOTICE 
    The notice provided for in section 1-1006 of this Code may be served by any police officer of the City and the return of such officer shall be sufficient evidence of the service of the same. Service and return of every such notice shall be made in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1958, 2.11; Code 1980, 2-88) 
1-1008 - REMOVAL OF COUNCIL MEMBERS; FAILURE TO APPEAR 
    In case any officer accused as provided by the preceding section shall neglect to appear and file a denial in writing, or render a satisfactory reason for not doing so, at the time and place he/she was notified to appear before the Council, the charge and specifications shall be taken as true and the Council shall declare the office vacant. 
(Ord. No. 2723, 1, 10-11-77; Code 1980, 2-89) 
1-1009 - REMOVAL OF COUNCIL MEMBERS; DENIAL OF CHARGES; TRIAL 
    In case any officer accused as provided by this Article shall file a denial of the charge and specifications in writing, the Council may forthwith proceed to try such officer and if, after the trial, the Council shall be satisfied that such officer has been guilty of the offense charged, it shall cause such finding to be entered upon the records and declare the office vacant. 
(Ord. No. 2723, 2, 10-11-77) 
1-1010 - REMOVAL OF COUNCIL MEMBERS; METHOD OF CONDUCTING TRIAL 
    The proceedings at the trial of any person under the provisions of this Article shall be as nearly like those in ordinary actions at law as the nature of the case will admit, and it shall be the duty of the City Attorney, if so directed by the Council, to prosecute the case against the accused officer, or the Council may employ such special assistant attorneys as it may deem necessary to act as prosecutors. 
(Code 1958, 2.12; Code 1980, 2-91) 
1-1011 - SOCIAL SECURITY; ACCEPTANCE; CONSTRUCTION OF TERMS 
    The City accepts for itself and on behalf of its officials, appointees and employees, except such as are excluded by the provisions of this Article, their dependents and survivors, the provisions, benefits and protection of the Federal Old Age and Survivors' Insurance System, designated the "system" in this Article, established by Title II of the Social Security Act, the same being Public Law 734 (81st Congress, 2nd Session, H. R. 6000) and to be cited as the "Social Security Act Amendments of 1950." 
    The term "employee" as used in this Article shall mean an employee as defined by the Social Security Act and shall include both officers and appointees of this City. 
(Code 1958, 2.32; Code 1980, 2-119) 
1-1012 - SOCIAL SECURITY; CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS TO EFFECTUATE SYSTEM 
    The Mayor/President of the City is hereby authorized and directed to enter into such contracts and make such agreements and stipulations with the administrator of the system in and for the State, or such other State agency for the purpose that may hereafter be designated or created, as may be deemed necessary or expedient by the administrator or other State agency authorized in the premises, as the case may be, or as required by general law, State or Federal, or any applicable regulations of the State or Federal agency, to extend the benefits and protection of such system to the eligible employees of this City, their dependents and survivors. Such contracts, agreements or stipulations shall be executed in duplicate by the Mayor/President, attested by the signature of the City Clerk with the seal of the City attached thereto, one copy thereof to be filed with and become a part of the permanent records of the City. Such agreement shall be made retroactive to January 1, 1951, in all respects. 
(Code 1958, 2.33; Code 1980, 2-120) 
1-1013 - SOCIAL SECURITY; EMPLOYEES INCLUDED IN SYSTEM 
    The employees or classes of employees of this City shall include all such employees as are not excluded from participation in the system by the provisions of the following section and are hereby determined to be within and entitled to the benefits and protection of the system. 
(Code 1958, 2.34; Code 1980, 2-121) 
1-1014 - SOCIAL SECURITY; EMPLOYEES EXCLUDED FROM SYSTEM 
    The following employees are hereby determined to be excluded by the terms of this Article from participation in the system: 
    Any employee with respect to any position not authorized for coverage by applicable State or Federal laws or regulations of the Federal administrative agency. 
(Code 1958, 2.35; Code 1980, 2-122) 
1-1015 - SOCIAL SECURITY; WITHHOLDINGS FROM SALARIES AUTHORIZED 
    Withholdings from the compensation of eligible employees of this City as found and determined by the two (2) preceding sections are hereby authorized and the City shall impose upon such employees as to services covered by this Article such withholdings to be made in amounts and at such times as may be required by general law, State or Federal, and applicable regulations promulgated with respect thereto by State or Federal administrative agencies. 
(Code 1958, 2.36; Code 1980, 2-123) 
1-1016 - SOCIAL SECURITY FUND; CREATED; PAYMENTS INTO FUND 
    There is hereby created and the Director of Finance and Administration is hereby authorized and directed to set up an account to be known as the "Social Security Fund" into which the withholdings authorized by the preceding section shall be paid, together with any appropriations from available funds that might be made from time to time by municipal authority for the benefit of the fund. Such fund shall be kept segregated and shall be used for no other purposes than the provisions and obligations of this Article as provided to be accomplished by such fund. 
(Code 1958, 2.37; Code 1980, 2-124) 
1-1017 - SOCIAL SECURITY FUND; PAYMENTS FROM FUND TO ADMINISTRATOR 
    The moneys in the Social Security Fund created by the preceding section shall be paid over to the tax commissioner designated by law as the administrator of the Social Security Act for the State as authorized and provided by regulations promulgated to that end by such administrator. 
(Code 1958, 2.38; Code 1980, 2-125) 
1-1018 - SOCIAL SECURITY; CITY RECORDS AND REPORTS 
    The Director of Finance and Administration and the City shall keep such records and make such reports relevant to the administration of the Social Security Act as may be required by general law, State or Federal, or as provided by regulations promulgated by either the State or Federal administrator of the system. 
(Code 1958, 2.39; Code 1980, 2-126) 
ARTICLE 11. - COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS 

1-1101 - PARTICIPATION IN COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS 
    The City is hereby authorized to join with any incorporated villages, cities or counties that are eligible and may wish to participate in the creation of the Buffalo County Council of Governments through the execution of an intergovernmental agreement. The Mayor/President is hereby authorized for and on behalf of the City, as its corporate act and deed under its corporate name and seal, to execute an agreement for participation by the City in the Buffalo County Council of Governments, which agreement shall be substantially in the words and figures set forth in that certain agreement. 
(Code 1958, 2.4-1; Code 1980, 2-3) 
ARTICLE 12. - CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION 

1-1201 - CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION; POSITIONS COVERED 
    The Civil Service Act shall apply only to full-time police officers and full-time firefighters of the City. Full-time police officers shall mean police officers in positions which require certification by the Nebraska Law Enforcement Training Center, who have the power of arrest, who are paid regularly by the City, and for whom law enforcement is a full-time career, but shall not include clerical, custodial, or maintenance personnel. Full-time firefighters shall mean duly appointed firefighters who are paid regularly by the City and for whom firefighting is a full-time career, but shall not include clerical, custodial, or maintenance personnel who are not engaged in fire suppression. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. I, 1, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-51; Ord. No. 5260, 5-28-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-1829 
1-1202 - ESTABLISHMENT OF SALARIES AND COMPENSATION 
    The Civil Service Act shall not be construed to infringe upon the power and authority of the City Manager to establish salaries and compensation of employees within the compensation schedule or ranges established by the Council for the positions. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. I, 2, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-52) 
1-1203 - CITY'S DUTY TO COMMISSION 
    It shall be the duty of the Council to appropriate each fiscal year, from the general funds of the City, a sum of money sufficient to pay the necessary expenses involved in carrying out the purposes of the Civil Service Act. The City Manager may establish the rate of pay of any special counsel. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. I, 3, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-53) 
1-1204 - POLITICAL FUND CONTRIBUTION AND POLITICAL SERVICE 
    No person holding any position subject to civil service shall be under any obligation to contribute to any political fund or to render any political service to any person or party whatsoever. No person shall be removed, reduced in position or salary or otherwise prejudiced for refusing to do so. No public officer, whether elected or appointed, shall discharge, promote, demote, or in any manner change the official rank, employment, or compensation of any person under civil service, or promise or threaten to do so for giving, withholding, or neglecting to make any contribution of money, services, or any valuable thing for any political purposes. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. I, 4, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-54) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-1841 
1-1205 - OBSTRUCTING EXAMINATION 
    No commissioner or any other person shall by himself/herself or in cooperation with one (1) or more persons: 
A.  Defeat, deceive, or obstruct any person in respect to the right of examination according to the rules and regulations made pursuant to the Civil Service Act; 
B.  Falsely mark, grade, estimate, or report upon the examination and standing of any person examined or certified in accordance with such act or aid in so doing; 
C.  Make any false representation concerning the same or concerning the persons examined; 
D.  Furnish any person any special or secret information for the purpose of improving or injuring the prospects or chances of any person so examined or certified to be examined or certified; or 
E.  Persuade any other person or permit or aid in any manner any other person to impersonate him/her in connection with any examination, application, or request to be so examined. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. I, 5, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-55) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-1840 
1-1206 - CREATED 
    There is hereby created in the City of Kearney a Civil Service Commission consisting of three (3) members, each being a citizen of the United States, a resident of such City for at least three (3) years immediately preceding such appointment, and an elector of the county wherein such person resides. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. II, 1, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-1827 
1-1207 - APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS 
    The members of the Civil Service Commission shall be appointed by the City Manager. At the time of any appointment, not more than two (2) members of the Civil Service Commission, including the one or ones appointed, shall be registered electors of the same political party. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. II, 2, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-62) 
1-1208 - MEMBERS' TERM OF OFFICE 
    The first persons appointed to the Civil Service Commission shall be for terms of two (2) years, four (4) years, and six (6) years respectively. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for six (6) years. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. II, 3, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-63) 
1-1209 - REMOVAL FROM OFFICE 
    Any member of the Civil Service Commission may be removed from office for incompetency, dereliction of duty, malfeasance in office, or other good cause by the City Manager, except that no member of the Civil Service Commission shall be removed until written charges have been preferred, due notice given such member, and a full hearing had before the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. II, 4, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-64) 
1-1210 - COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS 
    Members of the Civil Service Commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. II, 5, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-65) 
1-1211 - MEETINGS 
    The Civil Service Commission shall hold meetings as may be required for the proper discharge of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. II, 6, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-66) 
1-1212 - CHAIRPERSON 
    The Civil Service Commission shall annually elect one of its members as chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. II, 7, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-67) 
1-1213 - SECRETARY AND CHIEF EXAMINER 
    The Civil Service Commission shall appoint a secretary and a chief examiner who shall keep the records of the Commission, preserve all reports made to it, superintend and keep a record of all examinations held under its direction, and perform such other duties as the Commission may prescribe. The Commission may merge the positions of secretary and chief examiner and appoint one (1) person to perform the duties of both positions. The Commission shall appoint the City's personnel officer as secretary and chief examiner, if requested to do so by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. II, 8, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-68) 
1-1214 - QUORUM 
    Two (2) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. II, 9, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-69) 
1-1215 - POWERS AND DUTIES 
A.  The Commission shall adopt and promulgate procedural rules and regulations which shall provide in detail the manner in which examinations may be held and any other matters assigned to it by the City Manager. At least one (1) copy of the rules and regulations, and any amendments, shall be made available for examination and reproduction by members to the public. One (1) copy of the rules and regulations and any amendments shall be given to each full-time police officer and full-time firefighter. 
B.  The Commission shall provide that all tests shall be practical and consist only of subjects which will fairly determine the capacity of persons who are to be examined to perform the duties of the position to which an appointment is to be made and may include, but not be limited to, tests of physical fitness and of manual skill and psychological testing. 
C.  The Commission shall provide, by the rules and regulations, for a credit of ten percent (10%) in favor of all applicants for an appointment to an entry level position, as defined by the City Manager, under civil service who, in time of war or in any expedition of the Armed Forces of the United States, have served in and been honorably discharged from the Armed Forced of the United States and who have equaled or exceeded the minimum qualifying standards established by the City Manager. 
D.  The Commission may conduct an investigation concerning and report upon all matters regarding the enforcement and effect of the Civil Service Act and the rules and regulations prescribed. 
E.  The Commission may inspect all institutions, departments, positions, and employments affected by such Act to determine whether such Act and all such rules and regulations are being obeyed. The Commission shall also make a like investigation on the written petition of a citizen, duly verified, stating that irregularities or abuses exist or setting forth, in concise language, the necessity for such an investigation. The Commission may be represented in such investigations by the City Attorney, if authorized by the City Manager. If the City Attorney does not represent the Commission, the Commission may be represented by special counsel appointed by the Commission in any such investigation. In the course of such an investigation, the Commission or Chief Examiner shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas to require the attendance of witnesses and the production by them of books, papers, documents, and accounts appertaining to the investigation, and to cause the deposition of witnesses, residing within or without the State, to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like depositions in civil actions in the courts of this State. The oaths administered and subpoenas issued shall have the same force and effect as the oaths administered by a district judge in a judicial capacity and subpoenas issued by the district courts of Nebraska. The failure of any person so subpoenaed to comply shall be deemed a violation of the Civil Service Act and be punished as such. No investigation shall be made pursuant to this section if there is a written accusation concerning the same subject matter against a person in the Civil Service. Such accusation shall be handled pursuant to Section 1-1220 of this Article. 
F.  The Commission shall provide that all hearings and investigations before the Commission or Chief Examiner shall be governed by the Civil Service Act and the rules of practice and procedure to be adopted by the Commission. In the conduct thereof, they shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence. No informality in any proceedings or hearing or in the manner of taking testimony shall invalidate any order, decision, rule or regulation made, approved or confirmed by the Commission. 
G.  The Commission shall establish and maintain a roster of officers and employees. 
H.  The Commission shall provide for, establish, and hold competitive tests to determine the relative qualifications of persons who seek employment in any position and, as a result thereof, establish eligible lists for the various positions. 
I.  The Commission shall make recommendations concerning a reduction in force policy to the City Manager. 
J.  The Commission shall keep such records as may be necessary for the proper administration of the Civil Service Act. 
K.  The Commission, upon request of the City Manager, shall establish and maintain a list of names and addresses, for a period of time established by the City Manager, of those eligible for appointment to or promotion within the department. 
L.  The Commission, upon request of the City Manager, shall certify the names of the persons who are the three (3) highest on the eligible list, following the most recent examination, and whose qualifications have been validated by the Commission for the vacant position. 
M.  The Commission shall begin and conduct all civil suits which may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the Civil Service Act and of the rules of the Commission. The Commission may be represented in such suits and all investigations pursuant to the Act by the City Attorney if authorized by the City Manager. If the City Attorney does not represent the Commission, the Commission may be represented by special counsel appointed by it in any particular case. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. II, 10, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-70; Ord. No. 5260, 5-28-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-1830 
1-1216 - APPOINTMENTS AND PROMOTIONS 
    All appointments to and promotions in the Police or full-time Fire Department shall be made solely on merit, efficiency, and fitness, which shall be ascertained by open competitive examination and impartial investigation by the Commission. Appointments shall mean all means of selecting, appointing, or employing any person to hold any position or employment subject to civil service. Promotion or demotion shall mean changing from one position to another, accompanied by a corresponding change in current rate of pay. Position shall mean an individual job which is designated by an official title indicative of the nature of the work. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. III, 1, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-76; Ord. No. 5260, 5-28-91) 
1-1217 - REQUIREMENTS FOR CIVIL SERVICE POSITION APPLICANTS 
    An applicant for a position of any kind under civil service shall be able to read and write the English language, meet the minimum job qualifications of the positions established by the City Manager, and be of good moral character. An applicant shall be required to disclose his/her past employment history and his/her criminal record, if any. Prior to certifying to the City Manager the names of the persons eligible for the position or positions, the Commission shall validate the qualifications of such person. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. III, 2, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-77) 
1-1218 - FILLING OF VACANT POSITIONS 
A.  Considerations. If the City Manager fills a vacancy in a position subject to the Civil Service Act, he/she shall consider factors including, but not limited to: 
1.  The multiple job skills recently or currently being performed by the applicant which are necessary for the position; 
2.  The knowledge, skills, and abilities of the applicant which are necessary for the position; 
3.  The performance appraisals of any applicant who is already employed in the department, including any recent or pending disciplinary actions involving the employee; 
4.  The employment policies and staffing needs of the department together with contracts, ordinances, and statutes related thereto; 
5.  Required Federal, State or local certifications or licenses necessary for the position; and 
6.  The qualifications of the applicants who are already employed in the department and have successfully completed all parts of the examination for the position. No person shall be reinstated in or transferred, suspended, or discharged from any such position or employment contrary to the Civil Service Act. 
B.  Procedure for Filling Vacant Positions. Whenever a position subject to the Civil Service Act becomes vacant, the City Manager shall make requisition upon the Commission for the names and addresses of the persons eligible for appointment and may decline to fill such vacancy for an indefinite period. If the Commission certifies fewer than three (3) names for each vacancy to the City Manager, the City Manager may appoint one (1) of such persons to fill the vacancy, may decline to fill the vacancy, or may order that another examination be held by the Civil Service Commission. 
C.  Temporary Appointments. If a vacancy occurs and there is no eligible list for the position or if the Commission has not certified persons from the eligible list, a temporary appointment may be made by the City Manager. Such temporary appointment shall not continue for a period longer than four (4) months. No person shall receive more than one (1) temporary appointment or serve more than four (4) months as a temporary appointee in any one (1) fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. III, 3, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-78) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-1829, 19-1835 
1-1219 - PROBATIONARY PERIOD 
    To enable the City Manager to exercise the choice in the filling of positions, no appointment, employment, or promotions in any position in the service shall be deemed complete until after the expiration of a period of one (1) year after the date of hire, employment, appointment or promotion for police officers or six months for full-time firefighters, during which time the City Manager may terminate the employment of the person appointed by him/her if, during the performance test thus afforded and upon an observation or consideration of the performance of duty, the City Manager deems such person unfit or unsatisfactory for service in the department. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. III, 4, 10-8-85; Ord. No. 3930, 1, 7-14-87; Code 1980, 31-79; Ord. No. 5260, 5-28-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-1835 
1-1220 - DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS 
A.  Tenure of Employment. The tenure of a person holding a position of employment under the Civil Service Act shall be only during good behavior. 
B.  Causes for Disciplinary Action. Any person subject to the Civil Service Act may be removed or discharged, suspended with or without pay, demoted, reduced in rank, or deprived of vacation, benefits, compensation, or other privileges, except pension benefits, for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Incompetency, inefficiency, or inattention to or dereliction of duty; 
2.  Dishonesty, prejudicial conduct, immoral conduct, insubordination, discourteous treatment of the public or a fellow employee, any act of omission or commission tending to injure the public service, any willful failure on the part of the employee to properly conduct himself/herself, or any willful violation of the Civil Service Act or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to such Act; 
3.  Mental or physical unfitness for the position which the employee holds; 
4.  Drunkenness or the use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or any other habit-forming drug, liquor or preparation to such an extent that the use interferes with the efficiency or mental or physical fitness of the employee or precludes the employee from properly performing the functions and duties of his/her position; 
5.  Conviction of a felony or misdemeanor tending to injure the employee's ability to effectively perform the duties of his/her position; or 
6.  Any other act or failure to act which, in the judgment of the Civil Service Commissioners, is sufficient to show the offender to be an unsuitable and unfit person to be employed in the public service. 
C.  Disciplinary Action Procedure. 
1.  No employee in the civil service who shall have been permanently appointed or inducted into civil service shall be removed, suspended, demoted, or discharged, except for cause and then only upon the written accusation of the Police Chief or Fire Administrator in the case of firefighters, or City Manager, or any citizen or taxpayer. 
2.  The written accusation shall set forth, in concise language, the alleged misconduct, charges, or grounds for investigation against the employee. The written accusation shall be filed by the complainant with the Secretary of the Commission who shall cause a copy of such written accusation to be delivered within seventy-two (72) hours after the filing (a) to the Police Chief, or Fire Administrator in the case of full-time firefighters, (b) to the City Manager, and (c) to the employee personally or by certified mail, addressed to the employee at the residence address of the employee shown in the personnel records. The Secretary of the Commission shall cause a return showing such delivery or mailing to be executed and filed in the Secretary's office. 
3.  The Police Chief, or Fire Administrator in the case of full-time firefighters, shall have the authority to immediately suspend, with or without pay, an employee against whom such written accusation has been filed, pending the confirmation of the suspension, or a decision of the City Manager to reinstate the employee, remove, demote, discharge, or suspend the employee, with or without pay. 
4.  Prior to the decision of the City Manager to reinstate the employee or remove, demote, discharge, or suspend the employee, with or without pay, the Police Chief or Fire Administrator in the case of full-time firefighters, shall within a reasonable period of time investigate the alleged misconduct, charges, or grounds against the employee and explain the basis of the employer's evidence to the employee and provide the employee an opportunity to present his/her version of the circumstances which resulted in the filing of the written accusation. If the Chief/Administrator's investigation reveals other misconduct, charges, or grounds, the Chief/Administrator shall amend the written accusation to include the misconduct, charges, or grounds by filing an amendment to the written accusation with the Secretary of the Commission who shall cause a copy of such amended accusation to be delivered within seventy-two (72) hours after the filing (a) to the Police Chief, or Fire Administrator in the case of full-time firefighters, (b) to the City Manager, and (c) to the employee personally or by certified mail, addressed to the employee at the residence address of the employee shown in the personnel records. The Secretary of the Commission shall cause a return showing such delivery or mailing to be executed and filed in the Secretary's office. In the event that the Police Chief is being disciplined, the City Manager shall follow the same procedures as are followed by the Police Chief in disciplining employees under the Act. Upon completion of this procedure within a reasonable period of time, the Police Chief or Fire Administrator shall recommend in writing to the City Manager that the alleged misconduct, charges, or grounds set forth in the written accusation be deemed: 
(a)  To be without merit; 
(b)  Insufficient grounds to warrant disciplinary action; 
(c)  To warrant disciplinary action less severe than removal, demotion, discharge, or suspension, with or without pay, such as an oral or written reprimand; or 
(d)  To warrant removal, demotion, discharge or suspension, with or without pay. 
5.  Within three (3) calendar days after receiving the written recommendation of the Police Chief or Fire Administrator, the City Manager shall decide that the alleged misconduct, charges, or grounds for investigation against the employee set forth in the written accusation be deemed: 
(a)  To be without merit; 
(b)  Insufficient grounds to warrant disciplinary action; 
(c)  To warrant disciplinary action less severe than removal, demotion, discharge, or suspension, with or without pay, such as an oral or written reprimand; or 
(d)  To warrant removal, demotion, discharge, or suspension, with or without pay. 
The City Manager shall file a copy of his/her decision within three (3) calendar days after receiving the written recommendation of the Police Chief or Fire Administrator, with the Secretary of the Commission who shall cause a copy of such decision to be delivered within seventy-two (72) hours after the filing (a) to the Police Chief or Fire Administrator, (b) to the employee, personally or by certified mail, addressed to the employee at the residence address of the employee shown in the personnel records, (c) to the complaining party by certified mail, and (d) to each member of the Commission. The Secretary of the Commission shall cause a return showing such delivery or mailing to be executed and filed in the Secretary's office. In the event the City Manager decides the complaint is without merit, or does not warrant disciplinary action, the Commission shall review and either affirm, modify or reject the decision of the City Manager. Review of the matter may be conducted by a standing committee of at least one (1) member of the Commission, or through the use of special counsel or investigator who shall report his/her findings and recommendations to the Commission. In the event the Commission finds that there are or may be grounds to sustain the accusation, the employee, Police Chief or Fire Administrator, City Manager and complaining party shall be notified by certified mail. The Commission shall then conduct a full investigation. 
6.  Any employee so removed, suspended, demoted or discharged may, within ten (10) calendar days after receiving written notice of the City Manager's decision, file a written demand for an investigation and public hearing by the Civil Service Commission. The employee shall file the request for the hearing with the Secretary of the Commission and simultaneously send a copy of the request to the City Manager. The failure to file such a request with the Secretary of the Commission within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of notice of the action by the City Manager shall constitute a waiver of the employee's right to review by the Civil Service Commission and the City Manager's decision shall become final. 
7.  Within five (5) calendar days of receipt of the employee's notice of appeal, the City Manager shall cause to be mailed or delivered the following notice to the employee and Secretary of the Civil Service Commission: 
(a)  A statement of the charge(s); 
(b)  The names of the witnesses who will be called on behalf of the City Manager and a general statement of the nature of their testimony; 
(c)  Copies of the documents to be introduced. 
8.  Within ten (10) calendar days of the filing of the written demand for an investigation and public hearing by the Commission, the employee shall mail or deliver the following to the City Manager and Commission: 
(a)  A response to the statement of the charge(s); 
(b)  The names of the witnesses who will be called on behalf of the employee and a general statement of the nature of their testimony; 
(c)  Copies of the documents to be introduced. 
9.  Upon receipt of a written demand, the Commission shall conduct an investigation. The investigation shall consist solely of a review of the written submissions of the City Manager and employee to determine whether any individuals or documents should be subpoenaed by the Commission for the subsequent public hearing before the Commission ultimately to determine whether the City Manager acted in good faith for cause. Good faith for cause shall mean that the action was not arbitrary or capricious and was not made for political or religious reasons. 
10.  The Commission shall schedule a public hearing not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) calendar days from the date of filing of the employee's written demand for an investigation. The Commission shall notify the City Manager and employee in writing at least three (3) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
11.  The City Manager or Police Chief or Fire Administrator shall be permitted to appear in person and by counsel and to present his/her case. The City Manager or Police Chief may present evidence by testimony and documents and shall be permitted to cross-examine the employee's witnesses. At the hearing, the employee shall be permitted to appear in person and by counsel and to present his/her defense. The employee may present evidence by testimony and documents and shall be permitted to cross-examine the witnesses called by the City Manager, Police Chief or Commission. 
12.  The Commission may affirm the action taken by the City Manager if such action is supported by a preponderance of the evidence. If the Commission finds that the removal, suspension, demotion or discharge was made for political or religious reasons or was not made in good faith for cause, it shall order the immediate reinstatement or reemployment of such employee in the position or employment from which such employee was removed, suspended, demoted, or discharged, which reinstatement shall, if the Commission in its discretion so provides, be retroactive and entitle such person to compensation and restoration of benefits and privileges from the time of such removal, suspension, demotion or discharge. 
13.  After the hearing, in lieu of affirming the removal, suspension, demotion, or discharge, the Commission may modify the order of removal, suspension, demotion, or discharge by directing a suspension, with or without pay, for a given period and the subsequent restoration to duty or demotion in position or pay. No later than ten (10) calendar days after the hearing the Commission shall certify its findings in writing to the employee and the City Manager who shall enforce them. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. III, 5, 10-8-85; Ord. No. 3793, 1, 10-22-85; Code 1980, 31-80; Ord. No. 5260, 5-28-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-1832, 19-1833 
1-1221 - REDUCTION IN FORCE POLICY 
A.  Establishment. The City Manager, in establishing a reduction in force policy, shall consider recommendations from the Civil Service Commission, but shall not be bound by them. Prior to the adoption of a reduction in force policy the Council and City Manager shall, after giving reasonable notice to each police officer or full-time firefighter by first-class mail, conduct a public hearing. 
B.  Factors. The City Manager shall adopt a reduction in force policy which shall consider factors including, but not limited to: 
1.  The multiple job skills recently or currently being performed by the employee; 
2.  The knowledge, skills, and abilities of the employee; 
3.  The performance appraisal of the employee including any recent or pending disciplinary actions involving the employee; 
4.  The employment policies and staffing needs of the department together with contracts, ordinances, and statutes related thereto; 
5.  Required Federal, State, or local certifications or licenses; 
6.  Seniority. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. III, 6, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-1830 
1-1222 - LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
    A leave of absence with or without pay may be granted by the City Manager to any person under civil service. The City Manager shall give notice of such leave to the Commission. All appointments for temporary employment resulting from such leaves of absence shall be made from the eligible list, if any, of the civil service. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. III, 7, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-82) 
1-1223 - PROVISIONS IN FORCE 
    All other provisions of the Civil Service as set forth in sections 19-1825 to 19-1847 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, which are not in conflict with this Article and are not specifically set forth in this Article are hereby approved and adopted by the City of Kearney as a part of the civil service ordinance of the City of Kearney. 
(Ord. No. 3789, Art. III, 8, 10-8-85; Code 1980, 31-83) 
ARTICLE 13. - KEARNEY HOUSING AGENCY 

1-1301 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
1-1302 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
1-1303 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
1-1304 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
1-1305 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
1-1306 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
1-1307 - RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF HOUSING AGENCY 
    The previously created and existing Housing Authority shall continue to exist as a Housing Agency under the Nebraska Housing Agency Act and shall hereafter conduct its operations consistent with the said Act. It shall be named the Kearney Housing Agency and all property, rights and land, buildings, records, and equipment and any funds, money, revenue, receipts or assets of the Housing Authority shall belong to the Kearney Housing Agency as successor. All obligations, debts, commitments, and liabilities of the Housing Authority shall become obligations, debts, commitments and liabilities of the Kearney Housing Agency. Any previously passed Resolutions of the Housing Authority and any actions taken by the Housing Authority prior to January 1, 2000 with regard to any project or program which is to be completed within or to be conducted for a twelve month period following January 1, 2000 and which Resolution or action is lawful under Nebraska law as it exists prior to the operative date of LB-105 shall be a lawful Resolution or action of the Kearney Housing Agency, binding upon and enforceable by or against the Kearney Housing Agency, notwithstanding that such Resolution or action is inconsistent with, not authorized, or prohibited under the provisions of the Nebraska Housing Agency Act. All Commissioners of the Housing Authority and all Officers, legal council, technical experts, directors, and other appointees or employees of the Housing Authority holding office or employment by virtue of any such prior law on January 1, 2000 shall be deemed to have been appointed or employed under the Nebraska Housing Agency Act. 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 71-1576, 71-1579 
1-1308 - THE KEARNEY HOUSING AGENCY BOARD 
    The Mayor/President shall appoint, subject to confirmation or denial of the Council, five (5) persons who, along with the Resident Commissioner, if any, shall constitute the Housing Agency Board, and such persons shall be called the Commissioners. One (1) Commissioner shall be appointed each year. Each Commissioner shall serve a five-year term of office or until his/her successor is duly appointed and qualified; provided that all vacancies shall be filled for the un-expired terms. The Council may appoint one (1) of its members to serve as one of the five (5) members of such Housing Agency for such term as the Council may determine. No person shall serve as a Commissioner unless he/she resides within the area of operation of the Kearney Housing Agency. A certificate of the appointment or re-appointment of any Commissioner shall be filed with the City Clerk, and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the proper appointment of such Commissioner. The Commissioner shall receive no compensation for his/her services, but he/she shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in discharge of his/her duties as provided by Sections 81-1174 thru 81-1177, R.R.S. A majority of Commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the Agency for the purpose of conducting its business, exercising its powers, and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the Agency upon the vote of the majority of the Commissioners present and voting, unless the by-laws of the Agency or the Ordinance creating the Agency require a larger number. The Commissioners shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from among the Commissioners and shall have the power to employ an executive director who shall serve as ex-officio secretary of the Agency. The Agency may also employ legal counsel for said services as it may require. It may employ accountants, appraisers, technical experts and such other officers, agents, and employees as it may require and shall determine their qualifications, duties, compensations, and terms of office. The Agency may delegate such other powers and duties to its agents or employees, as it may deem proper. During his/her tenure and for one year thereafter, no Commissioner, officer or employee of the Housing Agency shall voluntarily acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any project or in any property included or planned to be included in any project, or in any contact or proposed contract relating to an housing project. If any such commissioner, officer or employee involuntarily acquires any such interest, or voluntarily or involuntarily acquired any such interest prior to appointment or employment as commissioner, office, or employee, he/she shall immediately disclose his/her interest in writing to the Agency, and such disclosure shall be entered upon the minutes of the Agency, and he/she shall not participate in any action by the Agency relating to the property or contract in which he/she has any such interest. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. This prohibition shall not apply to the acquisition of any interest in notes or bonds of the Agency issued in connection with any housing project, or to the execution of the agreements by banking institutions for deposit or handling of funds in connection with a project or to act as trustee under any trust indenture, or to utility services, the rates for which are fixed or controlled by a governmental agency. This section shall not be construed to preclude, regulate or restrict the participation of any tenant of the Agency from serving, if appointed, as a commissioner of such authority, but he/she may not participate in any decision solely affecting his/her individual interest. 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 71-1594, 71-1595, 71-15,106, 71-15,149, 71-15,150 
1-1309 - APPOINTMENT OF RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 
    A sixth Commissioner, to be known as the Resident Commissioner, shall be appointed to the governing body by the President of the City Council, subject to confirmation or denial by the Council. To select the initial Resident Commissioner, or to fill subsequent vacancies in the position, the Housing Agency shall notify any Resident Advisory Board or other Resident Organization and all adult persons directly assisted by such Agency, to the effect that the position of Resident Commissioner is open and that if any such person is interested in being considered as a candidate for the position, such person should notify the Housing Agency, in writing, within 30 days of the person's willingness to be considered and to serve as Resident Commissioner. The names of all persons interested who have notified the Housing Agency of their interests in so serving shall be forwarded to the President of the Council and the Resident Commissioner shall be appointed from the list of names, subject to confirmation by the Council. Upon the appointment of a Resident Commissioner, the Certificate of Appointment shall state the term is for five (5) years or when no longer an eligible resident, whichever occurs first. In the event that no qualified person has submitted his or her name to the Housing Agency as being interested as a candidate for the position, and the Housing Agency has received no notification of interest in serving as a Resident Commissioner by any person, no Resident Commissioner shall be required to be selected. In the event a Resident Commissioner is appointed and resigns from the position prior to completion of the appointed term, or is no longer an eligible resident, or is otherwise disqualified or removed from the Board, and a vacancy is created, the Housing Agency shall solicit new candidate(s) for the position following the same procedure set forth above. In the event that no Resident Commissioner is selected and the position is un-filled, the Agency shall re-notify all adult persons directly assisted by the Agency that the position of Resident Commissioner is open and solicit these persons for candidates for the position not less than once annually. 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 71-15,104 
1-1310 - REMOVAL OF COMMISSIONERS 
    The Mayor/President may remove a Commissioner for neglect of duty, misconduct in office, or conviction of any felony, in the manner prescribed hereinafter. The Mayor/president shall send a notice of removal to such commissioner, which notice shall set forth the charges against him/her. Unless within the ten (10) days from the receipt of such notice, the Commissioner files with the Clerk a request for a hearing before the Council, the Commissioner shall be deemed removed from office. If a request for a hearing is filed with the Clerk, the Council shall hold a hearing not sooner than ten (10) days after the date a hearing is requested, at which time the Commissioner shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel and the Council shall determine whether the removal shall be upheld. If the removal is not upheld, the Commissioner shall continue to hold his/her office. 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 71-15,105 
1-1311 - AUTONOMY OF AGENCY 
    The Kearney Housing Agency is a political Subdivision, independent from the City of Kearney and operated by the Housing Agency. The Housing Agency shall constitute a public body, corporate and politic, and shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Nebraska Housing Agency Act. 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 71-1575(16) 
1-1312 - HOUSING AGENCY ACT ADOPTED 
    Except as otherwise herein specifically provided, the definitions, terms, provisions and conditions set forth in the Nebraska Statutes under the Nebraska Housing Agency Act are hereby adopted by reference, as they now exist, or may hereafter be amended, for the operation and management of the Kearney Housing Agency, and the Housing Agency Commission shall fully comply with and be governed by the terms of the Nebraska Housing Agency Act. 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 71-1575(10), 71-1576 
1-1313 - POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
    The Housing Agency shall adopt and promulgate fair and equitable policies establishing a plan for selection of applicants. The plan shall include standards for eligibility, procedures for prompt notification of eligibility or disqualification, and procedures for maintaining a waiting list of eligible applicants for whom vacancies are not immediately available. Eligible applicants shall be offered available vacancies as provided in such policies. 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 71-15,133 
1-1314 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
    The Housing Agency may adopt, promulgate, and enforce rules and regulations related to carrying out the purposes of the local housing agency and exercising its powers and to amend or repeal such rules and regulations from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 71-15,113(5) 
1-1315 - ANNUAL REPORTS 
    Within six months after the end of the Housing Agency's fiscal year, the Housing Agency shall prepare an annual report. This report shall contain financial statements and the results of the operations. The report shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners and signed by the Chairperson. The annual report of the Housing Agency shall be a public record and available for inspection and copying by members of the general public at the Housing Agency office. The annual report shall be placed on file with the City Clerk upon completion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 71-15,141 
1-1316 - FILING OF PLANS 
    The Housing Agency shall file with the City Clerk a copy of the five-year plan and annual plan required by Section 511 of The Federal Quality Housing and Work Responsibility Act of 1998. The plans shall be filed within 30 days after the date the plan is filed with the Department of Housing & Urban Development. 
(Ord. No. 6618, 1-25-2000) 
ARTICLE 14. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

1-1401 - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY; CREATION 
    There is hereby created the Community Redevelopment Authority of the City of Kearney, Nebraska. (Ord. No. 5647, 1, 8-10-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-2102.01 
1-1402 - OFFICERS 
    The City Manager shall appoint five (5) persons who shall constitute the Authority. The Authority shall organize by electing one of its members Chairperson of the Authority, and another of its members Vice Chairperson. The presence of three (3) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Authority shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which records shall be made available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 5647, 2, 8-10-93; Ord. No. 7544, 9-8-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-2102.01 
1-1403 - DIRECTOR 
    The Authority may appoint a Director, a Community Redevelopment Administrator or Coordinator and such other officers and employees as may be desired through contract with the Department of Economic Development upon terms which are mutually agreeable. The Director, when appointed, shall serve as Ex-Officio Secretary of the Community Redevelopment Authority, and shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the Authority, including the necessary administrative functions described in the statutes under which the Authority has been created. 
(Ord. No. 5647, 3, 8-10-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-2102.01 
1-1404 - FUNDS 
    All income, revenue, profits and other funds received by the Authority shall be deposited with the City Treasurer as Ex Officio Treasurer of such Authority without commingling such money with any other money under his/her control and disbursed by him/her by check or draft only upon warrants, orders or requisitions by the Chairperson of such Authority or other person authorized by such Authority, which shall state distinctly the purpose for which the same are drawn. A permanent record shall be kept by the Authority of all warrants, orders or requisitions so drawn, showing the date, amount, consideration and to whom payable. 
(Ord. No. 5647, 4, 8-10-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-2102.01 
1-1405 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT LAW 
    The Authority shall be vested with all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth at Chapter 18, Article 21, the Community Development Law, Sections 18-2101, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 5647, 5, 8-10-93) 
ARTICLE 15. - PURCHASING 

1-1501 - TITLE 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Purchasing Ordinance of the City of Kearney". 
1-1502 - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    BID: Shall mean and include all bids and proposals. 
    CITY: Shall mean the City of Kearney, Nebraska. 
    CONTRACTUAL SERVICES: Shall mean work performed by an independent contractor requiring specialized knowledge, experience, expertise or similar capabilities wherein the service rendered does not consist primarily of acquisition of supplies, materials, and equipment. The services may include (by way of illustration, not limitation) services such as maintenance of buildings or equipment, employee training, postage, equipment service contracts, rental of equipment and machinery, and cleaning services. The term shall not include professional services, as defined in this article, or other contractual services which are in their nature unique and not subject to competition such as public utility services, telephone, and cable services. 
    PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: Shall mean and include all architect, engineering, accounting, legal, medical, and consultant services. 
    SUPPLIES: Shall mean all property including all supplies, materials, and equipment. 
    USING AGENCY: Shall mean any department, division, commission, or other unit in the City using supplies, procuring contractual services, or procuring professional services as provided for in this article. 
1-1503 - OFFICE OF PURCHASING AGENT; APPOINTMENT OF AGENT 
    There is hereby created and established an office of the Purchasing Agent. The Director of Finance shall be the Purchasing Agent of the City and shall be responsible to the City Manager for the efficient conduct of his/her office. 
(Ord. No. 7170, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 7954, 12-22-2014) 
1-1504 - RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES OF PURCHASING AGENT 
    The Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall have the responsibility: 
A.  To purchase or contract for all supplies, equipment, and contractual services needed by any using agency which derives its support wholly or in part from the City, in accordance with procedures as prescribed by City ordinance and such rules and regulations as the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the purchasing functions. 
B.  To procure for the City the highest quality in supplies, equipment, and contractual services at the least expense to the City; to discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales; and to establish and amend, when necessary, all rules and regulations authorized by City ordinance and any others necessary to its operations. 
C.  To explore the possibilities of purchasing "in bulk", so as to take full advantage of discounts; to procure for the City all tax exemptions to which it is entitled; and to cooperate with the City Manager, or his/her duly authorized representative, so as to secure for the City the maximum efficiency in budgeting and accounting. 
D.  To prescribe and maintain such forms as shall be reasonably necessary to the operation of purchasing; to prepare and adopt standard purchasing terms for City departments, divisions, agencies and suppliers. 
E.  To prepare or cause to be prepared written specifications of all such standard supplies. 
F.  To have the authority to declare vendors who default on their quotation irresponsible vendors and to disqualify them from receiving any business from the City for a stated period of time. 
G.  To keep informed on current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products, and secure for the City the benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions having national recognition and by private businesses and organizations. 
H.  To perform any related duties assigned by the City Manager. 
1-1505 - FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURE 
A.  When the estimated cost of supplies, equipment or contractual services exceeds forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00), no formal contract for purchase shall be authorized until the contract, if any, has been reviewed by the City Attorney, and without prior approval of the City Council. All supplies, equipment, and contractual services in this category shall be purchased by formal written contract or purchase order, from the lowest responsible and responsive bidder, after due notice inviting bids. 
B.  Notice inviting bids shall be published once in at least one (1) official newspaper in the city and at least ten (10) days preceding the last day set for the receipt of bids. The notice shall include a general description of the items to be purchased, and shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the date, time and place for opening bids. The Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall also endeavor to distribute bid documents to responsible prospective suppliers of whom the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, may be aware. 
C.  When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notice inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to a return of surety required by the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee. The successful bidder shall forfeit his/her bid deposit upon failure on his/her part to enter a contract within ten (10) days after the award. 
D.  Bids shall be submitted sealed to the City Clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public on the date and at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection. 
1.  The City Council shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of all bids, or all bids for any one (1) or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be served thereby. 
2.  The City Council shall have the authority to not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses, or other monies due the City. 
E.  Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. In determining "lowest responsible bidder", in addition to price, the City Council shall consider: 
1.  The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the contract required; 
2.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
3.  Whether the bidder can perform the contract within the time specified; 
4.  The quality of performance of previous contracts; 
5.  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract; 
6.  The life-cost of the personal property in relation to the purchase price and specific use of the item; 
7.  The performance of the personal property, taking into consideration any commonly accepted tests and standards of product usability and user requirements; 
8.  Energy efficiency ratio as stated by the bidder for alternative choices of appliances or equipment; 
9.  The information furnished by each bidder when deemed applicable by the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, concerning life-cycle costs between alternatives for all classes of equipment, evidence of expected life, repair and maintenance costs, and energy consumption on a per-year basis; 
10.  Such other information as may be secured having a bearing on the decision to award the contract; 
11.  A "responsive bidder" shall be defined as a person or company who has submitted a bid that conforms in all material respects to the "Invitation for Bids". 
F.  When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, and filed with other papers relating to the transaction. 
G.  No contract in excess of forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) for enlargements or general improvements, such as (by way of illustration, not limitation) water/sewer main extensions, street improvements, park improvements, or airport improvements, shall be awarded by the City Council until the plans/specifications and estimate of the cost are approved by the City Council. 
H.  Except in the case of tie bids, there shall be neither formal nor tacit local vendor's preference policies. The City shall neither impose nor condone any bidding or procurement policies that result in exclusionary or anti-competitive bidding or violate state or federal antitrust laws. If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder. Where there is no local bidder or when two (2) or more local bidders are equal, the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall award the contract to one (1) of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public. 
I.  The City, whenever applicable, may, by the use of purchasing under a State of Nebraska contract, purchase supplies, equipment or services without the necessity of using the formal bid requirements as set forth in this section. 
J.  The Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing of supplies, equipment or services when the best interests of the City would be served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 7170, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 7449, 7-8-2008; Ord. No. 7954, 12-22-2014, Ord. No. 8173, 8-22-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-321 
1-1506 - INFORMAL PURCHASING 
A.  When the estimated cost of supplies, equipment or contractual services is less than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00), the purchase shall be made in the open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure prescribed for the award of formal contracts in this article and shall be referred to as open market purchases. All such purchases shall be awarded by the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee. 
B.  All open market purchases greater than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and not more than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) shall be acquired after solicitation of two (2) quotations, if possible, and after being assigned a purchase order by the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee. Purchases provided for under this subsection should be made from the "lowest responsible and responsive bidder", in accordance with the same criteria established in this article for the formal contract procedure. 
C.  All open market purchases of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or less may be made by utilizing a purchase card without the necessity of soliciting two (2 quotations). 
D.  The Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, may solicit open market quotes by direct mail request to prospective vendors, by public notice on the bulletin board at City Hall, by telephone, by facsimile transmission, by electronic mail or other electronic means. 
(Ord. No. 7170, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 7449, 7-8-2008; Ord. No. 7954, 12-22-2014, Ord. No. 8173, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 8214, 2-13-2018) 
1-1507 - PROFESSIONAL SERVICES 
    For the purpose of procuring professional services, any using agency requiring such services may procure them on its own behalf, in accordance with the selection procedures specified in this section. A using agency procuring such services shall consult with the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee. No contract for professional services exceeding forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) may be awarded until the contract has been reviewed by the City Attorney, and without the prior approval of the City Council. 
    All using agencies shall follow the following selection procedure when procuring professional services exceeding forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00): 
A.  Persons engaged in providing the designated types of professional services may submit statements of qualifications and expressions of interest in providing such professional services. A using agency using such professional services may specify a uniform format for statements of qualifications. 
B.  Adequate public notice of the need for such professional services shall be given by the using agency requiring professional services through a request for proposals. Such notice may include publication in a newspaper of general circulation not less than ten (10) days prior to the final date of receipt of proposals. The request for proposals shall describe the services required, list the types of information and data required of each offeror, and state the relative importance of particular qualifications. 
C.  The head of a using agency procuring the required professional services, or a designee of such officer, may conduct discussions with any offeror who has submitted a proposal to determine such offeror's qualifications for further consideration. Discussions shall not disclose any information derived from proposals submitted by other offerors. 
D.  Award shall be made to the offeror determined in writing by the head of the using agency procuring the required professional services, or a designee of such officer, to be best qualified offeror based on the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals, and negotiation of compensation determined to be fair and reasonable. If compensation cannot be agreed upon with the best qualified offeror, then negotiations will be formally terminated with the selected offeror. If proposals were submitted by one (1) or more other offerors determined to be qualified, negotiations may be conducted with such other offeror or offerors, in the order of their respective qualification ranking, and the contract may be awarded to the offeror then ranked best qualified if the amount of compensation is determined to be fair and reasonable. 
E.  All professional services costing one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less may be made by utilizing a purchase card without the necessity of a request for proposals. 
(Ord. No. 7170, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 7409, 12-26-2007; Ord. No. 7449, 7-8-2008; Ord. No. 7954, 12-22-2014, Ord. No. 8173, 8-22-2017) 
1-1508 - SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT 
    A contract may be awarded without competition when the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, determines that there is only one source for the required supplies, materials, or contractual services. The Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery, and terms. 
1-1509 - EMERGENCY PURCHASES 
A.  In the event of an emergency which requires immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services, the City Manager shall be empowered to authorize the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, to secure by open market procedure as herein [set forth], at the lowest obtainable price, any supplies or contractual services. 
B.  An "emergency" shall be defined as any event that interrupts the normal administration of municipal services, thereby jeopardizing the life, health or convenience of citizens. 
C.  Should an emergency situation arise on a weekend or holiday, and where it is not possible or convenient to reach the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, any purchase necessary shall be made by the department in charge and such purchase reported to the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, without delay. 
D.  A report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be filed by the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, with the City Manager. 
1-1510 - MISCELLANEOUS EXPENDITURES 
    The expenditure of public funds is hereby subject, pursuant to the State of Nebraska Local Government Miscellaneous Expenditure Act, to the following: 
A.  Authorized expenses may include: 
1.  Registration costs, tuition costs, fees, or charges; and 
2.  Mileage at the then current rate allowed by Section 81-1176 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, or actual travel expense if travel is by commercial or charter means. When travel mode is optional, the lower of the reimbursable cost is authorized; and 
3.  Meals and incidental (M&I) expense at the then current rate of the applicable federal per diem for M&I when required to travel away from home overnight; and 
4.  When required to travel away from home overnight, and traveling includes a partial day on the departure day or a partial day on the return day, the federal per diem rate for meals and incidentals (M&I) will apply at the rate of twenty percent (20%) for breakfast, thirty percent (30%) for lunch, and fifty percent (50%) for supper. Departures must occur prior to 6:00 a.m. for breakfast per diem and return must be after 8:00 p.m. for supper per diem; and 
5.  Actual cost of meals (receipts required), not to exceed the applicable federal per diem rate for meals and incidentals (M&I), when not required to travel when away from home overnight: and 
6.  Actual lodging rate is allowed, but no additional transportation costs, such as car rentals, shall be paid for commuting during the lodging stay if lodging is at a location hosting the function. 
B.  Authorized expenditures shall not include expenditures for meals of City Council members provided while attending a public meeting of the City Council unless such meeting is a joint meeting with one (1) or more other governing bodies. 
C.  Authorized expenditures shall not include expenditures for any expenses incurred by a spouse of an elected or appointed official, employee, or volunteer unless the spouse is also an elected or appointed official, employee, or volunteer of the City. 
    The expenditure of public funds is hereby authorized, pursuant to the State of Nebraska Local Government Miscellaneous Expenditure Act, for the following purposes: 
A.  Nonalcoholic beverages provided to individuals attending public meetings of the City Council. 
B.  Nonalcoholic beverages and meals: 
1.  Provided for any individuals while performing or immediately after performing relief, assistance, or support activities in emergency situations, including but not limited to, tornado, severe storm, fire or accident; 
2.  Provided for any volunteers during or immediately following their participation in any activity approved by the City Council, including but not limited to, mowing parks, picking up litter, removing graffiti, or snow removal; 
3.  Provided at one (1) recognition dinner each year held for elected and appointed officials, employees who are in good standing and have completed 10 years of service, or volunteers. The maximum cost per person for such dinner shall not exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The annual recognition dinner may be held separately for employees of each department or separately for volunteers, or any of them in combination. 
C.  Plaques, certificates of achievement, or items of value awarded to elected or appointed officials, employees, or volunteers, including persons serving on local government boards or commissions, subject to the following dollar limit on value: 
Volunteer Service $150.00 Board, Commission, Council Service $150.00 Award Ceremony/Farewell Tribute $150.00  
    The following procedures shall be used for business travel: 
A.  Transportation Method: 
1.  When travel is by air, advance ticketing by purchase card will be utilized whenever possible to obtain the lowest available coach fare. 
2.  All refunds, travel coupons, and other promotions in connection with business travel shall be returned to the City. 
B.  Lodging: 
1.  Reimbursement for non-commercial lodging is not permitted. 
2.  When City personnel are accompanied by non-City personnel, only the costs attributed to the City personnel are reimbursable. 
C.  Expenses: 
1.  The following expenses are reimbursable upon submission of paid receipts: parking fees; taxi fares; shuttle fares; bus fares; highway tolls; registration fees; lodging; tuition fees; supplies or equipment required for travel or training; rental cars; fees for official functions related to travel; and traveler's checks fees. 
2.  The following expenses are not reimbursable: entertainment, including television rentals; personal expenses, e.g. hygiene items, laundry, magazines; travel insurance; and alcoholic beverages. 
D.  Travel Advances: 
1.  Employees shall receive approval by the City Manager, or his/her designee, for any trip, and any travel advance, before departing and before incurring any expenses (including prepaid transportation, lodging expenses, and registration fees). Travel advances will only be authorized when employees are required to travel away from home overnight. 
2.  The use of purchase cards and advance purchase order payments of registration fees, lodging, and transportation expenses are encouraged. 
E.  Expense Claims: 
1.  Personnel on authorized travel must submit expense claims to the Finance Department immediately upon return, but not later than ten (10) working days after return to duty. 
2.  All receipts, unexpended City funds, and funds due the City, shall be returned at that time. 
3.  All expenses (including prepaid expenses) shall be summarized and accounted for on a "Request for Travel and Statement of Expenses" form. 
(Ord. No. 7170, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 7449, 7-8-2008; Ord. No. 7626, 1-11-2011; Ord. No. 7954, 12-22-2014, Ord. No. 8165, 7-25-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 13-2203 
1-1511 - PRESCRIBED AUTHORITY STRUCTURES 
    Insofar as the sale or purchasing procedures of this policy are concerned, the following authority structure shall apply: 
A.  Every City employee shall requisition for supplies, equipment, or contractual services only with the written approval of the employee's department or division head or duly authorized representative; 
B.  After obtaining the written approval of the department or division head, the employee shall forward the information regarding the proposed purchase to the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee. The Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall determine the disposition of the proposed purchase according to the procedures and authority specified in this article; 
C.  Any City employee who desires to appeal a decision of the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall appeal only to the City Manager, unless the City Manager determines that the final decision should rest with the City Council and be determined in public session, his decision in all cases shall be final; 
D.  No City employee shall circumvent that prescribed authority structure of this policy without permission of the City Manager 
1-1512 - REQUISITIONS AND ESTIMATES 
A.  All using agencies, departments or divisions, either by or with the authorization of the agency, department or division head under which they operate, shall file with the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements for any supplies, equipment, or contractual services, in such manner, at such times, and for such future periods as the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall prescribe. 
B.  A using agency, department or division shall not be prevented from filing in the same manner with the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, at any time, a requisition or estimate for any supplies, equipment, and contractual services, the need for which was not foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed. 
C.  The Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall examine such requisition or estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to estimated cost; but revisions as to quality and quantity shall be directly approved by the City Manager. 
D.  Purchases under one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), not involving supply needs that can be ordered in bulk, may be accomplished through the use of a purchase card. 
(Ord. No. 7170, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 7954, 12-22-2014) 
1-1513 - ENCUMBRANCE OF FUNDS 
    Except in cases of emergency, the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall not issue any order for delivery on a contract or open market purchase until it has been certified, after pre-audit, that there is sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance to the credit of the using agency or department, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such orders. 
1-1514 - PERFORMANCE AND PAYMENT BONDS 
A.  When a construction contract is awarded in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the City and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract: 
1.  A performance bond satisfactory to the City, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the City, in an amount equal to 100% of the price specified in the contract; and 
2.  A payment bond satisfactory to the City, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the City, for the protection of all persons supplying labor and material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of the work provided for in the contract. The bond shall be in an amount equal to 100% of the price specified in the contract. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the City to require a performance bond or other surety in addition to those bonds, or in circumstances other than specified in this section. 
C.  Unless otherwise authorized by law, any person who has furnished labor or material to the contractor or subcontractors for the work provided in the contract, for which a payment bond is furnished under this section, and who has not been paid in full within ninety (90) days from the date on which that person performed the last of the labor or supplied the material, shall have the right to sue on the payment bond for any amount unpaid at the time the suit is instituted and to prosecute the action for the amount due that person. However, any person having a contract with a subcontractor of the contractor, but no express or implied contract with the contractor furnishing the payment bond, shall have a right of action upon the payment bond upon giving written notice to the contractor within ninety (90) days from the date on which that person performed the last of the labor or supplied the material. That person shall state in the notice the amount claimed and the name of the party to whom the material was supplied or for whom the labor was performed. The notice shall be served personally or be registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to the contractor at any place the contractor maintains an office or conducts business. 
D.  Unless otherwise authorized by law, every suit instituted upon a payment bond shall be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction for the county or district in which the construction contract was to be performed. 
1-1515 - EXCEPTIONS 
    Insofar as the authority of the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, is concerned, this policy shall not apply to construction contracts for state or federally funded programs that mandate a different contracting procedure. 
1-1516 - PROHIBITION OF INTEREST 
    Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this article in which the Purchasing Agent, or any other City employee, is financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void, except that before the execution of a purchase order or contract, the City Council shall have the authority to waive compliance with this section when it finds such action to be in the best interest of the City. 
1-1517 - GIFTS AND REBATES 
    The Purchasing Agent, and any other City employee, is expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person, company, firm or corporation to which any purchase order or contract is or might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money, or anything of value whatsoever, except where given for the use and benefit of the City. 
1-1518 - INVENTORY 
    It shall be the responsibility of the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, to supervise the preparation and maintenance of a current inventory of all real and personal City property having a value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more and an anticipated life of more than one (1) year. Periodic checks will be made by the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, to ensure reliability. 
1-1519 - SURPLUS STOCK 
A.  All departments shall submit to the Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, at such time and in such form as he/she shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out, or scrapped. 
B.  The Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to sell or dispose of all surplus supplies and equipment of less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) in value which have become unsuitable or unnecessary for public use. The Purchasing Agent, or his/her designee, shall sell or dispose of the property by any method which is most advantageous to the City, including auction, sealed bid, private or public sale, trade-in for other property, or disposal at the landfill. All sales of equipment or supplies of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or more in value shall require the prior approval of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 7170, 4-26-2005) 
ARTICLE 16. - SENIOR SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD 

1-1601 - SENIOR SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD; CREATED 
    There is hereby created a Senior Services Advisory Board in and for the City of Kearney. The Board shall act in an advisory capacity and shall advise and assist the Senior Services Coordinator and the City Manager to insure the efficient and economical management and operation of City senior services programs and related facilities. 
(Ord. No. 7551, 9-22-2009; Ord. No. 7904, 6-10-2014) 
1-1602 - COMPOSITION 
    The Senior Services Advisory Board shall consist of five (5) members chosen from the citizens at large with a minimum of three (3) members residing within the corporate limits of the City of Kearney. However all members must be residents of Buffalo County. The members shall be qualified by general knowledge or experience in matters related to senior activities and community social programs, must be active at the Petersen Senior Activity Center and/or attend their events or programs. All members must be age fifty (50) or older and shall not hold any elective position in the City. 
(Ord. No. 7551, 9-22-2009; Ord. No. 8025, 8-25-2015) 
1-1603 - APPOINTMENT 
    The members of the Senior Services Advisory Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the majority of the City Council. The appointment for the members of the Board shall be staggered for overlapping terms of three (3) years. 
1-1604 - COMPENSATION 
    All members of the Senior Services Advisory Board shall serve as such without compensation. 
1-1605 - SECRETARY 
    A City staff person shall serve as the recording secretary. The Senior Services Coordinator shall serve as an ex-officio member of the Board. 
1-1606 - TERMS OF OFFICE 
    The term of each appointed member of the Senior Services Advisory Board shall be three (3) years. All members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. A Board member shall serve a maximum of two (2) consecutive terms. Interim appointments for terms of less than two (2) years shall not be considered a term. In order to establish staggered terms for the members, the initial terms of three (3) members shall be three (3) years, and two (2) members shall be two (2) years. All terms of office will expire on July 31. 
1-1607 - PARTICIPATION 
    Members of the Senior Services Advisory Board are expected to attend meetings on a regular basis. Whenever a Board member misses three (3) consecutive meetings or his/her attendance falls below seventy-five (75) percent in a 12-month period, the Mayor will formally request, by letter, clarification from the identified board member of the reason for lack of attendance. If no attendance improvement plan can be agreed upon by the Mayor and board member, the board member may be asked to consider resignation. 
1-1608 - VACANCY OF MEMBER 
    In case of vacancies by resignation, removal, illness or any other reason, the Mayor with the approval of the majority of the City Council shall immediately appoint a new member to the Board for the unexpired vacated term. 
1-1609 - MEETINGS; RECORDS 
    The Senior Services Advisory Board shall meet every other month or as needed in the meeting room at the Peterson Senior Activity Center. The time of the meetings shall be fixed by the Board at its first meeting in October. At its first meeting, and then at the regular August anniversary meeting, the members shall elect from its membership a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson. The proceedings of the Board shall be recorded and preserved in accordance with the Public Meetings Law, Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1408 R.R.S., et seq. 
1-1610 - QUORUM 
    Three (3) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
1-1611 - POWERS AND DUTIES 
    The Senior Services Advisory Board is an advisory board, thus having only that duty and power to advise and recommend to the City Manager and City Council. The Board shall have the duties and responsibilities as may be delegated to it by the City Council. The primary functions and duties include: 
  Recommend policies and procedures for development of the senior services. 
  Recommend services and programs for the senior citizens of the City and to promote and stimulate public interest which encourages social, recreational, and business interaction of the citizens of the City of Kearney. 
  Assist in developing short and long-range priorities for the provision of senior services. 
  Promote coordination of senior services activities with those of public officials, civic groups and other organizations. 
(Ord. No. 7551, 9-22-2009) 
ARTICLE 17. - ARCHWAY ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

1-1701 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7862, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 8064, 1-26-2016) 
1-1702 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7862, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 8064, 1-26-2016) 
1-1703 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7862, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 8064, 1-26-2016) 
1-1704 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7862, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 8064, 1-26-2016) 
1-1705 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7862, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 8064, 1-26-2016) 
1-1706 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7862, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 8064, 1-26-2016) 
1-1707 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7862, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 8064, 1-26-2016) 
1-1708 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7862, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 8064, 1-26-2016) 
1-1709 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7862, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 8064, 1-26-2016) 
1-1710 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7862, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 8064, 1-26-2016) 
1-1711 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7862, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 8064, 1-26-2016) 
Chapter 2 - AIRPORTS AND AVIATION 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

2-101 - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance used or designed for navigation or flight in the air. 
    KEARNEY MUNICIPAL AIRPORT: The property covered by a deed dated the fifteenth (15th) day of June, 1950, executed by the United States of America in favor of the City and filed and recorded at the County Register of Deeds office on the seventh (7th) day of July, 1950, in Deed Book 151, page 47. 
(Ord. No. 2872, 1, 9-26-78; Ord. No. 2932, 1, 1-9-79; Code 1980, 4-1; Ord. No. 7206, 9-13-2005) 
2-102 - MANAGEMENT GENERALLY 
A.  The Kearney Municipal Airport shall be and continue to be under the supervision and control of the City. 
B.  The City Manager and/or his/her designated officers are hereby charged with the duty and responsibility of operating and managing the airport and enforcement of the rules, regulations and directives established for the airport. 
C.  The City Council may promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems necessary or advisable for the proper management, control and operation of the Kearney Municipal Airport, and such rules and regulations may be adopted from time to time hereafter by resolution of the Board of Directors. A copy of such rules and regulations as are adopted by the City Council shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord No. 2872, 12, 9-26-78; Ord. No. 2932, 5, 1-9-79; Code 1980, 4-2; Ord. No. 7206, 9-13-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 3-215(1) 
2-103 - AIRPORT GUARDS 
    The City Manager is hereby authorized to appoint as airport guards or police any qualified reserve peace officers as defined by Nebraska Revised Statutes Section 81-1438 et seq. Any such duly appointed guard(s) or police shall have full police powers within the boundary limits of the Kearney Municipal Airport. 
(Ord No. 2872, 13, 9-26-78; Ord. No. 2932, 6, 1-9-79; Code 1980, 4-3; Ord. No. 7206, 9-13-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-1508 
2-104 - APPLICATIONS OF CODE; POLICE AUTHORITY 
A.  The terms and provisions of this Code are hereby adopted for and made applicable to the Municipal Airport and are to be immediately in full force and effect within the territorial limits of the Municipal Airport as defined. 
B.  All regular officers of the Police Department shall be and are hereafter vested with full police powers within the boundaries of the Kearney Municipal Airport; and it shall, hereafter, be their duty to enforce the provisions of the applicable City Code sections, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2932, 6, 1-9-79; Code 1980, 4-4; Ord. No. 7206, 9-13-2005) 
2-105 - PERMIT REQUIRED FOR COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS 
A.  No person shall operate or conduct any activity from the Kearney Municipal Airport for any commercial purpose or any purpose whatsoever for the financial profit of such operators, without first obtaining a permit for such operation or activity from the City. This issuance of any such permit shall be within the sole discretion of the City and in acting upon the application for such permit, the Kearney Municipal Airport shall take into consideration the availability of space for the particular type of operation or activity contemplated by the applicant, the safety of the lives and property of the inhabitants of the City, and all persons operating on or from said airport, the condition of the airport, and the desirability and suitability of such commercial operation upon and from said airport. 
B.  No permits for commercial operation shall be issued until the person seeking such permit shall have submitted to the City his/her application stating his/her name and address, a complete description of the type of commercial operation contemplated, the period of time to be covered by the permit, a complete description of the equipment to be used in such commercial operation and any other facts or information that may be required by the City Council from time to time. Each permit issued shall state specifically the nature or type of operation authorized by such permit, and the length of time covered by the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2872, 11, 9-26-78; Ord. No. 2932, 4, 1-9-79; Code 1980, 4-5; Ord. No. 7206, 9-13-2005) 
2-106 - RULES AND REGULATIONS; AIRCRAFT TRAFFIC PATTERN 
    The aircraft traffic pattern shall be the standard left-hand pattern as described in the Federal Aviation Regulations, Part 91, for airports without control towers. 
(Ord. No. 2932, 3, 1-9-79; Code 1980, 4-17) 
2-107 - RULES AND REGULATIONS; AIRCRAFT GROUND RULES 
    All landings and takeoffs, excepting helicopters, shall be made on the runways. No landings or takeoffs, excepting helicopters, shall be made on areas designated as ramp or areas designated as taxiways. 
(Ord. No. 2872, 10, 9-26-78; Ord. No. 2932, 3, 1-9-79; Code 1980, 4-18) 
2-108 - RULES AND REGULATIONS; NOISE RESTRICTED, DROPPING OBJECTS PROHIBITED 
    When any aircraft is in flight within or above the City, the pilot thereof, or any other person therein, shall not make, or permit any loud or unnecessary noise to be made by such aircraft, its motor, or any apparatus attached to or contained in such aircraft; nor shall such pilot, or other person, permit the use of any radio, mechanical device or apparatus for the intensification or amplification of the human voice or any sound or noise for advertising purposes. Such pilot shall not drop or release, or permit any person to drop or release, any object or thing which may endanger life or injure property, or drop or release any paper or advertising matter therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 2872, 9, 9-26-78; Ord. No. 2932, 2, 1-9-79; Code 1980, 4-19; Ord. No. 7206, 9-13-2005) 
2-109 - RULES AND REGULATIONS; ACCESS TO AIRPORT LANDS AND BUILDINGS 
A.  Excepting public roads and buildings (during normal business hours) that are used for public aviation transportation, only persons and/or vehicles authorized by a written lease or agreement with the City of Kearney or authorized by the Airport Manager shall be allowed to enter upon any airport lands or buildings. 
B.  Except for the vehicles and equipment used by the City in the operation and maintenance of the Kearney Municipal Airport, only vehicles authorized by the Airport Manager and equipped with flashing or rotating beacons shall be allowed to cross, enter upon, or travel upon any runway or taxiway. The Airport Manager may grant access to the apron areas to vehicles determined to need said access. Except for emergency vehicles, no vehicle shall exceed speeds of thirty-five (35) miles per hour when traveling upon or crossing any runway, taxiway, or apron area. 
C.  The Airport Manager shall determine which vehicles or persons are authorized to enter upon areas of the Kearney Municipal Airport. Unauthorized persons or vehicles shall be considered to be trespassing if they refuse to leave any of the Airport areas when requested to do so by the Airport Manager, any employees of the City of Kearney, the Kearney Police Department or the Kearney Volunteer Fire Department. 
D.  The use of any Airport-owned property for the establishment or maintenance of a family residence is hereby prohibited. For purposes of this section, the definitions of family and residence shall be as follows: 
    FAMILY: One (1) or more persons who are related by blood or marriage, living together and occupying a housekeeping unit, with or without kitchen facilities. 
    RESIDENCE: A factual place of abode (requiring only bodily presence as an inhabitant of the place). 
(Ord. No. 7206, 9-13-2005) 
2-110 - SMOKING PROHIBITED 
    Smoking is prohibited in the terminal building of the Kearney Municipal Airport except in designated areas and in private offices that are closed off from the rest of the public areas, in order to protest the public from exposure to smoke. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 5730, 3-8-94; Ord. No. 7206, 9-13-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 3-215(2), §71-5701, et seq. 
Chapter 3 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE 1. - SIGNS 

3-101 - SIGNS; TITLE 
    This Article shall be known as the City of Kearney Sign Ordinance and shall be referred to in this Article as "this ordinance." Refer to Chapter 50 "Sign Regulations" for zoning regulations pertaining to signs. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-1, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 7423, 3-11-2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-210 and 16-246 
3-102 - SIGNS; INTENT AND PURPOSE 
    This Article is intended to regulate and permit all exterior signs within the corporate limits so as to protect property values, to protect the character of various use areas of the City, to protect the health, safety and public welfare of the citizens of the City of Kearney. 
    The principle features of this ordinance will be the regulation of advertising to the business or use of the premises on which the sign is located unless otherwise permitted; to regulate the total sign area per site. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-2, 12-10-91) 
3-103 - SIGNS; DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
    COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
A.  Which advertises for sale any service, merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or 
B.  Which directs attention to any business, merchandise or commercial establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales; or 
C.  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind which is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, if such license is or may be required by any law of this State or any ordinance of this City; or 
D.  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
    NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Postal Department of the United States in accordance with the Federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year and sold to the public. 
    NON-COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature other than a commercial handbill or newspaper as defined herein. 
    POLITICAL SIGN: Campaign signs and posters advertising any candidate for any elected office. 
    SIGN PERMIT: A permit issued for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, relocation, improvement, removal, conversion or demolition of any sign issued pursuant to the building code and/or sign ordinance of the City of Kearney. 
    STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to, signs and excepting utility poles, fences and retaining walls. 
    UNLAWFUL SIGN: Any sign and/or advertising structure erected in the absence of a permit required by this ordinance, or in violation of any of the limitations, prohibitions or requirements of this ordinance. 
    VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1980, 3-17, 3-35; Ord. No. 5337, 3-3, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6865, 3-12-2002) 
ARTICLE 2. - POSTING 

3-201 - POSTING GENERALLY 
    No person shall post any bills, signs, posters or advertisements on any buildings, fences, poles or other property belonging to another without the consent of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1958, 3.1; Code 1980, 3-1; Ord. No. 5337, 3-4, 12-10-91) 
3-202 - ADVERTISING ON UTILITY POLES 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or place upon or against any telegraph, telephone or electric light pole or electric light standard within the City any advertisement of any character or description. 
(Code 1958, 3.1; Code 1980, 3-2; Ord. No. 5337, 3-5, 12-10-91) 
3-203 - MARKING ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, or attempt to advertise, by marking or painting on any of the streets or sidewalks within the City. 
(Code 1958, 3.3; Code 1980, 3-3; Ord. No. 5337, 3-6, 12-10-91) 
3-204 - DESTROYING LAWFUL POSTERS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully and maliciously tear down, deface or cover up any posted advertisement or bill of any person when the same is lawfully posted and put up and during the time such sign or advertisement shall be of value. 
(Code 1980, 3-4; Ord. No. 5337, 3-7, 12-10-91) 
3-205 - SIGNS AND BANNERS ACROSS STREETS 
    No person shall erect or place any sign or banner of wood, cloth, metal or other material across any street or sidewalk in the City, unless approved by the Council. 
(Code 1980, 3-5; Ord. No. 5337, 3-8, 12-10-91) 
ARTICLE 3. - HANDBILLS 

3-301 - DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS; PROHIBITED WHERE PROPERLY POSTED 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any parking lot or shopping center or upon any building therein if there is placed on said premises, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words "no trespassing," "no peddlers or agents," "no advertisement," or any similar notice. 
(Code 1980, 3-18; Ord. No. 5337, 3-9, 12-10-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-210 
3-302 - DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS; INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises. Provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill upon such premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent the same from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulation. 
(Code 1980, 3-19; Ord. No. 5337, 3-10, 12-10-91) 
3-303 - DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS; DEPOSITING ON UNINHABITED, VACANT PREMISES 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which is uninhabited or vacant. 
(Code 1980, 3-20; Ord. No. 5337, 3-11, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 5850, 10-25-94) 
3-304 - DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS; RESTRICTED IN PUBLIC PLACES 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any public place; except that a handbill may be personally delivered to any person willing to accept the same. 
(Code 1980, 3-21; Ord. No. 5337, 3-12, 12-10-91) 
3-305 - DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS; PLACING ON VEHICLES 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any shopping center or parking lot for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. 
(Code 1958, 3.2; Code 1980, 3-22; Ord. No. 5337, 3-13, 12-10-91) 
3-306 - DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS; SHOPPING CENTERS AND PARKING LOTS 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any shopping center or parking lot, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any shopping center or parking lot; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any shopping center or parking lot for any person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(Code 1980, 3-23; Ord. No. 5337, 3-14, 12-10-91) 
3-307 - DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS; EXEMPTION FOR MAIL AND NEWSPAPER 
    The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspaper shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1980, 3-24; Ord. No. 5337, 3-15, 12-10-91) 
ARTICLE 4. - PERMANENT SIGNS 

3-401 - PERMANENT SIGNS; REGISTRATION OF INSTALLERS 
    No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of installing, altering, repairing or removing any sign within the corporate limits of the City of Kearney unless he/she is registered as a sign installer by the City of Kearney. 
    Each person registering under the provisions of the above paragraph shall pay a two-year registration fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-16, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 8218, 2-13-2018) 
3-402 - REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION; GENERALLY 
    The Council, by a majority vote, shall have the power to revoke the registration of any sign installer pursuant to this ordinance, upon recommendation of the Building Inspector, if such registration was fraudulent, or if the sign installer is shown to be grossly incompetent or has twice been convicted within the calendar year of a violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to the penalties prescribed for the violation of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-17, 12-10-91) 
3-403 - REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION; NOTICE AND HEARINGS 
    Before registration can be revoked, notice shall be issued in writing enumerating the charges against him/her, and he/she shall be entitled to a hearing before the Council by appealing in writing not later than five (5) days from the date of receipt of the notice. The registrant shall be given an opportunity to present testimony, oral or written, and shall have the right of cross-examination. All such testimony before the Council shall be given under oath. The Council shall have the power to administer oath, issue subpoenas and compel the attendance of witnesses in such cases. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-18, 12-10-91) 
3-404 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7156, 3-22-2005) 
3-405 - CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE 
    Every person applying for registration as a Registered Sign Installer shall present evidence to the City Clerk that he/she has an insurance policy providing: 
A.  Worker's compensation insurance. 
B.  Minimum public liability and property damage insurance for the general public in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each person, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each accident and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage, executed by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State and acceptable to the City. 
C.  A thirty (30) day written notice to be given to the City Clerk in the event of expiration or of proposed cancellation of the insurance policy. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-20, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 8218, 2-13-2018) 
ARTICLE 5. - PERMIT 

3-501 - PERMIT; REQUIRED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter, relocate or maintain within the City and its extra-territorial jurisdiction any sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the City Manager or officers designated by him/her. 
(Ord. No. 2935, 1, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-51; Ord. No. 5337, 3-21, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
3-502 - APPLICATION 
    Application for a permit required by the provisions of this division shall be made to the Building Official upon forms provided for such purpose. It shall contain information requested by the Building Official on the required forms. 
(Ord. No. 2935, 1, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-52; Ord. No. 5337, 3-22, 12-10-91) 
3-503 - INCOMPLETE APPLICATIONS 
    In the event insufficient information is received to issue a permit, this department will request the balance of required information. If no response is received within thirty (30) days of the application, said application will become null and void and information will no longer be kept on file. Any fees paid will be forfeited by applicant. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-23, 12-10-91) 
3-504 - EXPIRATION 
    If the work authorized by a permit issued under the provisions of this division has not been completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
(Ord. No. 2935, 1, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-55; Ord. No. 5337, 3-24, 12-10-91) 
3-505 - APPROVAL 
    The Building Official shall review the completed application for a permit required by the provisions of this division and shall either approve or disapprove such application. 
(Ord. No. 2935, 1, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-53; Ord. No. 5337, 3-25, 12-10-91) 
3-506 - FEES 
    Fees as prescribed in this article are set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
A.  Where work for which a permit is required for this ordinance is started prior to obtaining the prescribed permit, the fee specified in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be doubled. The payment of such double fees shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this ordinance in the execution of the work or from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
B.  A separate electrical permit is required for the hook-up of an electric sign. Fees are set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2935, 3, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-62; Ord. No. 4005, 1, 4-12-88; Ord. No. 5337, 3-26, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
3-507 - APPEAL FROM DENIAL 
    In the event the City Manager or his/her designated officer refuses to approve an application for a permit required by this Section, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2935, 1, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-54; Ord. No. 5337, 3-27, 12-10-91) 
ARTICLE 6. - SIGNS GENERALLY 

3-601 - GENERAL PROHIBITION AND REQUIREMENTS 
A.  No sign shall be erected, installed, reconstructed or moved until a sign permit shall have been issued by the Building Official. 
B.  No sign shall be installed on or overhanging any public street or alley right-of-way except where otherwise permitted by this ordinance. 
C.  Signs of a public service or safety nature and placed by a governmental agency shall be exempt from these regulations. 
D.  No sign shall be attached to a utility pole nor to a tree which is on public right-of-way. 
E.  No sign or other markings shall be painted or otherwise placed on a public street, alley or sidewalk. 
F.  All signs shall be kept and maintained in good and clean condition, be kept structurally safe and sound and shall have a neat and attractive appearance. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-28, 12-10-91) 
3-602 - ELECTRIC SIGNS 
    Any person engaged in making connections of any electric sign to any electrical power system shall be registered as an electrician engaged in the business of electrical contracting, registered with the City of Kearney or shall be employed by a City of Kearney registered sign installer and possess a current Special Electrician license issued by the State of Nebraska as provided in Rule #9 of the State Electrical Board Rules with proof of license on file in the office of the Building Official. 
    Every electric sign installed in the City of Kearney shall bear the label of an approved testing agency and shall meet the applicable articles of the National Electric Code as adopted by the City of Kearney. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-29, 12-10-91) 
3-603 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-30, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6865, 3-12-2002) 
3-604 - UNLAWFUL SIGNS 
    The erection or maintenance of the following signs shall not be permitted: 
A.  Signs that are illegal or which advertise activities which are illegal under Federal, State or local laws or regulations. 
B.  Signs whose copy is out of date. 
C.  Signs that are not clean and in substantial good repair. 
D.  Signs which attempt, or appear to attempt, to direct the movement of traffic or which obscure or interfere with the effectiveness of or imitate or resemble any official traffic signal, sign or device. 
E.  Signs which prevent the driver of a vehicle from having a clear and unobstructed view of official signs and approaches to intersections where traffic merges. 
F.  Signs erected or maintained upon trees or utility poles or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural formations or features. 
G.  Signs which block any required access way or window. 
H.  Signs not attached or fastened down. 
I.  Signs with wiring not approved in accordance with the National Electrical Code. 
J.  Swinging signs of all types are prohibited and rotating signs shall not exceed eight (8) revolutions per minute. 
K.  Signs and banners across streets or sidewalks, unless approved by the Council. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-31, 12-10-91) 
3-605 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-32, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6865, 3-12-2002) 
3-606 - CHURCHES AND SCHOOLS 
    Every church and school shall be permitted one (1) wall sign, illuminated or nonilluminated, not exceeding fifty (50) square feet in area. In addition to the wall sign, each church or school shall be permitted a detached monument sign, illuminated or nonilluminated, having not more than two (2) faces, each face not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area. Such detached sign shall set back from the property line a minimum of fifteen (15) feet and shall not be located in the vision clearance triangle as described in Section 9-1109 "Vision Clearance." If the zoning district in which the church or school is located allows larger wall or detached signs, then the size standards of the zoning district shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-33, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6082, 2-27-96) 
3-607 - POLITICAL SIGNS, GENERALLY 
    It shall be unlawful for any candidate for any public office, or for any person, or persons, firm or corporation acting for or on his/her behalf with or without his/her express direction or knowledge, to fasten or attach in any manner whatsoever any political and campaign signs, poster, advertisement or notice, or cause the same to be done, upon any curb stone or upon any portion of any sidewalk or street, or upon any tree, post, pole, hydrant, bridge, pier or other structure within the limits or upon the corporate property of the City. 
    It shall be unlawful for any candidate for any public office or for any person or persons, firm or corporation acting for or on his/her behalf, with or without his/her express direction or knowledge, other than the owner or the agent thereof, to fasten or attach in any manner whatsoever any political and campaign signs, posters, advertisements or notices, or cause the same to be done, upon any private wall, window, door, gate, fence or sign, or upon any other private structure or upon any building, or upon any residential property without first having obtained the consent of the owner or an agent thereof. All such political campaign signs, posters, advertisements or notices permitted must be removed within ten (10) days from the date of final election and within ten (10) days from the date of a primary election, unless the candidate who seeks such public office has been nominated thereto. It shall be the duty of the owner of the property of where such political or campaign signs, posters, advertisements or notices are placed, to remove them in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. No permit shall be required to place political or campaign signs, posters, advertisements or notices under authority of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-34, 12-10-91) 
Cross reference- Chapter 50, Sign Regulations 
ARTICLE 7. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 

3-701 - DESIGN; GENERAL 
    Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic forces as specified in this ordinance. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such a manner as not to overstress any of the elements thereof. 
    The overturning moment produced from lateral forces shall in no case exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the dead-load resisting moment. Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of the building. The weight of earth superimposed over footings may be used in determining the dead-load resisting moment. Such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly compacted. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-35, 12-10-91) 
3-702 - DESIGN; WIND LOAD 
    Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces as specified in the adopted edition of the International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-36, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 7062, 05-11-2004) 
3-703 - DESIGN; SEISMIC LOADS 
    Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist seismic forces as specified in the adopted edition of the International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-37, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
3-704 - DESIGN; COMBINED LOADS 
    Wind and seismic loads need not be combined in the design of signs or sign structures; only that loading producing the larger stresses need be used. 
    Vertical design loads, except roof live loads, shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the wind or seismic loads. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-38, 12-10-91) 
3-705 - DESIGN; ALLOWABLE STRESSES 
    The design of wood, concrete, steel or aluminum members shall conform to the requirements of the adopted edition of the International Building Code. Loads, both vertical and horizontal, exerted on the soil shall not produce stresses exceeding those specified in the adopted edition of the International Building Code. 
    The working stresses of wire rope and its fastenings shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the ultimate strength of the rope or fasteners. 
    Working stresses for wind or seismic loads combined with dead loads may be increased as specified in the adopted edition of the International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-39, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
3-706 - DESIGN; FOOTING DESIGN AND LOADING 
    The footing design and/or loading of signs shall be certified by an architect or engineer registered in the State of Nebraska on a form provided by the Building Official. (Ord. No. 5337, 3-40, 12-10-91) 
3-707 - CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL 
    The supports for all signs or sign structures shall be placed in or upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected in conformance with the requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-41, 12-10-91) 
3-708 - CONSTRUCTION; MATERIALS 
    Materials of construction for signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade as specified for buildings in the Building Code. 
    In all signs and sign structures, the materials and details of construction shall, in the absence of specified requirements conform with the following: 
A.  Structural steel shall be of such quality as to conform with U.B.C. Standard No. 27-1. Secondary members in contact with or directly supporting the display surface may be formed of light gauge steel, provided such members are designed in accordance with the specifications of the design of light gauge steel as specified in U.B.C. Standard No. 27-9 and in addition shall be galvanized. Secondary members, when formed integrally with the display surface, shall be not less than 0.024 inch in thickness. When not formed integrally with the display surface, the minimum thickness of the secondary members shall be 0.10 inch. The minimum thickness of hot rolled steel members furnishing structural support for signs shall be one-fourth (1/4) inch, except that, if galvanized, such members shall be not less than one-eighth (1/8) inch thick. Steel pipes shall be of such quality as to conform with U.B.C. Standard No. 27-1. Steel members may be connected with one (1) galvanized bolt, provided the connection is adequate to transfer the stresses in the members. 
B.  Anchors and supports when of wood and embedded in the soil, or within six (6") inches of the soil, shall be of all hardwood of a durable species or shall be pressure treated with an approved preservative. Such members shall be marked or branded by an approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-42, 12-10-91) 
3-709 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-43, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6865, 3-12-2002) 
3-710 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-44, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6865, 3-12-2002) 
3-711 - CONSTRUCTION; ANCHORAGE 
    Members supporting unbraced signs shall be so proportioned that the bearing loads imposed on the soil in either direction, horizontal or vertical, shall not exceed the safe values. Braced ground signs shall be anchored to resist the specified wind or seismic load acting in any direction. Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil and for an effective resistance to pullout amounting to a force twenty-five percent (25%) greater than the required resistance to overturning. Anchors and supports shall penetrate to a depth below ground greater than that of the frost line. 
    Portable ground signs supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to the base shall be so proportioned that the weight and size of the base will be adequate to resist the wind pressure specified in this Article. 
    Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to support safely the loads applied. 
    No wooden blocks or plugs or anchors with wood used in connection with screws or nails shall be considered proper anchorage, except in the case of signs attached to wood framing. 
    No anchor or support of any sign shall be connected to, or supported by, an unbraced parapet wall, unless such wall is designed in accordance with the requirements of parapet walls, specified for seismic zones on the Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-45, 12-10-91) 
3-712 - CONSTRUCTION; DISPLAY SURFACES 
    Display surfaces in all types of signs may be made of metal, glass or approved plastics, or wood where permitted elsewhere by this ordinance. 
    Glass thickness and area limitations shall be as set forth in Table No. 3-A. 
    Sections of approved plastics on wall signs shall not exceed two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet in area. 
    Exceptions: 
A.  Section of approved plastics on signs other than wall signs may be of unlimited area if approved by the Building Official. 
B.  Sections of approved plastics on wall signs shall be separated three (3) feet laterally and six (6) feet vertically by the required exterior wall construction. 
    Exceptions: 
A.  Sections of approved plastics on signs other than wall signs may not be separated if approved by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-46, 12-10-91) 
3-713 - CONSTRUCTION; APPROVED PLASTICS 
    The Building Official shall require that sufficient technical data be submitted to substantiate the proposed use of any plastic material and, if it is determined that the evidence submitted is satisfactory for the use intended, he/she may approve its use. 
TABLE NO. 3-A - SIZE, THICKNESS AND TYPE OF GLASS PANELS IN SIGNS 
    Maximum Size of Exposed Glass Panel 
Any Dimension 
(in inches) Area (in square inches Minimum Thickness of Glass (in inches) Type of Glass 30 500 1/8 Plain, plate or wired 45 700 3/16 Plain, plate or wired 144 3600 1/4 Plain, plate or wired Over 144 Over 3600 1/4 Wired glass  
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-47, 12-10-91) 
ARTICLE 8. - PROJECTION AND CLEARANCE 

3-801 - PROJECTION AND CLEARANCE; GENERAL 
    Signs shall conform to the clearance and projection requirements of this ordinance and as noted elsewhere in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-48, 12-10-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-207, 16-210 
3-802 - CLEARANCE FROM HIGH VOLTAGE POWER LINES 
    When installed, signs shall maintain clearance from overhead power lines as follows: 
Less than 750 volts ..... 7 feet horizontally and vertically 
Over 750 volts ..... 10 feet horizontally and vertically 
    The term "overhead conductors" as used in this ordinance means any electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground, except such conductors as are enclosed in iron pipe or other material covering of equal strength. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-49, 12-10-91) 
3-803 - CLEARANCE FROM FIRE ESCAPES, EXITS OR STANDPIPES 
    No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit or standpipe. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-50, 12-10-91) 
3-804 - OBSTRUCTION OF OPENINGS 
    No sign shall obstruct any openings to such an extent that light or ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by this Code. 
    Signs erected within five (5) feet of an exterior wall in which there are openings within the area of the sign shall be constructed of noncombustible material or approved plastics. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-51, 12-10-91) 
3-805 - PROJECTION OVER ALLEYS 
    No sign or sign structure shall project into any public alley. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-52, 12-10-91) 
3-806 - CLEARANCE FROM STREETS 
    Signs shall not project within three (3) feet of the curb line, where permitted to overhang the street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-53, 12-10-91) 
ARTICLE 9. - NONCONFORMING SIGNS 

3-901 - NONCONFORMING SIGNS; CONFORMITY TO REQUIREMENTS 
    Signs erected prior to the date of passage of this ordinance, which do not conform with the sign regulations contained herein, shall not be expanded, enlarged, modified or changed in any way except in conformity with these sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-54, 12-10-91) 
3-902 - REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE 
    Repairs and maintenance of any nonconforming sign may be done in any period of ninety (90) consecutive days to an extent not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the current replacement costs, provided the square foot content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. Should such a nonconforming sign be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement costs at the time of destruction or declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with this ordinance. 
    This ordinance shall not prohibit a change in copy only to a nonconforming sign of record. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-55, 12-10-91) 
ARTICLE 10. - TEMPORARY SIGNS 

3-1001 - TEMPORARY SIGNS; PERMIT REQUIRED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter or relocate or maintain within this City any temporary sign without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager, or officers designated by him/her, as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2935, 3, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-61; Ord. No. 5337, 3-56, 12-10-91) 
3-1002 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2935, 3, 3-13-79; Ord. No. 3481, 1, 12-22-81; Ord. No. 3688, 1, 5-22-84; Code 1980, 3-63; Ord. No. 5337, 3-57, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6865, 3-12-2002) 
3-1003 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-58, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6865, 3-12-2002) 
3-1004 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-59, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6865, 3-12-2002) 
3-1005 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2935, 2, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-37; Ord. No. 5337, 3-60, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6865, 3-12-2002) 
3-1006 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2935, 2, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-38; Ord. No. 5337, 3-61, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6865, 3-12-2002) 
3-1007 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2935, 2, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-39; Ord. No. 5337, 3-62, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6865, 3-12-2002) 
3-1008 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2935, 3, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-64; Ord. No. 3688, 1, 5-22-84; Ord. No. 5337, 3-63, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6865, 3-12-2002) 
3-1009 - LOCATION RESTRICTED 
    No detached temporary sign shall be placed on any public right-of-way, nor shall more than one (1) temporary sign be permitted at any one (1) business location. No temporary sign shall be placed in the vision clearance triangle, as defined in Section 9-1209 of the Kearney Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2935, 3, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-65; Ord. No. 3688, 1, 5-22-84; Ord. No. 5337, 3-64, 12-10-91) 
3-1010 - VISION CLEARANCE 
    All temporary signs shall comply with the requirements of Section 9-1209, "Vision Clearance," of the Code of the City of Kearney. 
(Ord. No. 2935, 3, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-66; Ord. No. 3481, 2, 12-22-81; Ord. No. 5337, 3-65, 12-10-91) 
3-1011 - LIMITATION ON ADVERTISING; EXCEPTION 
    Any advertising contained on any temporary sign shall pertain only to the business, industry or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which such sign is erected or maintained; provided that such limitation shall not apply to signs of a civic, political or religious nature. 
(Ord. No. 2935, 3, 3-13-79; Code 1980, 3-67; Ord. No. 5337, 3-66, 12-10-91) 
ARTICLE 11. - APPEAL PROCEDURE 

3-1101 - REPEALED 
    See Sections 59-108 through 59-111 pertaining to the Board of Adjustment of Chapter 59, "Administration and Procedures" of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-67, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
3-1102 - REPEALED 
    See Sections 59-108 through 59-111 pertaining to the Board of Adjustment of Chapter 59, "Administration and Procedures" of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-68, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
3-1103 - REPEALED 
    See Sections 59-108 through 59-111 pertaining to the Board of Adjustment of Chapter 59, "Administration and Procedures" of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 5337, 3-69, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
ARTICLE 12. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

3-1201 - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purpose of this Article, certain words and phrases shall be defined as herein set forth: 
    ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical or electrical device that is arranged, designed, or used to signal the occurrence in the City of Kearney of a burglary, robbery, other criminal offense, fire emergency, or medical emergency requiring urgent attention, and to which law enforcement, fire, or emergency medical personnel are expected to respond. Alarm systems include those through which public safety personnel are notified directly of such signals through automatic recording devices or are notified indirectly by way of third persons who monitor the alarm systems and who report such signals to public safety personnel. Alarm systems also include those designed to register a signal which is so audible, visible, or in other ways perceptible outside a protected building, structure, or facility as to notify persons in the neighborhood beyond the zoning lot where the signal is located, who may in turn notify the public safety personnel of the signal. Alarm systems do not include those affixed to automobiles. Further, alarm systems do not include auxiliary devices installed by telephone companies to protect telephone equipment or systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system. 
    FALSE ALARM: Any signal created by an alarm system (including but not limited to alarm signals initiated by human error) which signal directly or indirectly notified public safety personnel of the occurrence of a burglary, robbery, other criminal offense, fire emergency or medical emergency when no such emergency exists and when law enforcement, fire, or emergency medical personnel are not needed to respond to a burglary, robbery, other criminal offense, fire emergency, or medical emergency. 
    SUBSCRIBER: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity who, or which, purchases, leases, contracts for, or obtains an alarm system. 
    VENDOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity associated with an alarm business or company, either indirectly or directly, whose duties include but are not limited to any of the following: selling, replacing, moving, repairing, maintaining, or installing an alarm system on or in any structure, building, or facility. 
(Ord. No. 3572, 1, 1-11-83; Code 1980, 4.5-1) 
3-1202 - DUTIES OF SUBSCRIBER AND VENDOR 
A.  Duties of Subscriber. It shall be the responsibility of each subscriber to see that the standards of installation and maintenance set forth in this Article are adhered to. 
B.  Duties of Vendor. It shall be the responsibility of any vendor causing installation of or maintaining an alarm system to cause such installation or maintenance to conform to the requirements of the fire code and the electric code applicable in the City of Kearney, Nebraska. 
C.  Duties of Subscriber and Vendor. Each alarm system shall be utilized only for the purpose of summoning the public safety personnel for emergency and/or life hazard situations. Without the prior express consent of the City Manager or his/her designated representative, systems shall not be tested so as to transmit a signal to public safety personnel when an emergency or life hazard situation does not exist. It shall be the responsibility of each subscriber and also each vendor not to make such tests. 
(Ord. No. 3572, 1, 1-11-83; Code 1980, 4.5-2) 
3-1203 - STANDARDS REQUIRED FOR EXISTING AND FUTURE ALARM SYSTEMS 
A.  Notification. Each subscriber must provide to the City on a form provided by the City Manager or his/her designated representative, the name, address, and telephone number of the subscriber and of the vendor, if any, with whom the subscriber has contracted for maintenance of the alarm system. Each subscriber shall also provide the City with the names, addresses, and phone numbers of those persons (not less than two (2)) who can be contacted twenty-four (24) hours a day and seven (7) days a week to turn off or deactivate an alarm system. It shall be the obligation of the subscriber to keep this information current and correct through supplementary notifications filed from time to time on the same form. 
B.  Designated Telephone Lines. No person shall use or cause to be used an alarm system or device of any kind that automatically dials or calls any telephone line of the offices of the City or any department or division thereof, except such telephone line or lines as may be designated by the City Manager or his/her designated representative for the specific purpose of receiving signals from alarm systems. 
C.  Automatic Dialing or Calling Devices. Alarm systems that automatically dial or call a telephone line designated by the City Manager or his/her designated representative shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Total length of the recorded message being transmitted to the department (including repetition of message) shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds duration; 
2.  The recorded message transmitted shall be repeated not less than two (2) nor more than three (3) times; 
3.  The recorded message being transmitted shall incorporate language specifically identifying the message as a "recording" with the balance of the message identifying by street number and street name the location of the emergency and the nature of the event which cause the alarm system to activate. If the location of the event signaled by the alarm system is in a multi-family building or a multi-unit office or commercial building, the message shall also identify by number and by floor the particular dwelling unit, office unit, or commercial unit in which the event occurred; 
4.  The recorded message being transmitted to the department shall be appropriate for the purpose for which the alarm system was installed, and the message, in its entirety, shall be intelligible and spoken in the English language; 
D.  Application of Standards to Existing and Future Alarm Systems. 
1.  Every new system installed after the passage of this Article shall comply with the above standards; 
2.  Every alarm system existing before the passage of this Article shall be placed in compliance with the above standards no later than three (3) months after such passage date. The City Manager or his/her designated representative may elect not to respond to any alarm system that is not in compliance within that time period or may elect to charge each subscriber not in compliance for each response at a rate to be adopted by resolution of the Kearney Council per false alarm, or to charge the City's direct and indirect costs for the time, labor, equipment, and other services used in responding to such alarm, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 3572, 1, 1-11-83; Code 1980, 4.5-3) 
3-1204 - STANDARDS REQUIRED ONLY FOR FUTURE ALARM SYSTEMS 
    Systems installed after enactment of this Article shall comply with the following standards as to installation and maintenance (and, in addition, shall also comply with the standards set forth in Section 3-1203: 
A.  Alarm systems must incorporate a device that allows an adequate delay before the time at which activation of the system would directly or indirectly signal public safety personnel. This delay is to permit the subscriber to stop a false alarm from being transmitted. 
B.  The alarm system shall incorporate a device that limits any exterior signal to a period of time not to exceed sixty (60) minutes in duration. At the expiration of the maximum time permitted, the alarm system shall automatically cease to emit a signal. 
(Ord. No. 3572, 1, 1-11-83; Code 1980, 4.5-4) 
3-1205 - MONITORING CHARGES 
    The City shall provide twenty-four (24) hour daily monitoring of all alarm systems, including automatic dialing or calling devices, and each subscriber shall pay to the City a fee for said services at a daily rate to be adopted by resolution of the Kearney Council. If not paid within thirty (30) days of receipt, the system alarm must be disconnected immediately in the manner described in Section 3-1206 (C). (Ord. No. 3572, 1, 1-11-83; Code 1980, 4.5-5) 
3-1206 - EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS 
    If any alarm system produces four (4) false alarms in the calendar year, written notice of that fact shall be given by certified mail or delivery to the subscriber, or other appropriate party (available twenty-four (24) hours a day and seven (7) days a week) listed in the notification required in Section 3-1203.A at the addresses listed in the most recent such notification for that alarm system. Thereafter, the City Manager or his/her designated representative shall have the power to require the subscriber to comply with any one (1) or combination of the requirements set forth below as would minimize, in his/her judgment, such false alarms in the future: 
A.  The subscriber may be charged for the direct and indirect costs to the City of time, labor, equipment, and other services rendered in responding to each subsequent alarm or may be charged a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per false alarm, whichever is higher. Such charges shall continue for each excessive false alarm until the end of that calendar year have elapsed during which no false alarms have been registered, and must be paid within thirty (30) days after notice thereof is given in the same manner as provided by this Section for notice of excessive false alarms; 
B.  The subscriber may be required to cause the alarm system to comply immediately with the applicable standards referred to in Section 3-1204 (those standards otherwise being imposed only on alarm systems installed after enactment of this Article); 
C.  The subscriber may be required to disconnect the alarm system immediately in such fashion that signals are not emitted so as to notify public safety personnel directly or indirectly through automatic telephone recording devices or to register a signal which is so audible, visible, or in other ways, perceptible outside a protected building, structure, or facility as to notify persons in the neighborhood who may in turn notify public safety personnel of the signal. 
    Notice of the determination of the City Manager or his/her designated representative shall be given in the same manner as provided by this Section for notice of excessive false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 3572, 1, 1-11-83; Code 1980, 4.5-6; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 7951, 12-9-2014) 
3-1207 - NO LIABILITY ON PART OF CITY 
    Nothing in this Article nor the existence of any other fact(s) shall be construed to require a response by public safety personnel to an address or location registering an alarm. The City shall neither assume nor bear any liability for its failure to respond to such an alarm signal. 
(Ord. No. 3572, 1, 1-11-83; Code 1980, 4.5-7) 
3-1208 - PENALTY 
A.  Any person who violates Section 3-1202 shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor. 
B.  Any person who fails to adhere to the standards and otherwise comply with Section 3-1203 or 3-1204 shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor. 
C.  Any person who fails to comply with the specific direction of the City Manager or his/her designated representative as provided for under Section 3-1203 (D)(2) or Section 3-1206 shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3572, 1, 1-11-83; Code 1980, 4.5-8) 
ARTICLE 13. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

3-1301 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; DEFINITION OF TERMS 
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases defined in State law shall be adopted for the purpose of construing this Article; and such words and phrases are hereby incorporated by reference the same as though copied at full length herein. 
(Code 1958, 5.1; Code 1980, 5-1) 
State Law reference- Definitions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-103 
3-1302 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; RIGHT OF ENTRY OF OFFICIALS 
    All police officers of the City are hereby authorized to enter at any time upon any premises of any licensee under the State Liquor Control Act within the City to determine whether any of the provisions of such act or of this Article or any rules or regulations adopted by the City or by the State Liquor Control Commission have been or are being violated and at such time to examine sufficiently the premises of such licensee in connection therewith. 
(Code 1958, 5.13; Code 1980, 5-2) 
State Law reference- Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-134.03 
3-1303 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; SALE TO MINORS AND INCOMPETENTS PROHIBITED 
    No person shall, within the City, sell or give any alcoholic liquors to, or procure any such liquor for or permit the sale or gift of any such liquor to, or the procuring of any such liquor for any minor or any person who is mentally incompetent or any person who is physically handicapped or mentally incapacitated due to the consumption of such liquor. 
(Code 1958, 5.3; Code 1980, 5-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-180 
3-1304 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; HOURS OF OPERATION 
A.  No alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, shall be sold at retail or dispensed within the City on any day between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
B.  No alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, shall be sold at retail or dispensed between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Sunday. 
C.  Alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, may be sold at retail and dispensed from 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on Sunday. 
(Code 1958, 5.4; Code 1980, 5-4; Ord. No. 7530, 6-23-2009; Ord. No. 7937, 10-14-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-179 
3-1305 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 5.4; Ord. No. 3781, 1, 10-8-85; Ord. No. 5077, 1, 12-12-89; Code 1980, 5-6; Ord. No. 5698, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 6056, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 6761, 1-23-2001; Ord. No. 7530, 6-23-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-179(2) 
3-1306 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; HOURS OF SALE; NEW YEAR'S EVE AND ST. PATRICK'S DAY 
    If December 31st, commonly called New Year's Eve, falls on Sunday, the sale of or dispensing of alcoholic liquors, including beer or wine, for consumption on premises, and the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors, including beer and wine for consumption off premises shall be permitted between the hours of 11:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m. on January 1. 
    If March 17, commonly called St. Patrick's Day, falls on Sunday, the sale of or dispensing of alcoholic liquors, including beer or wine, for consumption on premises, and the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors, including beer and wine for consumption off premises shall be permitted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. on March 17 and 12:00 a.m. on March 18. 
(Code 1958, 5.4; Code 1980, 5-7; Ord. No. 6761, 1-23-2001; Ord. No. 7314, 12-26-2006; Ord. No. 7786, 2-26-2013; Ord. No. 7937, 10-14-2014) 
3-1307 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; SALE IN OTHER THAN ORIGINAL, MARKED CONTAINERS PROHIBITED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the City, except the manufacturer, distributor or wholesaler, to fill or refill in whole or in part any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any kind or quality of alcoholic liquor; and it shall be unlawful for any person in the City to have in his/her possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks or other containers containing alcoholic liquor except in original packages. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the refilling of original packages of alcoholic liquor for strictly private use and not for resale. 
(Code 1958, 5.8; Code 1980, 5-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-184 
3-1308 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; NONBEVERAGE USERS 
    No nonbeverage user shall, within the City, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of any alcohol, purchased under a license as such nonbeverage user, in any form fit for beverage purposes. 
(Code 1958, 5.10; Code 1980, 5-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-187 
3-1309 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; VIOLATIONS BY MANAGERS, AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES 
    Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this Article by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee, if such act is committed or omission is made with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee; and such employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission has been done or omitted by him/her personally. 
(Code 1958, 5.11; Code 1980, 5-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-1,102 
3-1310 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; TAX REGULATIONS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to evade or attempt to evade the payment of tax or duty on any alcoholic liquor in any manner whatever and upon conviction thereof, in addition to the general penalty prescribed for the violation in this Article, such person shall forfeit such alcoholic liquor. 
(Code 1958, 5.14; Code 1980, 5-12) 
State Law reference- Tax regulations, Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-160 et seq. 
3-1311 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; POSSESSION BY MINORS 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor to consume or to have in his or her possession or physical control any alcoholic liquor or beverage, except that a minor may consume, possess, or have physical control of alcoholic liquor in his or her permanent place of residence or on the premises of a place of religious worship on which premises alcoholic liquor is consumed as a part of a religious rite, ritual, or ceremony. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-111 of the Code for each offense. Each separate act of violation of the terms of this Section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1958, 21.21-1; Ord. No. 3944, 1, 8-25-87; Code 1980, 5-13; Ord. No. 6836, 10-9-2001) 
Cross reference- Tobacco; Possession By Minors, § 8-1515 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-180.02 
3-1312 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE 
    No minor shall, within the City, represent that he/she is of age for the purpose of asking for, purchasing or receiving any alcoholic liquors from any person. 
(Code 1958, 5.3; Code 1980, 5-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-180.01 
3-1313 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; SALE AT RETAIL; RESTRICTIONS AS TO LOCALITY 
A.  No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any church, school, hospital, or home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children. This prohibition does not apply (a) to any location within such distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet for which a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail has been granted by the commission for two years continuously prior to making of application for license, (b) to hotels offering restaurant service, to regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or other places where sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business so exempted was established for such purposes prior to May 24, 1935, or (c) to a college or university in the state which is subject to Section 53-177.01 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. 
B.  If a proposed location for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any church, a license may be issued if the commission gives notice to the affected church and holds a hearing as prescribed in Section 53-133 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. 
C.  This restriction does not apply to properties located in the Downtown Business District. 
(Ord. No. 4066, 1, 3-14-89; Ord. No. 5048, 1, 9-12-89; Code 1980, 5-15; Ord. No. 7838, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 8069, 4-12-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-177 
3-1313.1 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; SALE FOR CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES NEAR CAMPUS OR COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY; RESTRICTIONS 
A.  No alcoholic liquor shall be sold for consumption on the premises within three hundred (300) feet from the campus of any college or university in the state, except that this section: 
1.  Does not prohibit a nonpublic college or university from contracting with an individual or corporation holding a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for the purpose of selling alcoholic liquor at retail on the campus of such college or university at events sanctioned by such college or university but does prohibit the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail by such licensee on the campus of such nonpublic college or university at student activities or events; and 
2.  Does not prohibit sales of alcoholic liquor by a community college culinary education program pursuant to Section 53-124.15 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 7838, 9-10-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-177.01 
3-1313.2 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; PLACES WHERE DRINKING PROHIBITED 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess an open container of alcoholic liquor in or on the public streets, public sidewalks, alleys, parking areas, roads or highways within the city, or upon property within the city owned by the state or any political subdivision thereof, unless authorized by the governing body having jurisdiction over such property and by the provisions of a license issued by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquors inside vehicles while upon the public streets, alleys, parking areas, roads, or highways. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquors within the city in any restaurant, café, club, or in any other place open to the public except as specifically permitted by a license issued by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission. 
(Ord. No. 7838, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 7962, 1-13-2015) 
3-1314 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LICENSES; REQUIRED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture for sale, sell, keep for sale or to barter, or exchange, transport for sale under any pretext any alcoholic liquor within the City unless such person shall have in full force and effect a license therefor as provided by the State Liquor Control Act. 
(Code 1958, 5.2; Code 1980, 5-27) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-132(4) 
3-1315 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LICENSES; OCCUPATION TAX 
    For the purpose of raising revenue for the City, there is hereby levied on the businesses distributing and selling alcoholic liquor, including beer, an occupation tax as provided in Section 3-1816. 
(Code 1958, 5.15; Code 1980, 5-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-148 
3-1316 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LICENSES; DISPLAY 
    Every licensee under the State Liquor Control Act within the City shall cause his/her license or licenses to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed property. 
(Code 1958, 5.9; Code 1980, 5-29) 
3-1317 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LICENSES; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION 
A.  A retail license to sell alcoholic liquors, which the Council is legally empowered to revoke, may be either revoked or suspended by the Council whenever it shall find, after notice and hearing as provided by law, that the holder of any such license has violated any of the provisions of the State Liquor Control Act, or of this Article, or the rule or regulation of the State Liquor Control Commission or any statutory provision or ordinance of the City now existing or hereafter passed or enacted in the interest of good morals and decency or for any one (1) or more of the following causes: 
1.  The licensee, his/her manager or agent in charge of the premises licensed has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to a felony under the laws of the State or of any other state of the United States. 
2.  The licensee, his/her manager or agent in charge of the premises licensed has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to being the proprietor, manager or agent in charge of a gambling house or of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality. 
3.  The licensee, his/her manager or agent in charge of the premises licensed has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to violation of any Federal or State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquors. 
4.  The licensee either swore falsely to any question in his/her application for the license or has failed to comply with the statements and representations made by the answer to any question or questions in the application or has failed to perform in accordance with any other statement or representation or keep any promise, oral or written, made to the Council in connection with such licensee's requests for the license. 
5.  The licensee, his/her manager or agent in charge of the premises licensed shall have forfeited bond to appear in court to answer charges for any one (1) of the violations of law or ordinances referred to in this Section. 
6.  It shall be cause for revocation or suspension as herein provided if the licensee, his/her manager or agent shall allow any live person to appear, or if there is reasonable cause to believe that any live person shall appear in any licensed premises in a state of nudity to provide entertainment, to provide service, to act as host or hostess, manager or owner or to serve as an employee in any capacity, except as hereafter specified. 
B.  For the purposes of this Section, the term "nudity" shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area. No live performance, contest or entertainment featuring the showing of the human female breast shall be conducted except between the hours of four (4:00) p.m. through nine (9:00) p.m. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall be permitted or allowed on a licensed premises during the conduct of any said performance. 
(Code 1958, 5.16; Res. No. 90-81, 1, 10-3-90; Code 1980, 5-30) 
3-1318 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LICENSE APPLICATION; STANDARDS 
    The Council shall only consider, in determining whether to approve or deny application for a liquor license, the requirements of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act and those criteria set forth by Section 53-134(2), RRS 1992 Cumulative Supplement, as the Section may be from time to time amended. 
(Ord. No. 3841, 1, 4-22-86; Ord. No. 5047, 1, 9-12-89; Ord. No. 5182, 1, 10-23-90; Code 1980, 5-31) 
3-1319 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LICENSE APPLICATION; SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 
    The Council may, in the event that an applicant for a liquor license consents, agrees or stipulates to be so bound and obligated, fix or set certain specific requirements and conditions upon the license; and such requirements or conditions shall be deemed to be a part of the license as though fully endorsed thereon; and any violation or breach of any of the said requirements or conditions shall constitute good cause for revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 5049, 1, 9-12-89; Code 1980, 5-31.1) 
3-1320 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LICENSE APPLICATION; MUNICIPAL EXAMINATION 
    Any person or persons desiring to obtain a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail shall file with the Liquor Control Commission. The Commission shall then notify the City Clerk by registered or certified mail. The Council shall then meet and determine the desirability of the application and report its recommendation for approval or denial of the application in writing or in person to the State Liquor Control Commission within forty-five (45) days of receipt from the Liquor Control Commission. The City Manager may examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant; examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant; to hear testimony; and to take proof for its information in the performance of its duties. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired, the Council may authorize the City Manager, or an agent appointed by him/her, or the City Attorney, to act on their behalf. The Council may hold the said examination and hearing upon the receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy of the application. The Council shall fix a time and place at which a hearing will be held, and at which time the Council may receive competent evidence under oath, either orally or by affidavit, from any person concerning the propriety of the issuance of such license . Notice shall be published in a legal newspaper in, or of general circulation in, the City one (1) time not less than seven (7) nor more than fourteen (14) days before the time of the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not more than twenty-one (21) days after the receipt of the Commission's letter of notice and after such hearing, the Council shall cause to be spread at large in the minute record of their proceedings a resolution recommending either issuance or refusal of said application. The City Clerk shall thereupon mail to the Commission a copy of the resolution which shall state the cost of the published notice. 
(Ord. No. 3841, 2, 4-22-86; Code 1980, 5-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-134(7) 
3-1321 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LICENSE APPLICATION; HEARING 
A.  Notice. Notice of a hearing held pursuant to Section 53-134 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, as amended, shall be given to the applicant by the City Clerk and shall contain the date, time and location of the hearing. 
B.  Procedure. Hearings will be informal and conducted by the Chairperson. The intent is an inquiry into the facts, not an adversary action. The Council shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence and shall have full authority as to the control and procedures of the hearing, including the admission or exclusion of testimony or other evidence. The Council may admit and give probative effect to evidence which possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonably prudent individuals in the conduct of their affairs. The Chairperson may limit testimony where it appears incompetent, irrelevant, or unduly repetitious. 
    The order of proceedings is as follows: 
1.  Presentation of evidence, witnesses and arguments by the applicant. 
2.  Examination of the applicant by Council and/or City Manager, City Attorney, or a duly appointed agent. 
3.  Cross-examination by the opposition to the applicant. 
4.  Presentation of evidence, witnesses and arguments by those in opposition to the applicant. 
5.  Cross-examination by the applicant. 
6.  Rebuttal evidence by both parties and by city administration and agent. 
7.  Summation by both parties, and recommendation of city administration and/or attorney/agent. 
    In all cases, the burden of proof and persuasion shall be on the party filing the application. 
    Any member of the Council may question any witness, call witnesses, or request information. 
    All witnesses shall be sworn. 
    The Council may make further inquiry and investigation following the hearing and may order the hearing to be recorded by an official court reporter at the expense of the applicant(s). 
(Ord. No. 3841, 3, 4-22-86; Code 1980, 5-33) 
3-1322 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; SPECIAL DESIGNATED PERMITS; APPLICANTS TO FILE LIABILITY POLICY WITH CITY; CONDITIONS 
    All parties, persons, organizations, entities, individuals or corporations filing application for a special designated permit, as provided by Section 53-124.11 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, for consumption of alcoholic liquors in or on the public streets, public sidewalks, alleys, parking areas, roads or highways within the city, or upon property within the city owned by the state or any political subdivision thereof, authorized by the governing body having jurisdiction over such at a location designated to be within the City shall, not later than five (5) days after the filing of the said application, also file with the City Clerk of the City a copy of a public liability policy, either on a form to be provided by the City Manager or on a form which is acceptable to the Council, with combined, single-limit coverage or bodily injury, including coverage for suits brought due to the handling, selling or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, issued to the applicant and bearing the name of the City as an additional named insured party, in the sum of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), said policy to be in force and effect during the period over which the permit is requested. 
(Ord. No. 3671, 1, 3-13-84; Code 1980, 5-41; Ord. No. 8215, 2-13-2018) 
3-1323 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; SPECIAL DESIGNATED PERMITS; PERMIT ISSUANCE; UNACCEPTABLE LOCATIONS 
    No application for a permit shall be approved by the Council which designates or specifies a location in or on public streets, alleys, parking areas, roads or highway, or upon property owned by the State or any governmental subdivision thereof unless authorized by the governing bodies having jurisdiction over such properties. No application requesting a special designated permit which specifies a designated location within a residential zone will be approved by the Council. 
(Ord. No. 3671, 2, 3-13-84; Ord. No. 3784, 1, 9-24-85; Code 1980, 5-42) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-186 
ARTICLE 14. - AMUSEMENTS 

3-1401 - DEFINITIONS 
A.  The term "exhibitions" as used in this Article shall be held to mean and include circuses, menageries, carnivals, side shows and other similar amusement enterprises which are open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged. 
B.  The term "carnival" as used herein shall mean and include amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for the conduct of games of skill, food dispensing facilities and sideshows. The term "carnival" shall not include gambling devices, games of chance, lotteries, punch boards or other activities in violation of City ordinances or State law. 
C.  "Street carnival" or "street show" as used herein shall mean and include any carnival, exhibition, show or other amusement to be given on any public street or sidewalk or in such public place that the only main accommodation for the public or the audience will be in or upon public streets, sidewalks or public places. 
D.  For the purposes of this Article, the term "circus" shall mean any parties, persons, organizations, entities, individuals or corporations operating a traveling company or entertainment consisting typically of a variety of performances, including but not limited to acrobats, clowns, trapeze artists, feats of physical skill and daring, trained wild animal acts, and/or jugglers. 
(Ord. No. 6338, 10-28-97) 
3-1402 - EXHIBITIONS AND CARNIVALS; PERMIT REQUIRED 
    It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate within the City any exhibitions, including circuses or carnivals, which are open to the public without first securing a permit therefor, provided that this Section shall not be held to apply to those amusements or exhibitions which are specifically permitted in other sections of this Code. 
    Applications for such permit shall be made to the City Clerk and shall comply with all the general provisions of this Code relating to such application. A permit under this Section shall not be used or represented in any manner as an endorsement by this City or by any department, officer or employee thereof. 
(Ord. No. 6338, 10-28-97) 
3-1403 - CONDITION OF PERMIT 
    In addition to other requirements set forth herein, the applicant shall furnish suitable evidence of his/her intention and ability to comply with the following conditions: The operator and sponsor of the carnival or exhibition shall be wholly responsible for maintaining order and security, and for keeping the site clean, free of trash, papers and other debris. Trash containers in adequate number shall be placed in convenient locations for the use of the public. 
    Applicants for a permit shall present with their application copies of all licenses or permits issued to them by the State of Nebraska, including, but not limited to, copies of safety inspection certifications. 
    Applicants shall tender payment of all occupation taxes required by Chapter 3 of the Code for the particular amusement or activity to be conducted, with their application. Concessions operated as a part of the circus, carnival or other exhibition shall individually pay the occupation tax set by 3-1823. 
(Ord. No. 6338, 10-28-97; Ord. No, 7885, 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 7913, 7-8-2014) 
3-1404 - INSURANCE 
    No permit shall be issued for conducting an exhibition or carnival until the applicant therefor has placed on file with the City Clerk a certificate or certificates of insurance indicating that it or they have in effect public liability insurance covering any damages or injuries arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices or facilities operated in connection with such carnival or exhibition. It shall include coverage for suits brought due to the operation of the carnival or exhibition. Such insurance shall be in the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for each person, and one million dollars ($1,000,000) for each accident or injury and shall bear the name of the City as an additional named insured party. 
(Ord. No. 6338, 10-28-97) 
3-1405 - PERMIT FEE 
    Upon receipt from the applicant of the appropriate occupation taxes, an administrative fee shall be paid to cover costs of issuance of the permit, a proper certificate of insurance, and approval of the application by the City Manager, the City Clerk shall issue such permit. Said fees are set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
    Provided further, that no fees or occupation taxes shall be charged for any amusement, exhibition or carnival where the same is sponsored, operated or conducted by or given for the benefit of any governmental, religious, educational, charitable, social, fraternal or similar non-profit organization. 
(Ord. No. 6338, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
3-1406 - PERMITS TO BE POSTED 
    The permit issued to the applicant hereunder by the City Clerk shall be posted in a conspicuous place and otherwise must be kept available by the applicant and exhibited at any time upon request. 
(Ord. No. 6338, 10-28-97) 
3-1407 - SECURITY 
    The applicant shall provide security service on the premises of each exhibition or carnival during all hours of operation; the City Manager shall, as a condition of the issuance of a permit, have the authority to require the applicant to provide additional security service if the type, size, or location of the carnival requires additional security service for the protection of carnival patrons and nearby areas; all security personnel shall be either off-duty law enforcement officers or persons certified in accordance with Nebraska law. 
(Ord. No. 6338, 10-28-97) 
3-1408 - STREET CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to put on, conduct, maintain, give or exhibit any street show, street carnival, circus, or any show of like nature or character within a commercial district, residential district or industrial district within the City, and it shall be unlawful for any person to permit, suffer or allow any such show to be maintained, conducted or exhibited on any lot or land which is owned, occupied or controlled by him/her within a business, residential or industrial district of the City; provided that this prohibition shall not extend to or include that portion of the City known as the "Buffalo County Fairgrounds." 
3-1409 - PENALTY 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be punished in accordance with the general penalty section, Section 1-111 of this Code, for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 6338, 10-28-97) 
Cross reference- Schedule; Circuses, § 3-1822, Schedule; Concessions, § 3-1823, Schedule; Exhibitions, § 3-1824 
ARTICLE 15. - AUCTIONS 

3-1501 - AUCTIONS; DEFINITION 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the words "auction houses" shall mean and include companies, persons or establishments which sell personal property at auction for the general public on commission on a regular basis, or in any event, more than one (1) time during any calendar year, shall be operated only after obtaining a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 17 of the Kearney Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 5(e), 4-28-78; Code 1980, 8-1) 
3-1502 - COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER 
    No personal property shall be sold at auction in the City except in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 1, 4-25-78) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-237 
3-1503 - EXCEPTIONS 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to auction sales conducted by the following: 
A.  Trustees or referees in bankruptcy, receivers, personal representatives of estates, executors, administrators, guardians or other public officers acting under judicial process. 
B.  Individuals selling their own household goods, tools, equipment and personal effects on their own residential premises. 
C.  To a retailer selling damaged goods, stock or merchandise which has been damaged by fire, water or wind within the City. 
D.  Farm sales or livestock sales, pavilions selling livestock and farm products. 
E.  The sale of real property at auction. 
F.  Any sale from which the proceeds are to be given to a charitable organization as defined by Nebraska Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 9, 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-3) 
3-1504 - SALES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an auction sale of personal property (goods, wares or merchandise) on any of the streets, sidewalks or public property of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 6, 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-4) 
3-1505 - STORAGE OF GOODS RESTRICTED 
    Auctioneers and auction houses shall not, under any circumstances, allow any goods, merchandise, equipment or any other personal property to be stored or deposited on the sale premises, unless within the enclosed confines of a building, in excess of a period commencing at seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the day of sale until twelve o'clock (12:00) Noon of the day following. The City Manager may, in his/her discretion, require that fencing or screening be erected around the confines of an auction house. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 7, 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-5) 
3-1506 - NOISE CONTROL 
    No loudspeaker or sound amplification equipment which disturbs the peace and quiet of residents of the City, and no such equipment shall be employed in any event after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. in the conduct of auctions, unless such equipment is confined to use within an enclosed building, and the sounds therefrom do not emanate or carry from the said property. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 8, 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-6) 
3-1507 - UNLAWFUL ACTS 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee, under the provisions of this Chapter, his/her auctioneer or their employees: 
A.  To knowingly and intentionally make any false statements or misrepresentation as to the quality, character, condition, value, cost or general selling price of any property offered for sale, or to refuse to truthfully disclose any of such facts when asked to do so. 
B.  To employ by-bidders, cappers or puffers and it shall be unlawful for any auctioneer in the City to use or employ any scheme or plan such as by-bidding or other similar artifice for the purpose of inducing increased bids, or to have in his/her employ, either directly or indirectly, any person who shall make, or attempt to make, bids on any property being offered for sale by such auctioneer for the purpose of increasing the price to be paid for such property, or for the purpose of causing or inducing other persons to increase their bids. 
C.  To sell any blind packages of merchandise. 
D.  To neglect or refuse to deliver immediate possession of any article sold upon payment of valid consideration, with the exception of sales requiring transfer of title. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 10, 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-7) 
3-1508 - ARTICLES TO BE NUMBERED 
    Each article, when offered for sale under a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, shall have attached to it, a tag which shall state the lot number. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 11, 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-8) 
3-1509 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8219, 2-13-2018) 
3-1510 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8219, 2-13-2018) 
3-1511 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8219, 2-13-2018) 
3-1512 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8219, 2-13-2018) 
3-1513 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8219, 2-13-2018) 
3-1514 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8219, 2-13-2018) 
3-1515 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8219, 2-13-2018) 
3-1516 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8219, 2-13-2018) 
3-1517 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8219, 2-13-2018) 
3-1518 - SPECIAL PERMIT FOR SALES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS; REQUIRED 
    No auction sale of personal property shall be conducted within any of the residential areas of the City as defined by the City's Zoning Code, except upon the issuance of a special permit therefor by the City Manager and in accordance with the express terms of such special permit. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 5(a), 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-40) 
3-1519 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8219, 2-13-2018) 
3-1520 - SPECIAL PERMIT FOR SALES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS; APPLICATION 
    Application for a special permit to conduct an auction sale of personal property within the residential areas of the City shall be made to the City Manager on a form to be provided by him/her upon which shall be stated the nature and quantity of the goods to be sold and the number of days during which it is desired to conduct such auction sale. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 5(b), 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-42) 
3-1521 - SPECIAL PERMIT FOR SALES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS; FEE 
    The fee for the special permit required by the provisions of this Article shall be as prescribed in Section 3-1818 of this Code; provided, however, that such fee shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the fees and bond for an auctioneer's license as required by the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 5(b), 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-43) 
3-1522 - SPECIAL PERMIT FOR SALES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS; ISSUANCE 
    The City Manager shall issue the permit required by the provisions of this Article upon the payment of the required fee upon his/her determination that there is good and sufficient reason for the issuance of such special permit. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 5(b), 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-44) 
3-1523 - SPECIAL PERMIT FOR SALES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS; REFUSAL OR REVOCATION; WHEN AUTHORIZED 
    The City Manager may refuse to issue or renew a special permit required by the provisions of this Article, or may revoke any special permit already issued, if he/she determines that there is good and sufficient reason for such refusal or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 5(c), 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-45) 
3-1524 - SPECIAL PERMIT FOR SALES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS; REFUSAL OR REVOCATION; APPEAL 
    Any individual aggrieved by the action of the City Manager in refusing to issue or renew or in revoking any special permit under the provisions of this Article shall have the right to appeal to the Council. (Ord. No. 2809, 5(c), 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-46) 
3-1525 - SPECIAL PERMIT FOR SALES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS; REFUSAL OR REVOCATION; EFFECT 
    Upon the revocation of any special permit issued under the provisions of this Article by the City Manager and the communication of the fact of such revocation to the special permit holder, and pending the decision of an appeal from such revocation by the Council in the event that such an appeal be taken, it shall be unlawful for any individual to conduct any sale at auction in accordance with the terms of such special permit. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 5(c), 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-47) 
3-1526 - SPECIAL PERMIT FOR SALES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS; LOCATION OF SALE 
    Each special permit issued under the provisions of this Article shall specify the place or places within the residential areas of the City to which it pertains and the number of days for which such special permit is valid. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 5(b), 4-25-78; Code 1980, 8-48) 
ARTICLE 16. - CABLEVISION 
DIVISION I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6335, adopted Oct. 28, 1997, repealed the former Div. I, §§ 3-1601-3-1656, and enacted a new division as set out herein. The former Div. I pertained to similar subject matter. 

3-1601 - GRANT OF FRANCHISE 
    The City may grant one or more cable television franchises containing such provisions as are reasonably necessary to protect the public interest. This Ordinance may be amended from time to time, provided no such amendment shall in any way impair any contract right or increase the obligations of a franchisee under an outstanding and effective franchise except as permitted in the lawful exercise of the City's police power. 
(Ord. No. 6335, 10-28-97) 
3-1602 - FRANCHISE REQUIRED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than the City to construct, install, operate or maintain in, under, on, over or along the streets, public ways, alleys and public areas, or elsewhere within the corporate limits of the City, a cable television system or provide cable service without first obtaining from the City a franchise authorizing the same to the extent such franchise is required by federal, state or local law. A cable system shall not be deemed as operating within the City, even though service is offered or rendered to one or more subscriber(s) within the City, if no public right-of-way is used, crossed or occupied. 
(Ord. No. 6335, 10-28-97) 
3-1603 - FRANCHISE CHARACTERISTICS GENERALLY 
A.  A franchise authorizes use of public rights-of-way for installing, operating and maintaining cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, underground conduit, and other facilities, equipment and devices necessary and appurtenant to the operation of a cable system within the City, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize a franchisee to provide service to or install a cable system on private property without owner consent (except for use of compatible easements pursuant to and consistent with applicable law) or to use publicly or privately owned poles, ducts or conduits without a separate agreement with the owners. 
B.  In addition to other matters contained in a franchise, a franchise is non-exclusive and will not explicitly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable systems, affect the City's right to authorize use of public rights-of-way by other persons to operate cable systems or for other purposes it deems appropriate. 
C.  All privileges prescribed by a franchise shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the public rights-of-way, and the City reserves the right to reasonably designate where a franchisee's facilities are to be placed within the public rights-of-way through its generally applicable permit procedures. 
D.  A franchisee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws. A franchisee shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the police powers of the City including, but not limited to, all rights the City may have regarding zoning, supervision of construction and control of public rights-of-way. Any person who occupies public rights-of-way for the purpose of operating or constructing a cable system or who provides cable service and who does not hold a valid franchise from the City may be required by the City to enter into a franchise agreement within thirty (30) days of receipt of a written notice to such person from the City that a franchise is required, and to the extent cable franchisees and cable systems are similarly situated, cable franchise agreements shall be issued on materially and substantially the same terms and conditions so as to prevent disparate treatment of persons which operate or construct cable systems or provide cable service. In the absence of such a franchise being signed, the City may require such person to remove its property and restore the affected area to a condition satisfactory to the City within such time period prescribed by the City; direct City personnel to remove the property and restore the affected area to a condition satisfactory to the City and charge the person the cost therefor, including by placing a lien on the person's property as provided in connection with abating nuisances; or the City may take any other action it is entitled to take under applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 6335, 10-28-97) 
3-1604 - THEFT OF SERVICES; PENALTY 
A.  A person commits theft if he or she obtains services, which he or she knows are available only for compensation, by deception or threat or by false token or other means to avoid payment for the service. Services include labor, professional service, telephone service, electric service, cable television service, or other public service, accommodation in hotels, restaurants, or elsewhere, admission to exhibitions, and use of vehicles or other movable property. When compensation for service is ordinarily paid immediately upon the rendering of such service, as in the case of hotels and restaurants, refusal to pay or absconding without payment or offer to pay gives rise to a presumption that the service was obtained by deception as to intention to pay. 
B.  A person commits theft if, having control over the disposition of services of others to which he or she is not entitled, he or she diverts such services to his or her own benefit or to the benefit of another not entitled thereto. 
C.  For purposes of this subsection, telecommunications service shall include, but not be limited to, telephone service and cable television service, and device shall include, but not be limited to, instrument, apparatus, equipment, and plans or instructions for making or assembling the same. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to: 
1.  Knowingly make or possess any device designed to or commonly used to obtain telecommunications service fraudulently from a licensed cable television franchisee with the intent to use such device in the commission of an offense described in subsection A of this Section; 
2.  Knowingly tamper with, interfere with, or connect to any cables, wires, converters, or other devices used for the distribution of telecommunications services by any mechanical, electrical, acoustical, or other means without authority from the operator of the service with the intent of obtaining telecommunications service fraudulently; or 
3.  Sell, give, transfer, or offer or advertise for sale a device which such person knows or should know is intended to be used for the purpose of obtaining telecommunications service fraudulently. 
(Ord. No. 6335, 10-28-97) 
DIVISION II. - ADVISORY BOARD OF CABLE COMMISSIONERS 

3-1657 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5816, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 7614, 9-14-2010) 
3-1658 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5816, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 7614, 9-14-2010) 
3-1659 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5816, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 5824, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 7614, 9-14-2010) 
3-1660 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5816, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 7614, 9-14-2010) 
3-1661 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5816, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 7614, 9-14-2010) 
3-1662 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5816, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 7614, 9-14-2010) 
3-1663 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5816, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 7614, 9-14-2010) 
3-1664 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5816, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 7614, 9-14-2010) 
3-1665 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5816, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 7614, 9-14-2010) 
3-1666 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5816, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 7614, 9-14-2010) 
3-1667 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5816, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 6335, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 7614, 9-14-2010) 
3-1668 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5816, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 7614, 9-14-2010) 
3-1669 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5816, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 6335, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 7614, 9-14-2010) 
ARTICLE 17. - JUNK DEALERS 

3-1701 - JUNK DEALERS; DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    JUNK: Shall mean old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, waste or junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, iron, steel, or other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material and metal scraps, including aluminum scraps and metals and used bicycle or automobile tires. 
    JUNK DEALER: Any person engaged in the buying, selling, receiving, collecting, storing or dealing in junk, but excluding persons whose sole business consists of owning or operating machines which accept and automatically render payment for aluminum cans. 
(Code 1958, 17.1; Ord. No. 5011, 1, 5-23-89; Code 1980, 19-1) 
3-1702 - FENCES AND CONCRETE FLOORS TO PREVENT RODENT HARBORAGE 
    In cases where the business of buying and selling junk, including the buying, dismantling or storing of wrecked, junked, scrapped, ruined, used, or dismantled automobiles, or parts thereof, or the buying and selling of new or used automobile parts is carried on within the City in any location whether it be because of the use of the property prior to the adoption of regulations of the ordinances of the City or by virtue of permit issued under City authority or by consent of property owners or otherwise, and whether carried on inside a building or in the open, such business shall be governed by the following building regulations which are adopted to prevent the harboring of rodents, the spread of diseases and to protect adjoining property: 
A.  Fences around auto-wrecking, etc., businesses. All dismantling or storage lots used for tearing down, or storage of automobiles or repair of automobiles, in the open shall be enclosed by an eight (8) foot solid fence to be kept in a good and substantial condition, which fence shall be placed on or inside the property line and shall conform with the setback required of all buildings, and on the front street side, in any case, shall not be placed closer than twenty (20) feet from the lot line. 
B.  Fences around junk business. All junk businesses where junk, scrap and other material is piled in the open shall be enclosed with an eight (8) foot solid fence to be maintained in a good and substantial condition and if the same shall harbor rodents, shall have a cement or brick wall of like height to replace such board fence, to be placed on or inside the property line and shall conform with the setback for other buildings of the district and on the front street shall not be placed closer than twenty (20) feet from the property line. 
C.  Cement floors. All buildings in which any business mentioned in this Article is conducted shall have cement floors and be otherwise constructed in accordance with any ordinances for the district in which the same are located and in addition shall be kept and maintained so that they shall be free from rodents. All new structures built or used in the business shall be built in conformance with the setback provisions for property where the same is located and upon the front street shall not be built closer than twenty (20') feet from the lot line. 
D.  Nuisance. At any time upon written complaint of the Board of Health, filed with the Council, stating that any such business is so carried on or maintained so that the same is harboring rodents, or if the provisions of this Article are not complied with, it shall be the duty of the Council to declare the same a nuisance and to notify the owner of the business and the property owner by registered mail to correct the condition within ten (10) days. The owners shall notify the City Clerk within such time that the correction has been made. If the owners fail to correct the condition and to comply with this Section, the Council shall declare such condition a nuisance and the City Attorney shall bring suit to abate such nuisance. 
(Code 1958, 17.10; Ord. No. 5011, 2, 5-23-89; Code 1980, 19-2) 
3-1703 - PERMIT; REQUIRED 
    Before any person shall engage in any business coming under the provisions of this Article, such person shall first obtain a permit therefor from the City Clerk. 
(Code 1958, 17.2; Code 1980, 19-18) 
3-1704 - PERMIT; OCCUPATION TAX 
    Every person, before engaging in the business of dealing in junk shall pay the occupation tax set forth in Section 3-1826 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, 17.2; Ord. No. 5011, 4, 5-23-89; Code 1980, 19-19) 
3-1705 - PERMIT; BOND; REQUIRED 
    Every person, before engaging in the business of dealing in junk shall give bond to the City in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Code 1958, 17.2; Ord. No. 5011, 5, 5-23-89; Code 1980, 19-20) 
3-1706 - PERMIT; BOND; CONDITIONS 
    The bond required of junk dealers shall be signed by the principal and one (1) or more sufficient sureties, and shall be conditioned, among other things, including compliance with all laws and ordinances, upon the faithful performance by the principal, of each and every trust imposed by law or by usage, upon the kind of business for which the permit is issued, and shall be for the benefit of any person injured or damaged by any fraud or willful misconduct of the person engaged in such business, or for the benefit of the City in enforcing its ordinances. The surety on such bond may be a natural person or some responsible guaranty or surety company. If such surety shall be a natural person, he or she shall be a resident of the County and State and shall justify in the sum of at least double the amount of such bond. Such bond shall be approved by the City Clerk. 
(Code 1958, 17.3; Ord. No. 5011, 6, 5-23-89; Code 1980, 19-21) 
3-1707 - PERMIT; ISSUANCE 
    Upon the payment of the required tax and giving of the required bond, the City Clerk shall issue the permit required by this Article. 
(Code 1958, 17.2; Code 1980, 19-22) 
3-1708 - PERMIT; ADVERTISING BEFORE ISSUANCE UNLAWFUL 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not having a junk dealer's permit to display in front of, about or upon his/her premises any sign or advertisement asserting that any goods of the charter named in this Article are bought or sold on the premises, before the issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1958, 17.5; Ord. No. 5011, 7, 5-23-89; Code 1980, 19-23) 
3-1709 - PERMIT; DURATION 
    Each permit issued under the provisions of this Article shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1958, 17.2; Code 1980, 19-24) 
3-1710 - PERMIT; LOCATION RESTRICTED 
    No person to whom a permit shall have been granted under the provisions of this Article shall be allowed to do business in more than one (1) place under one (1) permit. Every permit shall state the place where such business is to be carried on. 
(Code 1958, 17.4; Code 1980, 19-25) 
3-1711 - PERMIT; ASSIGNMENT 
    No permit issued under the provisions of this Article shall be assignable. (Code 1958, 17.4; Code 1980, 19-26) 
ARTICLE 18. - OCCUPATION, BUSINESS AND OTHER TAXES 

3-1801 - REQUIRED; PURPOSE 
    For the purpose of raising revenue, there is hereby levied an occupation tax upon each and every occupation and business carried on within the City as specified by this Article or in other sections of this Code making reference to this Article. 
(Code 1958, 20.1; Code 1980, 24-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-205 
3-1802 - WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE 
    On all occupations and businesses on which an occupation tax is levied at a yearly rate, the year for such tax shall be deemed to begin with the first (1st) day of May of each year and shall end on the last day of April following and the tax for that year shall be due and payable in advance on the first (1st) day of May of every year and thereafter shall be delinquent. On all occupations or businesses on which the tax is levied at a quarterly, daily or weekly rate, the tax shall be due and payable in advance before the business begins, for the number of quarters, days, or weeks, as the case may be, for which the occupation or business is to be carried on within the taxing year. 
(Code 1958, 20.3; Ord. No. 2652, 2, 4-26-77; Code 1980, 24-2) 
3-1803 - PAYMENT AND COLLECTION 
    Every person carrying on the occupation or business coming under the provisions of this Article within the City shall pay to the Director of Finance and Administration annually the sum named by this Article as a tax upon the occupation or business. 
(Code 1958, 20.2; Code 1980, 24-3) 
3-1804 - DUTY TO PAY WHEN DUE 
    It shall be the duty of each and every person to pay the tax levied against him or her at the time it becomes due. 
(Code 1958, 20.4; Code 1980, 24-4) 
3-1805 - ISSUANCE OF RECEIPT 
    Upon payment of the occupation tax or license fee required by this provisions of this Article, the City Clerk shall issue a receipt therefor to the person paying the same, properly dated and specifying on behalf of whom and for what the sum is paid. Such receipt shall be the proper authority of any person to carry on and conduct the business specified in the receipt. 
(Code 1958, 20.5; Ord. No. 2652, 2, 4-26-77; Code 1980, 24-5) 
3-1806 - ACCOUNTING 
    The City Clerk shall keep a proper account of occupation taxes and license fees paid under the provisions of this Article. 
(Code 1958, 20.5; Code 1980, 24-6) 
3-1807 - DISPOSITION OF RECEIPTS 
    Money collected under the provisions of this Article shall be credited to the general fund. Such money shall be and remain under the control of the Council for such use and purpose as other money belonging to the general fund. 
(Code 1958, 20.2; Code 1980, 24-7) 
3-1808 - METHODS OF COLLECTING DELINQUENT TAXES 
    Upon the failure of any person to pay any tax levied by this Article when the demand is made by the City Clerk or other person designated by the Council, the City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue a distress warrant over the corporate seal directed to the Chief of Police commanding the Chief of Police forthwith to collect, by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of the person named in the warrant, the occupation tax due and unpaid. The costs created by reason of the distress sale shall be paid out of the property levied upon in addition to the amount due on the occupation tax. Occupation taxes may also be collected by suit brought therefor in the name of the City against the person failing to pay the tax. 
(Code 1958, 20.6; Code 1980, 24-8) 
3-1809 - TERM; REFUNDS 
    Every occupation tax levied at a daily or yearly rate or other rate must be paid in one (1) payment in advance before the business is commenced, whether the tax receipt is issued at the beginning of the day, year or other term, or at any time thereafter, but no tax receipt shall be issued at the beginning of the day, year or other term for any certain time less than the day, year or other term. No person paying occupation taxes shall be entitled to a refund of any part of the tax so paid. 
(Code 1958, 20.7; Ord. No. 2652, 2, 4-26-77; Code 1980, 24-9) 
3-1810 - FAILURE TO PAY TAXES 
    Any person who shall refuse or neglect to pay the occupation taxes levied by this Article, or who transacts any such business or engages in any such occupation without having complied with the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a violation of this Code; provided, that whenever any of the businesses or occupations shall be conducted by an agent for a corporation or a nonresident, such agent shall be subject to arrest and punishment under the provisions of this Article, if his/her or her principal shall not have complied with the provisions of this Article. 
(Code 1958, 20.12; Code 1980, 24-10) 
3-1811 - DISPLAY 
    The receipt for the payment of an occupation tax due under the provisions of this Article shall be prominently displayed at the place of business for which such payment was made. 
(Code 1980, 24-11) 
3-1812 - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION 
    The privilege in engaging in any business or occupation granted under the provisions of this Article may be suspended or revoked by the Council for the violation by the person engaging in such business or occupation, or his/her or her agents or employees, of any applicable provision of this Code, State law or City ordinance, rule or regulations. 
(Code 1980, 24-12) 
3-1813 - SCHEDULE; EXEMPTIONS; FARMERS, ETC. 
    The provisions of this Article shall not extend nor affect individuals selling livestock, farm products or fuel raised or produced by the vendors or their employees. 
(Code 1958, 20.9; Code 1980, 24-24) 
3-1814 - SCHEDULE; EXEMPTIONS; LECTURES, LOCAL ENTERTAINMENT 
    All scientific and literary lectures and entertainments shall be exempt from payment of occupation taxes as well as concerts and other entertainment given exclusively by the citizens of the City. 
(Code 1958, 20.10; Code 1980, 24-25) 
3-1815 - SCHEDULE; EXEMPTIONS; GOVERNMENT BODIES AND OFFICIALS; INTERSTATE COMMERCE 
    Occupation taxes are not levied upon any business or occupation which is engaged in interstate commerce or which is done or conducted by any department of the government of the United States, the State, the City or the officers thereof in the course of their official duties, or by any county or subdivision of this State or its officers in the course of their official duties. 
(Code 1958, 20.11; Code 1980, 24-26) 
3-1816 - SCHEDULE; ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE DEALERS, DISTRIBUTORS 
    For the purpose of raising revenue, there is hereby levied upon distributors, retailers, and nonbeverage users of alcoholic liquor in the City of Kearney an annual occupation tax in accordance with the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. Such occupation tax, or any part of it, shall not be refunded for any cause. 
    The license year, unless otherwise provided in the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, shall commence on May 1 of each year and shall end on the following April 30, except that the license year for a Class C license shall commence on November 1 of each year and shall end on the following October 31. During the license year, no occupation tax shall be issued for a sum less than the amount of the annual occupation tax as fixed in City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule, regardless of the time when the application for such license has been made, except that (a) when there is a purchase of an existing licensed business and a new license of the same class is issued or (b) upon the issuance of a new license for a location which has not been previously licensed, the license fee and occupation taxes shall be prorated on a quarterly basis as of the date of issuance. 
    Such occupation tax shall be paid to the Director of Finance for the benefit of the City immediately after the final issuance of a license by the State for such business. 
(Code 1958, 20.8(19-21); Ord. No. 2652, 1(8), 4-26-77; Ord. No. 2871, 1(8), 8-22-78; Ord. No. 3629, 1, 9-27-83; Ord. No. 5136, 1, 6-12-90; Code 1980, 24-27; Ord. No. 5912, 4-11-95; Ord. No. 6492, 12-22-98; Ord. No. 7162, 4-12-2005; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
Cross reference- License for alcoholic beverages, § 3-1314 et seq. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 53-132(4) 
3-1817 - SCHEDULE; AUCTIONEERS 
    The fees for an auctioneer's license shall be as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 3, 4-25-78; Code 1980, 24-28; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
Cross reference- License for auctions, § 3-1509 et seq. 
3-1818 - SCHEDULE; AUCTION SALES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS 
    The fee for a special permit to sell personal property in the residential areas of the City as defined by the City's zoning ordinance shall be as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 5(b), 4-25-78; Code 1980, 24-29; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
Cross reference- Special permits for auctions in residential areas, 3-1518 et seq. 
3-1819 - SCHEDULE; BILLBOARD ADVERTISERS 
    The annual occupation tax due under the provisions of this Article for the location of billboards upon private property or elsewhere within this City by persons for hire, profit or gain shall be as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee. 
    A "billboard" shall be defined as any sign advertising a person, business, product, event or subject unrelated to a business or profession conducted on or to a commodity, service, or activity sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located. 
(Code 1958, 20.8(2); Ord. No. 2652, 1(2), 4-26-77; Ord. No. 2871, 1(2), 8-22-78; Ord. No. 3321, 1, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 24-31; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
3-1820 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 7A.2; Code 1980, 24-33; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 7398, 11-27-2007) 
Cross reference- Bingo, Ch. 3, Art. 26 
3-1821 - SCHEDULE; CABLEVISION FRANCHISE 
    There is hereby imposed upon each person or entity engaged in the cable television business within the City under the terms and provisions of a franchise granted by the City Council, an annual occupation tax as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee of the gross revenues of such person or entity as more fully set forth in a franchise. 
(Code 1958, 20.17; Ord. No. 3938, 1, 7-28-87; Code 1980, 24-36; Ord. No. 6336, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
Cross reference- Cablevision, Ch. 3, Art. 16 
3-1822 - SCHEDULE; CIRCUSES 
    The daily occupation tax due under the provisions of this Article for the operation of a circus within the City shall be as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee. 
(Code 1958, 20.8(4); Ord. No. 2652, 1(6), 4-26-77; Ord. No. 2871, 1(6), 8-22-78; Code 1980, 24-37; Ord. No. 6339, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
Cross reference- Amusements, Ch. 3, Art. 14 
3-1823 - SCHEDULE; CONCESSIONS 
    Each concession not otherwise classified in this Article, such as doll racks or other amusement stands of any kind or description, in the nature of a concession, including each concession connected with any circus, carnival or other exhibition doing business within the City shall pay a daily occupation tax as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee. 
(Code 1958, 20.8(5); Ord. No. 2652, 1(7), 4-26-77; Ord. No. 2871, 1(7), 8-22-78; Code 1980, 24-38; Ord. No. 6339, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
Cross reference- Amusements, Ch. 3, Art. 14 
3-1824 - SCHEDULE; EXHIBITIONS 
    The daily occupation tax due under the provisions of this Article for carnivals or exhibitions shall be as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee. 
(Code 1958, 20.8(10); Ord. No. 2652, 1(10), 4-26-77; Ord. No. 2871, 1(10), 8-22-78; Code 1980, 24-40; Ord. No. 6339, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
Cross reference- Amusements, Ch. 3, Art. 14 
3-1825 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2652, 1(12), 4-26-77; Ord. No. 2871, 1(12), 8-22-78; Code 1980, 24-43; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
Cross reference- Fireworks, Ch. 4, Art. 6 
3-1826 - SCHEDULE; JUNK DEALERS 
    The annual occupation tax due under the provisions of this Article for each junk dealer, as defined in Section 3-1701 of this Code, shall be as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Code 1958, 20.8(7); Ord. No. 2652, 1(15), 4-26-77; Ord. No. 2871, 1(15), 8-22-78; Code 1980, 24-46; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
Cross reference- Junk dealers, Ch. 3, Art. 17 
3-1827 - REPEALED 
    Transferred to Section 9-916 "Fee; Manufactured Home Parks" of Chapter 9 of the Code. 
(Code 1958, 29.4(b); Ord. No. 3240, 1, 6-18-80; Ord. No. 3904, 1, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 24.27; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
Cross reference- Manufactured homes, Ch. 9, Art. 9 
3-1828 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 20.8(14); Ord. No. 2652, 1(17), 4-26-77; Ord. No. 2871, 1(17), 8-22-78; Code 1980, 24-49; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
Cross reference- Pawnbrokers, Ch. 3, Art. 23 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 69-202 
3-1829 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2653, 1, 4-26-77; Code 1980, 24-53; Ord. No. 7325, 2-27-2007 effective April 1, 2007) 
Cross reference- Telephone companies, Ch. 3, Art. 20 
3-1830 - HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS 
    Each person engaged in the business of operating a hotel in the City shall pay an occupation tax in the amount as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule of the basic rental rates charged per occupied room per night. 
(Ord. No. 6153, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
3-1831 - HOTEL DEFINED 
    Hotel shall mean any facility in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in any space ordinarily used for accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist hotels, campgrounds, courts, lodging houses, inns and nonprofit hotels; but "hotel" shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, chronic care centers, or dormitories or facilities operated by an educational institution and regularly used to house students. 
(Ord. No. 6153, 8-27-96) 
3-1832 - OCCUPIED ROOM, DEFINED; EXCEPTIONS 
A.  Occupied room shall mean any space ordinarily used for sleeping accommodations and for which any occupant has, for consideration, obtained the use or possession, or the right to use or possess, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) continuous days. The term shall include camping space, trailer space or recreational vehicle space. The term does not include a function room such as a ballroom, banquet room, reception room, or meeting room, provided it is not used as temporary sleeping accommodations. 
B.  The term "occupied room" shall not mean, and no tax imposed by this article shall be measured by or collected for: 
1.  Complimentary or other sleeping accommodations for which no consideration is charged; 
2.  Sleeping accommodations for which the consideration is paid by a person not subject to the sales and use tax imposed by the Nebraska Revenue Act of 1967, as it is amended from time to time; or 
3.  Sleeping accommodations leased by an employer for use by its employees when a specific room is the subject of the lease, the lease extends for more than thirty (30) consecutive days, and consideration is actually paid for use during at least thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 6153, 8-27-96) 
3-1833 - COLLECTION 
    The tax imposed by this article shall be collected by the hotel operator from the occupant of each room to which the tax applies. The tax may be shown as an add-on to the charge for occupancy of the rooms and shall be collectible at the time the lodging is furnished, regardless of when the charge for the occupancy is paid. The operator shall remain responsible for payment of all taxes imposed whether or not the taxes are actually collected from the guests. 
(Ord. No. 6153, 8-27-96) 
3-1834 - RECORDS 
    It shall be unlawful for any hotel operator subject to this article to fail to maintain or fail to make available to the City, upon seventy-two (72) hours' notice, written records accurately and completely evidencing the number of rooms occupied, the dates the rooms are occupied, the amount of occupation tax due or paid under this article, and such other information as is required by the Director of Finance and Administration. Such records shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years after the occupation tax is due. 
(Ord. No. 6153, 8-27-96) 
3-1835 - DUE DATE 
    Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this chapter, the tax imposed by this article shall be due and payable on the first day of each calendar month next succeeding the month during which the room was occupied. All taxes not paid by the twenty-fifth day of the month in which they are due and payable shall be deemed to be delinquent. The operator shall be assessed a penalty of ten percent (10%) on all delinquent amounts as well as interest of one percent (1%) per month or fraction thereof from the first of the month in which such tax becomes due and payable until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 6153, 8-27-96) 
3-1836 - INTENT 
    It is the intent of the City Council that a portion of the revenue generated by the occupation tax imposed by this Article shall be appropriated annually to fund the Kearney Visitors Bureau for the purposes set forth at Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-315. 
(Ord. No. 6153, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 7012, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 7303, 10-10-2006) 
3-1837 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6153, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 6282, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 6287, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 7012, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 7303, 10-10-2006) 
3-1838 - PENALTY 
    Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of Sections 3-1830 through 3-1837 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-111 of this Code. Each distinct act or violation of the terms of Sections 3-1830 through 3-1837 shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 6153, 8-27-96) 
ARTICLE 19. - DOWNTOWN IMPROVEMENT AND PARKING DISTRICT 

3-1901 - DOWNTOWN IMPROVEMENT AND PARKING DISTRICT; ESTABLISHED 
    There is hereby created and established a downtown improvement and parking district in the City. 
(Code 1958, 20.24; Code 1980, 24-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-801 et seq.; 19-3401 et seq. (repealed laws 1979, LB 251, 26); 19-4015 et seq. (c.f. 19-4038) 
3-1902 - BOUNDARIES DEFINED 
    The boundaries of the district are as follows: Commencing at Railroad Street one hundred and thirty (130) feet west of Second Avenue, thence east along Railroad Street to a point one hundred and thirty (130) feet east of Avenue B, thence north along a line one hundred and thirty (130) feet east of Avenue B to 25th Street, thence west along 25th Street to a point one hundred and thirty (130) feet west of Second Avenue, thence south along a line one hundred and thirty (130) feet west of Second Avenue to the place of beginning. 
(Code 1958, 20.25; Code 1980, 24-100) 
3-1903 - DOWNTOWN IMPROVEMENT BOARD; CREATED 
    There is hereby created a Downtown Improvement Board. 
3-1904 - COMPOSITION 
    The Downtown Improvement Board shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom must own, operate and/or manage businesses within the Downtown Improvement and Parking District as defined. 
3-1905 - APPOINTMENT 
    Names of persons willing to serve the City in the capacity of a member of the Downtown Improvement Board shall complete an Expression of Interest form. The members of the Downtown Improvement Board shall be appointed by the Mayor/President and approved by the Council. 
(Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1906 - COMPENSATION 
    All members of the Downtown Improvement Board shall serve without compensation. 
3-1907 - CHAIRPERSON; OFFICERS 
    The officers of the Downtown Improvement Board shall be Chairperson/President and Vice-Chairperson/Vice-President. The officers shall be elected on expiration of the following terms by the members of the Board: 
A.  Chairperson/President: Two year term. 
B.  Vice-Chairperson/Vice-President: Two year term. 
C.  Secretary: Two year term. 
(Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1908 - TERMS OF OFFICE 
    The term of each appointed member of the Downtown Improvement Board shall be for five (5) years. All terms of office will expire on July 31. 
(Ord. No. 6363, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1909 - PARTICIPATION 
    Members of the Downtown Improvement Board are expected to attend meetings on a regular basis. Whenever a Board member misses three (3) consecutive meetings or his/her attendance falls below seventy-five (75) percent in a 12-month period, the Mayor/President will formally request, by letter, clarification from the identified board member of the reason for lack of attendance. If no attendance improvement plan can be agreed upon by the Mayor/President and board member, the board member may be asked to consider resignation. 
(Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1910 - VACANCY OF MEMBER 
    In case of illness, resignation, movement of the business out of the Downtown Improvement and Parking District or vacancy on the Board for any other reason, the Mayor/President, with Council approval, shall immediately appoint a member to the Board for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
3-1911 - MEETINGS 
    The Downtown Improvement Board may hold one (1) regular meeting in each month in the Council Chambers at City Hall at such time as may be fixed by the Board. Special meetings of the Board may be called by the Chairperson/President, or in his/her absence, by such other officer as may be designated by the Board, or by any three (3) members of the Board. 
(Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1912 - QUORUM 
    Three (3) members are needed at all meetings to conduct business and represent a quorum. 
3-1913 - MINIMUM VOTE REQUIRED 
    A majority vote of all the members present at a Board meeting shall be required to pass any measure or elect any officer of the Board. 
3-1914 - RULES AND RECORDS 
    The Downtown Improvement Board shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which records shall be public record. 
3-1915 - POWERS; DUTIES GENERALLY 
    It shall be the function and duty of the Downtown Improvement Board to advise and make recommendations to the Council regarding: 
A.  The creation and implementation of plans to furnish adequate public parking facilities with the district; 
B.  The creation and implementation of plans to acquire, construct, maintain and operate public off-street parking facilities for the benefit of the district area; 
C.  Planning the beautification and improving the general architectural design of the district; 
D.  Planning and promoting the improvement of streets, lighting and traffic control for the district; 
E.  Improvement and decoration of any public place in the district area; 
F.  Promotion, or coordination and administration of special events which are to take place on or in the district area; and 
G.  Assist in the payment of general obligation bonds issued for the construction of such parking facilities. 
(Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1916 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 20.26; Code 1980, 24-101; Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1917 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 20.27; Code 1980, 24-102; Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1918 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 20.28; Code 1980, 24-103; Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1919 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 20.29; Code 1980, 24-104; Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1920 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 20.30; Code 1980, 24-105; Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1921 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 20.31; Code 1980, 24-106; Ord. No. 6363, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1922 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 20.32; Code 1980, 24-107; Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1923 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 20.33; Code 1980, 24-108; Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1924 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 20.34; Code 1980, 24-109; Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
3-1925 - TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS; USE 
    In addition to uses otherwise authorized in the Offstreet Parking District Act, any money available from taxes or assessments levied pursuant to Section 19-3315 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes or revenue derived from the operation of an off-street parking facility may be used in the district for any one (1) or more of the following purposes: 
1.  Improvement of any public place or facility, including landscaping, physical improvements for decoration or security purposes, and plantings; 
2.  Construction or installation of pedestrian shopping malls or plazas, sidewalks or moving sidewalks, parks, meeting and display facilities, bus stop shelters, lighting, benches or other seating furniture, sculptures, trash receptacles, shelters, foundations, skywalks, and pedestrian and vehicular overpasses and underpasses, and any useful or necessary public improvements; 
3.  Leasing, acquiring, constructing, reconstructing, extending, maintaining, or repairing parking lots or parking garages, both above and below the ground, or other facilities for the parking of vehicles, including the power to install such facilities in public areas, whether such areas are owned in fee or by easement; 
4.  Creation and implementation of a plan for improving the general architectural design of public areas; 
5.  Development of any public activities and promotion of public events, including the management, promotion, and advocacy of retail trade activities or other promotional activities; 
6.  Maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of any publicly owned improvements or facilities; 
7.  The creation by ordinance and operation of a revolving loan fund for the purpose of providing financing upon appropriate terms and conditions for capital improvements to privately owned facilities, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  No loan from such fund shall exceed an amount equivalent to forty-nine percent of the total cost of the improvements to be financed by the loan; 
(b)  The city shall require and receive appropriate security to guarantee the repayment of the loan; and 
(c)  The proposed improvements to be financed shall serve to foster the purposes of the act, promote economic activity, or contribute to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
8.  Any other project or undertaking for the betterment of the public facilities, whether the project is capital or noncapital in nature; 
9.  Enforcement of parking regulations and the provision of security; and 
10.  Employing or contracting for personnel, including administrators, for any improvement program under the act, and providing for any service as may be necessary or proper to carry out the purposes of the act. 
(Ord. No. 7215, 9-27-2005) 
ARTICLE 20. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

3-2001 - TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES COMPANIES; LEVIED; AMOUNT 
    Commencing April 1, 2007, there is hereby levied upon every person, firm, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or association engaged in the business of offering or providing telecommunications services to the public for hire in the City of Kearney an occupation tax as follows: 
A.  A percentage as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule on the gross receipts resulting from any toll services and charges on basic local exchange services and wireless services as follows: 
1.  Basic local exchange services shall include the access and transmission of two-way switched communications within the city, including local telephone and telecommunication services; and 
2.  Wireless services shall include any cellular communication services provided pursuant to license or authority granted by the Federal Communications Commission and charged to a service address within the City regardless of where the charges are actually paid. 
B.  Gross receipts shall not include any toll services and charges as follows: 
1.  For interstate telecommunications between persons in this city and persons outside of this state; 
2.  For local carrier access charges, transmission facilities and switching services provided to telecommunications companies; and 
3.  From accounts charged to the United States government or any of its departments, or the State of Nebraska, or any of its agencies, subdivisions or departments. 
    No part or portion of the tax provided for in this chapter shall be levied upon or assessed against or taken from any such gross receipts so excepted from the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2653, 1, 7-26-77; Ord. No. 3858, 1, 8-12-86; Code 1980, 24-121; Ord. No. 7325, 2-27-2007 effective April 1, 2007; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
3-2002 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2653, 1, 7-26-77; Code 1980, 24-122; Ord. No. 7325, 2-27-2007 effective April 1, 2007) 
3-2003 - PAYMENT PERIOD AND DUE DATE 
    The payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to Sections 3-2001 to 3-2010 shall be in quarterly payments, using the calendar quarter year as a basis for determining and computing the amount of tax payable. Each quarterly payment shall be due forty-five (45) days after the termination of each calendar quarter year. 
(Ord. No. 2653, 2, 7-26-77; Code 1980, 24-123) 
3-2004 - TO WHOM PAYABLE; RECEIPT; DISPOSITION 
    The occupation tax levied pursuant to Sections 3-2001 to 3-2010 shall be paid to the Director of Finance at the time provided by Sections 3-2001 to 3-2010 and the Director of Finance shall issue and deliver a receipt therefore upon the payment thereof. The amount of payment shall be credited to the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 2653, 3, 7-26-77; Code 1980, 24-124) 
3-2005 - INTEREST AND PENALTY 
    All payments of the occupation tax levied pursuant to Sections 3-2001 to 3-2010 which are made after the due date thereof shall draw interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month and, after payment thereof has been in default for six (6) months, a penalty of five percent (5%) shall be added thereto in addition to such interest charges, which shall be paid by any company subject to this occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2653, 4, 7-26-77; Code 1980, 24-125) 
3-2006 - QUARTERLY REPORT OF GROSS RECEIPTS 
    All telecommunication services companies doing business in this City shall, at the time they make their quarterly payments of the occupation tax levied pursuant to Sections 3-2001 to 3-2010, file with the Director of Finance a full, complete and detailed statement of the gross receipts subject to such occupation tax; which statement shall be duly verified and sworn to by the manager in charge of the business of the particular company in the City or by a higher managerial employee of such company. 
(Ord. No. 2653, 5, 7-26-77; Code 1980, 24-126; Ord. No. 7325, 2-27-2007 effective April 1, 2007) 
3-2007 - ADJUSTMENTS 
    Each succeeding quarterly payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this Article may include any adjustment which is shown on the report provided for by Section 3-2006 which may be necessary for the consideration of uncollectibles or any other matters which may have resulted in either an excess or a deficiency in the amount of tax paid in any previous quarter. 
(Ord. No. 2653, 6, 7-26-77; Code 1980, 24-127) 
3-2008 - INSPECTION OF RECORDS 
    The City shall have the right at any time to inspect, through its officers, agents or representatives, the books and records of any telecommunication services companies, for the purpose of verifying any report submitted pursuant to the requirements of Section 3-2006. 
(Ord. No. 2653, 7, 7-26-77; Code 1980, 24-128; Ord. No. 7325, 2-27-2007 effective April 1, 2007) 
3-2009 - PRESUMPTION OF AMOUNT DUE 
    In case any telecommunication services companies shall refuse, fail or neglect to furnish or file any report required by Section 3-2006 at the time required for such filing, or shall fail or refuse to permit the City to inspect the books and records of such company for the purpose of verifying such report, then the occupation tax for the preceding quarter shall be the sum of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), and such amount shall be paid within forty-five (45) days following the end of the calendar quarter as required by Section 3-2003 and such amount shall draw interest and be subject to penalties as provided by Section 3-2005. 
(Ord. No. 2653, 8, 7-26-77; Code 1980, 24-129; Ord. No. 7325, 2-27-2007 effective April 1, 2007) 
3-2010 - RIGHT OF CITY TO SUE, ETC., WHEN PAYMENT IN DEFAULT 
    In case any telecommunication services companies shall fail to make payment of the occupation tax provided for by Sections 3-2001 to 3-2010 at the time specified for such payment, the City shall have the right to sue any such company in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of such occupation tax due and payable under the terms and provisions of Sections 3-2001 to 3-2010 and may recover judgment against any such company for such amount due, together with interest and penalties, and may have execution thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2653, 9, 7-26-77; Code 1980, 24-130; Ord. No. 7325, 2-27-2007 effective April 1, 2007) 
ARTICLE 21. - NATURAL GAS COMPANIES 

3-2101 - NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES; LEVIED 
    Each natural gas distribution company doing business in the City is required to pay an occupation tax to the City in an amount as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per therm for gas delivered to residential and commercial customers within the City on the natural gas company's distribution system. 
(Ord. No. 2860, 1, 7-25-78; Code 1980, 24-142; Ord. No. 6361, 3-10-98; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
3-2102 - EXCEPTIONS 
    There shall be excepted from the provisions of Sections 3-2101 to 3-2110 all receipts for natural gas service to governmental agencies, departments or other bodies whether they are federal, state or local. 
(Ord. No. 2860, 1, 7-25-78; Code 1980, 24-143) 
3-2103 - PAYMENT PERIOD AND DUE DATE 
    The payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to Sections 3-2101 and 3-2110 shall be in monthly payments. Each monthly payment shall be due thirty (30) days after the termination of each month. 
(Ord. No. 2860, 2, 7-25-78; Code 1980, 24-144; Ord. No. 6361, 3-10-98) 
3-2104 - TO WHOM PAYABLE; RECEIPT; DISPOSITION 
    The occupation tax levied pursuant to Sections 3-2101 to 3-2110 shall be paid to the Director of Finance at the time provided by Sections 3-2101 to 3-2110 and the Director of Finance shall issue and deliver a receipt therefore upon the payment thereof. The amount of payment shall be credited to the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 2860, 3, 7-25-78; Code 1980, 24-145) 
3-2105 - INTEREST AND PENALTY 
    All payments of the occupation tax levied pursuant to Sections 3-2101 to 3-2110 which are made after the due date thereof shall draw interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month and, after payment thereof has been in default for six (6) months, a penalty of five percent (5%) shall be added thereto in addition to such interest charges, which shall be paid by any company subject to this occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2860, 4, 7-25-78; Code 1980, 24-146) 
3-2106 - QUARTERLY REPORT OF GROSS RECEIPTS 
    All natural gas companies shall, at the time they make their quarterly payments of the occupation tax levied pursuant to Sections 3-2101 to 3-2110, file with the City Clerk a full, complete and detailed statement of the gross receipts subject to such occupation tax, which statement shall be duly verified and sworn to by the manager in charge of the business of the particular company in the City or by a higher managerial employee of such company. 
(Ord. No. 2860, 5, 7-25-78; Code 1980, 24-147) 
3-2107 - ADJUSTMENTS 
    Each succeeding quarterly payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to Sections 3-2101 to 3-2110 may include any adjustment which is shown on the report provided for by Section 3-2106 which may be necessary for the consideration of uncollectibles or any other matters which may have resulted in either any excess or a deficiency in the amount of tax paid in any previous quarter. 
(Ord. No. 2860, 6, 7-25-78; Code 1980, 24-148) 
3-2108 - INSPECTION OF RECORDS 
    The City shall have the right upon request and during business hours, to inspect, through its officers, agents or representatives, the books and records of any natural gas company, for the purpose of verifying any report submitted pursuant to the requirements of Section 3-2106. 
(Ord. No. 2860, 7, 7-25-78; Code 1980, 24-149) 
3-2109 - PRESUMPTION OF AMOUNT DUE 
    In case any natural gas company shall refuse, fail or neglect to furnish or file any report required by Section 3-2106 at the time required for such filing, or shall fail or refuse to permit the City to inspect the books and records of such company for the purpose of verifying such report, then the occupation tax for the preceding quarter shall be the sum of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), and such amount shall be paid within forty-five (45) days following the end of the calendar quarter as required by Section 3-2103 and such amount shall draw interest and be subject to penalties as provided by Section 3-2105. 
(Ord. No. 2860, 8, 7-25-78; Code 1980, 24-150) 
3-2110 - RIGHT OF CITY TO SUE, ETC., WHEN PAYMENT IN DEFAULT 
    In case any natural gas company shall fail to make payment of the occupation tax provided for by Sections 3-2101 to 3-2110 at the time specified for such payment, the City shall have the right to sue any such company in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of such occupation tax due and payable under the terms and provisions of Sections 3-2101 to 3-2110 and may recover judgment against any such company for such amount due, together with interest and penalties, and may have execution thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2860, 9, 7-25-78; Code 1980, 24-151) 
ARTICLE 22. - SALES AND USE TAX 

3-2201 - SALES AND USE TAX; ADOPTION AND IMPOSITION; ADMINISTRATION; ASSESSMENT; COLLECTION; CLAIMS; REMEDIES; PENALTIES AND DISPOSITION; SALES AND USE TAX USE; REVIEW AND AUDIT; DUTIES; REPEAL OF ORDINANCE NO. 5094 
A.  There is hereby adopted a sales and use tax to be effective on and after April 1, 2006, of one and One-half percent (11/2%) upon the same transactions within the corporate limits of the City of Kearney, Buffalo County, Nebraska, as the same may from time to time be extended, on which the State of Nebraska is authorized to impose a tax pursuant to the provisions of the Nebraska Revenue Act of 1967, Nebraska Revised Statutes Section 77-2701 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
B.  The administration of the sales and use tax imposed by this Section, the making of returns for the ascertainment and assessment, the provisions for tax claims and remedies, the laws governing consumption of sales, penalties and collection, and the disposition and distribution of the taxes so imposed and collected shall be as provided by Nebraska Revised Statutes Section 77-2701 et seq. and including Nebraska Revised Statutes Section 77-27,142 et seq., as amended, said latter statutes being known as the Local Option Revenue Act. 
C.  One percent (1%) of all revenue collections from the imposition of sales and use tax on affected transactions within the corporate limits of the City and any interest accruing on the same shall be used for property tax relief purposes. One-half percent (1/2%) of all revenue collections from the imposition of sales and use tax on affected transactions within the corporate limits of the City and any interest accruing on the same shall be used for funding capital improvements and equipment purposes. 
D.  To ensure compliance with subsection C above, the current City Auditor shall review and audit the use of sale and use tax revenue collections and annually report its findings to the Council at a regularly scheduled Council meeting. 
E.  This Section specifically repeals, effective March 31, 2006 Ordinance No. 5094, passed and approved on the 27th day of February, 1990; and that all other ordinances and resolutions or parts of ordinances and resolutions in conflict herewith are also hereby repealed. 
F.  This Section of the official City Code shall not be amended or repealed except by a vote of the electors of the City or by subsequently enacted State statutes as long as there is a sales and use tax imposed on affected transactions within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. No. 5094, 1, 2-27-90; Code 1980, 24-161; Ord. No. 7225, 11-22-2005) 
ARTICLE 23. - PAWNBROKERS 

3-2301 - PAWNBROKERS; DEFINITION 
    Any person engaged in the business of lending money upon chattel property for security and requiring possession of the property so mortgaged on condition of returning the same upon payment of a stipulated amount of money, or purchasing property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price, is declared to be a pawnbroker within the meaning of this Article. 
(Code 1958, 22.1; Code 1980, 27-1; Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
3-2302 - PERMIT; REQUIRED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to carry on the business of a pawnbroker without having first obtained a permit to do so. 
(Code 1958, 22.2; Code 1980, 27-17; Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 69-202 
3-2303 - PERMIT; APPLICATION 
    Any person desiring to conduct the business of a pawnbroker within the City, shall apply for a permit, on a form provided by the City, and the Permit shall provide the following information: 
1.  The name, address, social security number and date of birth of the owner and manager of the business; 
2.  If applicant is a Corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation and the names of its officers and shareholders; 
3.  The exact location where the business is to be conducted; and 
4.  The exact location where any goods, wares and merchandise may be stored or kept if other than the business location; 
5.  Any criminal records or convictions of the owner, manager or, in the event of a corporate applicant, the officers and shareholders. 
    Failure to complete an application properly or to fraudulently or knowing provide false information on the application shall be considered a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
3-2304 - PERMIT; FEE 
    Every person engaged in business of pawnbrokering shall pay to the Director of Finance and Administration the annual sum as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. The permit fee shall be paid in advance and shall be valid until December 31st of the year issued. 
(Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
3-2305 - PAWNBROKERS; BOND REQUIRED 
    Any person desiring to conduct the business of a pawnbroker within the City shall file with the City Clerk a bond to the City in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with one (1) or more sureties to be approved by the City Manager, conditioned for the faithful observance of all provisions of this Code, other ordinances and regulations of the City and State relating to pawnbrokers, the honest and faithful conduct of such business, and the faithful performance by the principal of each and all of the trusts imposed by law or by usage attached to pawnbrokers. The bond shall be for the benefit of any person injured or damaged by the fraud or willful misconduct of the business. 
(Ord. No. 2727, 1, 10-25-77; Code 1980, 27-18; Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 69-202 
3-2306 - PAWNBROKERS; OCCUPATION TAX 
    There is hereby levied on all persons engaged in the business of pawnbroker, an occupation tax as provided by Section 3-1828 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, 22.4; Code 1980, 27-19; Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
State Law reference- License fee, Neb. Rev. Stat. 69-202 
3-2307 - PERMIT; ISSUANCE 
    Upon compliance with the provisions of this Article, and approval of the application by the City Manager, the Clerk shall issue a permit which shall be signed by the City Manager and the City Clerk and shall be attested by the City seal. In the event that the City Manager denies approval of the application, the applicant may appeal to the City Council. 
(Code 1958, 22.4; Code 1980, 27-20; Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
3-2308 - PERMIT; BUSINESS LOCATION; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES 
    No persons shall be allowed to do business in more than one location under one permit. Each permit shall state the place where such business is to be carried on, and shall not be assigned. Goods, wares, and merchandise shall be kept or stored only at those locations specifically listed in the permit application. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not having a permit as required by this Article to display any sign or advertisement stating that money is lent on goods or that goods are purchased as described in Section 3-2301. 
(Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
3-2309 - RECORD REQUIRED; INSPECTION 
    Every pawnbroker, or employee of a pawnbroker, shall admit to the pawnbroker's premises at any reasonable time during normal business hours any law enforcement officer for the purpose of examining any property and records on the premises, and shall allow such officer to place restrictions on the disposition of any property for which a reasonable belief exists that it has been stolen. Any person claiming an ownership interest in property received by a pawnbroker for which a reasonable belief exists that such property has been stolen may recover such property as provided by Neb. Rev. Stat. Sections 25-1093 to 25-10,110. 
(Code 1958, 22.7; Code 1980, 27-3; Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
3-2310 - RECORDS REQUIRED; LEDGER; CARDS 
    All persons who shall be engaged in the business of pawnbrokers, dealers in secondhand goods, or junk dealers, shall keep a ledger and complete a card, to be furnished by the city, on which shall be legibly written in ink, at the time of any loan or purchase, the following information: 
1.  The date of the loan or purchase; 
2.  The name of the person from whom the property is purchased or received, his or her signature, date of birth, and driver's license number or other means of identification; 
3.  A full and accurate description of the property purchased or received, including any manufacturer's identifying insignia or serial number; 
4.  The time when any loan becomes due; 
5.  The amount of purchase money, or the amount lent and any loan charges, for each item; and 
6.  The identification and signature of the clerk or agent for the business who handled the transaction. 
    Entries shall not in any manner be erased, obliterated, or defaced. 
(Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
3-2311 - RECORDS REQUIRED; REPORTS TO POLICE 
    It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker in the City, every day except Sunday before twelve o'clock (12:00) Noon, to deliver to the Police Department a legible and correct copy of each card or ledger required by Section 3-2310 of this Code for the transactions of the previous day. Transactions occurring on Saturday shall be reported on the following Monday. No card shall be required for goods purchased from manufacturers or wholesale dealers having an established place of business, or goods purchased at open sale from any bankrupt stock or from any other person doing business and having an established place of business in the city, but such goods must be accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of open and legitimate purchase, and must be shown to the mayor or any law enforcement officer when demanded. Dealers in scrap metals, except gold and silver, shall not be included in the provisions of this Article. 
(Code 1980, 27-4; Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
3-2312 - PAWN TICKET 
    The person receiving a loan or selling property shall receive, at no charge, a plain written or printed pawn ticket for the loan, or a plain written or printed receipt for the articles sold, containing a copy of the entries required by this Article. 
3-2313 - PAWNBROKERS; CUSTOMER FINGERPRINT REQUIRED 
    All persons who shall be engaged in the business of pawnbroker shall obtain and keep a single legible fingerprint of each person pawning, pledging, mortgaging, or selling any goods or articles. The fingerprint shall be taken from the right index finger, or, if the right index finger is missing, from the left index finger. Each pawnbroker shall display a notice to customers, in a prominent location, stating that such pawnbroker is required by state law to fingerprint every person pawning or selling an item. 
3-2314 - RESTRICTIONS ON PROPERTY ACCEPTED; RECEIPTS FROM MINORS OR NONOWNERS OF PROPERTY 
    No pawnbroker shall accept as collateral security or purchase any property: 
(a)  From any person who is under eighteen years of age, or who appears to be under the influence of alcohol, narcotic drug, stimulant, or depressant, or who appears to be mentally incompetent; or 
(b)  On which the serial numbers of other identifying insignia have been destroyed, removed, altered, covered, or defaced. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker knowingly to receive on pawn or deposit any personal property of any kind which the pawnbroker knows does not belong to the person attempting to pawn the property. 
(Code 1958, 22.8; Code 1980, 27-5; Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
3-2315 - PAWNED OR SECONDHAND GOODS; RESTRICTIONS ON DISPOSITION; JEWELRY DEFINED 
    No personal property received or purchased by any pawnbroker, dealer in secondhand goods, or junk dealer, shall be sold or permitted to be taken from the place of business of such person for fourteen days or, in the case of secondhand jewelry, for five days, after the copy of the card or ledger entry required to be delivered to the police department or sheriff's office shall have been delivered as required by this Article. Secondhand jewelry shall not be destroyed, damaged, or in any manner defaced for a period of seventy-two hours after the time of its purchase or receipt. For purposed of this Section, jewelry shall mean any ornament which is intended to be worn on or about the body and which is made in whole or in part of any precious metal, including gold, silver, platinum, copper, brass, or pewter. 
    All property accepted as collateral security or purchased by a pawnbroker shall be kept segregated from all other property in a separate area for a period of forty-eight hours after its receipt or purchase, except that valuable articles may be kept in a safe with other property if grouped according to the day of purchase or receipt. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, a pawnbroker may return any property to the person pawning the same after the expiration of such forty-eight-hour period or when permitted by the chief of police, sheriff, or other authorized law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
3-2316 - PAWNBROKER, LIMITATION ON SALE OF GOODS 
    It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to sell any goods purchased or received as described in this article, during the periods of four months from the date of purchasing or receiving such goods. (Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
3-2317 - VIOLATION; PENALTY 
    Every broker, agent, or dealer mentioned in this article who shall violate any of the provisions thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to a maximum of $100.00 fine with no imprisonment for each offense or violation. 
(Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
3-2318 - PERMIT; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; PROCEDURE 
    Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be revoked or suspended if the holder of such permit violates any provision of state law classified as a misdemeanor or felony. Before any permit may be revoked or suspended, the holder shall be given notice of the date and time for a hearing before the City Manager in order to show cause why the permit should not be revoked or suspended. Such hearing shall be held within seven days of the date of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 6506, 1-26-99) 
ARTICLE 24. - RAILROADS 

3-2401 - RAILROADS; CONSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE DITCHES ALONG TRACKS; REQUIRED 
    It shall be the duty of any railroad company owning, maintaining or operating a railroad within the corporate limits of the City to construct and keep in repair ditches, drains and culverts along and under its railroad tracks at all places within the limits of the City, where the same may be necessary for the escape of water and the proper draining of the territory on either side of the railroad tracks. 
(Code 1958, 25.1; Code 1980, 32-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-211, 16-212 
3-2402 - CONSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE DITCHES ALONG TRACKS; RESOLUTION ORDERING CONSTRUCTION 
    When any drains, ditches or culverts may be necessary for the escape of water and the proper drainage of the territory on either side of any railroad track, the Mayor/President and Council may, by resolution, call upon the proper railroad company to construct or repair the drain, ditch or culvert and to place the same in proper condition for the escape of water for the proper drainage of the territory on either side of the railroad track. A copy of every such resolution shall be served upon the local agent of the railroad company whose duty it is to construct or keep in repair any such drain, ditch or culvert; and for a failure or refusal to comply with any such resolution within fourteen (14) days after the service thereof, as aforesaid, such railroad company, its local agent, section foreman or the employee in charge of the maintenance and way through the City shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1958, 25.2; Code 1980, 32-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-212 
3-2403 - MAINTENANCE OF CROSSINGS; DUTY OF RAILROAD COMPANY 
    It shall be the duty of all railroad companies owning, operating and maintaining a railroad passing through the corporate limits of the City to place, keep or maintain all places within their right-of-way where the public streets or alleys of the City intersect and cross any of the railroad tracks in a suitable and safe condition for public travel over and across the same. 
(Code 1958, 25.4; Code 1980, 32-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-212 
3-2404 - MAINTENANCE OF CROSSINGS; RESOLUTION ORDERING REPAIRS 
    If any railroad crossing shall be at any time in bad condition or unsafe or inconvenient for public travel, the Council may by resolution, call upon the proper railroad company to repair or replace the crossing and render the same safe and convenient for public travel. A copy of every such resolution shall be served upon the local agent of the railroad company whose duty it is to maintain such crossing; and for a failure or refusal to comply with such resolution within thirty (30) days after the service thereof, as aforesaid, such railroad company shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1958, 25.5; Code 1980, 32-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-212 
3-2405 - MAINTENANCE OF CROSSINGS; LIGHTS AT CROSSINGS 
    At all points within the corporate limits of the City, where any railroad or railway track shall intersect any platted street, there shall be installed and maintained, when ordered by the motion or resolution of the Council, wholly at the expense of the railroad company maintaining such intersecting railroad, an electric light of at least such power and strength as in commonly used by the City for its street lighting, which electric light shall be kept lighted at all times between one (1) hour after sunset in the evening and one (1) hour before sunrise in the morning following. 
(Code 1958, 25.6; Code 1980, 32-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-212 
3-2406 - MAINTENANCE OF CROSSINGS; AUTOMATIC WARNING SIGNALS 
    When ordered by the Council, approved automatic lights or signals shall be installed at designated crossings. Such wigwag lights and bells shall be kept in good working order at all hours of the day or night so that all persons approaching the crossings will be warned of the danger of approaching trains, engines or cars on the tracks. 
(Code 1958, 25.7; Code 1980, 32-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-212 
3-2407 - SPEED LIMITS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or railway company, or any employee or agent managing, operating or controlling any locomotive engine, car or train of cars, to run or permit to be run or propelled or operated any locomotive engine, car or train of cars between Eighth (8th) Avenue and Avenue Q within the limits of the City at a rate of speed greater than forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 2807, 1, 4-25-78; Code 1980, 32-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-212 
3-2408 - OBSTRUCTING STREETS 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company operating a railroad into the City to obstruct any of the public streets within the City by leaving trains or cars standing thereon so as to prevent the public from crossing the rail track for a longer period at one time than five (5) minutes except in cases of inevitable accident. 
(Code 1958, 25.3; Code 1980, 32-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-212 
3-2409 - RUNNING OR FLYING SWITCHES 
    It shall be unlawful for any agent or servant of any railroad to make any running or flying switches on any of the railroad lines within the City. 
(Code 1958, 25.8; Code 1980, 32-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-212 
3-2410 - DEPOT PLATFORM LIGHTS 
    Railroad companies within the corporate limits of the City, shall, wholly at their own expense, construct and maintain on their depot platforms electric lights at such height and of such candlepower ample to light such platform, as the Mayor/President and Council shall by resolution direct. 
(Code 1958, 25.9; Code 1980, 32-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-212 
3-2411 - LOITERING ON TRACKS; ATTACHING VEHICLES, ETC., TO TRAINS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter about any railroad track, or to hitch, tie on, or otherwise connect a sled, toboggan, bobsled, coaster, wagon or other small vehicle for the purpose of coasting to the rear of any vehicle within the City. 
(Code 1958, 25.10; Code 1980, 32-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-212 
3-2412 - JUMPING OFF TRAINS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to jump off or on any train while the same is at rest or in motion; provided, however, that nothing in this Section shall be construed to apply to any employee of a railroad or the owner of any of the vehicles, or to any person authorized by them to use the same or to any person boarding a train as a passenger at a depot or station. 
(Code 1958, 25.1-1; Code 1980, 32-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-212 
ARTICLE 25. - TATTOO BUSINESS 

3-2501 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 1, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
State Law reference- Neb. Rev. Stat. 38-1060 
3-2502 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 2, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2503 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 3, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2504 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 4, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2505 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 5, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2506 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 6, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2507 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 7, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2508 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 8, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2509 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 9, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2510 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 10, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2511 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 11, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2512 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 12, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2513 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 13, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2514 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 14, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2515 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 15, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2516 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 16, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2517 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 17, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
3-2518 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5341, 18, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 8085, 6-28-2016) 
ARTICLE 26. - BINGO 

3-2601 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 7A.1; Ord. No. 3638, 1, 9-27-83; Code 1980, 25-83; Ord. No. 7398, 11-27-2007) 
3-2602 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 7A.5; Code 1980, 25-85; Ord. No. 7398, 11-27-2007) 
3-2603 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 7A.6; Ord. No. 3638, 2, 9-27-83; Ord. No. 5205, 1, 2-12-91; Code 1980, 25-86; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 7398, 11-27-2007) 
3-2604 - INFORMATION; COPIES; WITH WHOM FILED 
    A copy of all information filed with the department pursuant to Section 9-232.01 shall also be filed with the county clerk of the county in which the bingo is to be conducted, and if the bingo is conducted within the limits of the City, a copy shall also be filed with the City Clerk. Such information shall be filed within five (5) days after its filing with the department. 
(Code 1958, 7A.7; Code 1980, 25-87; Ord. No. 7398, 11-27-2007) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §9-237 
3-2605 - REPEALED 
(Code 1980, 25-88; Ord. No. 7398, 11-27-2007) 
3-2606 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 7A.2; Code 1980, 25-95; Ord. No. 7398, 11-27-2007) 
3-2607 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 7A.3; Code 1980, 25-96; Ord. No. 7398, 11-27-2007) 
3-2608 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 7A.2; Code 1980, 25-97; Ord. No. 5325, 11-12-91; Ord. No. 7398, 11-27-2007) 
3-2609 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 7A.2; Code 1980, 25-98; Ord. No. 7398, 11-27-2007) 
3-2610 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 7A.2; Code 1980, 25-100; Ord. No. 5325, 11-12-91; Ord. No. 7398, 11-27-2007) 
3-2611 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 7A.2; Code 1980, 25-101; Ord. No. 7398, 11-27-2007) 
3-2612 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 7A.4; Code 1980, 25-102; Ord. No. 7398, 11-27-2007) 
ARTICLE 27. - LOTTERY 

3-2701 - SALES OUTLET LOCATIONS 
    The lottery operator whom the Governing Body contracts to conduct its lottery shall not operate the lottery at a sales outlet location other than the location of the lottery operator without prior approval of the sales outlet location by the Governing Body. The Governing Body shall approve or disapprove each sales outlet location requested by the lottery operator and each individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, or corporation which desires to conduct the lottery at its sales outlet location solely on the basis of the qualification standards prescribed in Section 3-2702. 
3-2702 - APPROVAL REQUIRED 
    Any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, or corporation which seeks to have its location approved as an authorized sales outlet location: 
A.  May first obtain a retail liquor license for consumption on the premises pursuant to Chapter 53, article 1, RS Neb.; 
B.  Shall not have been convicted of, forfeited bond upon a charge of, or pleaded guilty to forgery, larceny, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, willful failure to make required payments or reports to a governmental agency at any level, filing false reports with any such agency, or any similar offense or offenses or any crime, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving gambling activity or moral turpitude; 
C.  Shall not have had a gaming license revoked or canceled under the Nebraska Bingo Act, the Nebraska Pickle Card Lottery Act, the Nebraska Lottery and Raffle Act or the Nebraska County and City Lottery Act; and 
D.  Shall be fit, willing, and able to properly provide the service proposed in conformance with all provisions and requirements of the Nebraska County and City Lottery Act and the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to the act. 
3-2703 - QUALIFICATION STANDARDS 
    If the person seeking to have its location approved as an authorized sales outlet location is a partnership or corporation, the qualification standards shall apply to every partner of such partnership, every officer of such corporation, and stockholder owning more than ten (10) percent of the stock of such corporation. 
3-2704 - NOTICE TO THE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE 
    The Governing Body shall notify the Department of Revenue of all approved lottery locations within thirty (30) days of approval. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 9-642.01 
ARTICLE 28. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

3-2801 - PURPOSE 
    The purpose of this Division is to: 
a.  Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and services; 
b.  Establish clear and nondiscriminatory local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of telecommunications providers and services; 
c.  Promote competition in telecommunications; 
d.  Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers and services; 
e.  Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and residents of the City; 
f.  Permit and manage reasonable access to the public rights-of-way of the City for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis; 
g.  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held by the City; 
h.  Assure that the City's current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the public rights-of-way are fully paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs; 
i.  Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the City and the residents of the City, in a nondiscriminatory manner, for permitting private use of the rights-of-way; 
j.  Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or services within the City comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City; 
k.  Assure that the City can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
l.  Enable the City to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2802 - DEFINITIONS 
    Terms used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings: 
A.  AFFILIATE shall mean a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another Person. 
B.  CITY shall mean the City of Kearney. 
C.  CITY MANAGER shall mean the duly appointed person acting as City Manager or an officer of employee designated by the City Manager. 
D.  CITY PROPERTY shall mean all real property owned or controlled by the City whether in fee ownership or other interest. 
E.  CODE shall mean the Kearney City Code, as amended. 
F.  EXCESS CAPACITY shall mean the volume or capacity in any existing, or future duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the right-of-way that is or will be available for use for additional Telecommunications Facilities. 
G.  FCC or Federal Communications Commission shall mean the Federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee Telecommunications Carriers, Services and Providers on a national level. 
H.  GRANTEE shall mean both Licensees and Franchisees granted certain rights and obligations as more fully described herein. 
I.  NEBRASKA PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION or NPSC shall mean the State administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee Telecommunications Carriers, Services and Providers in the State of Nebraska to the extent prescribed by law. 
J.  OPERATOR shall mean Nebraska Public Power District (hereinafter known as "NPPD") who has been granted the authority to operate City's Electrical Distribution System, pursuant to the terms of a long-term Professional Retail Operations Agreement with City, which Distribution System includes the electric distribution facilities consisting of wires, poles and appurtenant fixtures, meters, services, distribution transformers, and street lighting owned by the City, as such Distribution System may be modified from time to time, or any other successor, person or entity authorized by Contract to operate the City's Electrical Distribution System, or in the event no contract is in effect with NPPD or a successor, the City of Kearney. 
K.  OVERHEAD FACILITIES shall mean utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities. 
L.  PERSON shall mean corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies, other entities and individuals. 
M.  PUBLIC WAYS includes the surface of a space above and below any real property in the City which the City owns or in which it holds an interest as a trustee for the public including, but not limited to, all public streets, highways, roads, alleys, easements, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways, or any other public place, area or property under the ownership or control of the City, and any rights-of-way established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes; but does not include any property specifically exempted by Order of the City Council. 
N.  RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall mean all City Property and Public Ways, dedicated for public right-of-way use, collectively, within the City, but shall not include any property specifically exempted by Order of the City Council. 
O.  STATE shall mean the State of Nebraska. 
P.  SURPLUS SPACE shall mean that portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and regulations of the Nebraska Public Service Commission to allow its use by a Telecommunications Carrier for a pole attachment, and which complies with the Ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Kearney. 
Q.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER includes every Person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages Telecommunications Facilities used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer Telecommunications Service. 
R.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES shall mean the plant, equipment and property within the City used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer Telecommunications Service. 
S.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER includes every Person who provides Telecommunications Service over Telecommunications Facilities. 
T.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE shall mean the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium, unless excluded or exempted by local, state or federal law. This definition specifically excludes the provision of cable television services which may only be provided under a Franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of Section 3-1601 et seq. of the Kearney City Code. In the event that the telecommunication provider also provides cable television service, but is held or determined by a court to not be a cable television provider, the services provided shall be deemed to constitute telecommunication services as defined herein. 
U.  UNDERGROUND FACILITIES shall mean Utility and Telecommunications Facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for Overhead Facilities. 
V.  USABLE SPACE shall mean the total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Nebraska Public Service Commission, which has been approved by the Operator, and which complies with the Ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Kearney. 
W.  UTILITY FACILITIES shall mean the plant equipment and property including, but not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within Rights-of-Way and used or to be used for the purpose of providing Utility or Telecommunications Services. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2803 - PENALTIES 
    Any Person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Upon conviction any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to fines as provided by Section 1-112 of this Code. A separate and distinct violation shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2804 - OTHER REMEDIES AND REGULATIONS 
    Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any other remedies at law or in equity that the City may have for enforcement of this Chapter. The City Manager is authorized to establish regulations and procedures for the implementation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2805 - REGISTRATION AND FEES AND DURATION 
A.  To the extent permitted by law and except as otherwise provided herein, all Telecommunications Carriers or Providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications service originating, terminating, or existing, within the City shall register with the City pursuant to this Chapter and pay all fees as provided herein, unless otherwise required to apply for and obtain a license or franchise pursuant to this Chapter. 
B.  A registration shall remain in effect for a period of five (5) years from the date which the City Manager certifies that the information required pursuant to Section 3-2806 has been submitted to the City Manager. A registration may be renewed by either; (1) submitting information in duplicate to the City Manager as set forth in Section 3-2806, or (2) submitting affidavits in duplicate attesting that the information submitted for the initial registration remains unchanged except to the extent modified by attachments to said affidavits. Upon filing a registration renewal the registrant shall pay all fees as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2806 - REGISTRATION REQUIRED 
    All telecommunications carriers or providers required to register pursuant to Section 34-2805 shall register with the City by submitting information in duplicate to the City Manager which shall include the following: 
A.  The identity of the registrant. 
B.  The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement. 
C.  A general description of registrant's existing or proposed Telecommunications Facilities within the City. 
D.  A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the City. 
E.  Information sufficient for the City to determine whether the registrant is subject to licensing or franchising. 
F.  Copies of the registrant's Certificate of Convenience and Necessity issued by the Nebraska Public Service Commission. 
G.  A copy of the relevant portions of the registrant's Certificate of Convenience and Necessity application may be filed in lieu of items (c), (d) and (e) above. 
H.  Such other information as the City may require for purposes of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2807 - REGISTRATION PURPOSES, EXCEPTION 
A.  The purpose of registration is to: 
1.  Provide the City with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide telecommunications services within the City, or that own or operate telecommunication facilities within the City; 
2.  Assist the City in enforcement of this Chapter; 
3.  Assist the City in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes, occupation taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that are lawfully permissible and may be due the City; and 
4.  Assist the City in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal laws. 
B.  A person which provides telecommunications services solely to itself, its affiliates or members between points in the same building, or between closely located buildings under common ownership or control is exempted from the provisions of this Chapter, provided that such company or person does not use or occupy any public ways or property of the City. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2808 - LICENSE AND FEES 
    To the extent permitted by law and except as otherwise provided herein, any Telecommunications Carrier who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate Telecommunications Facilities in Public Ways, but who does not provide Telecommunications Service to Persons and areas within the City shall first obtain a license granting the use of such Public Ways from the City pursuant to this Chapter and pay all the fees as provided herein. A license shall not be required by any person that obtains a franchise pursuant to Section 3-2819. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2809 - LICENSE APPLICATION 
    All Telecommunications Carriers required to obtain a license pursuant to Section 3-2808 shall apply for a license from the City by submitting information in duplicate to the City Manager which shall include the following: 
A.  The identity of the applicant. 
B.  The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the license application. 
C.  A general description of applicant's existing or proposed Telecommunications Facilities within the geographic area to be covered by the license. 
D.  A confirmation that the Telecommunications Service that the applicant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, is to persons, firms, businesses or institutions outside the City. 
E.  Information sufficient for the City to determine whether applicant is subject to licensing or franchising. 
F.  Copies of the applicant's Certificate of Convenience and Necessity issued by the Nebraska Public Service Commission. 
G.  A copy of relevant portions of the applicants' Certificate of Convenience and Necessity application may be filed in lieu of items (c), (d), and (e) above. 
H.  Such other information as the City may require for purposes of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2810 - LICENSE; DETERMINATION BY THE CITY 
    After receiving a complete application hereunder, the City Manager shall make a recommendation to the Mayor and City Council to grant or deny the license application in whole or in part. If the application is recommended for denial, the recommendation shall include the reasons for denial. The Mayor and the City Council shall grant or deny the license application in whole or in part after receiving a recommendation of the City Manager. The decision of the Mayor and City Council on the application shall be made within sixty (60) days of the filing of a complete application; provided, time may be extended upon request of the applicant or to permit the City to obtain additional information relevant to the application. The following standards shall apply when determining to grant or deny the license application: 
A.  The legal status of the applicant. 
B.  The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's facilities. 
C.  The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and Telecommunications Facilities if the application is granted. 
D.  The damage or disruption, if any, to existing or future public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the application is granted, giving consideration to an applicant's willingness and ability to mitigate and/or repair same. 
E.  The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways. 
F.  The type of service that applicant will provide. 
G.  The availability of alternate routes or locations for the proposed facilities. 
H.  Applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations, rules and policies. 
I.  The effect, if any, on the operation of the City's Electrical Distribution System due to the capacity requirements necessary to accommodate additional utility or telecommunication facilities, as recommended and approved by the Operator. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2811 - LICENSE; AGREEMENT 
    No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the City Council has approved a written agreement with the applicant setting forth the particular items and provisions under which the license to occupy and use public ways will be granted. A license granted hereunder shall be limited to a grant of rights to use specific public ways and defined portions thereof, as may be indicated in the license agreement. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2812 - LICENSE, NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT 
    No license granted hereunder shall confer any exclusive right, privilege or license to occupy or use the public ways or property or to provide telecommunications services or any other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2813 - LICENSE, RIGHTS GRANTED AND TERM 
A.  No license granted hereunder shall convey any right, title or interest in public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy specified portions of the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the Grant. 
B.  No license granted hereunder shall authorize or excuse a licensee from securing such further easements, leases, permits or other approvals as may be required to lawfully occupy and use public ways. 
C.  No license granted hereunder shall be construed as any warranty of title. 
D.  Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of not more than five (5) years from the date of execution of the license agreement by the Mayor following approval by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2814 - LICENSE; CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 
    All licensees shall obtain all required construction permits for all projects and pay all fees required by law. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2815 - LICENSE; COMPENSATION TO CITY 
    In the absence of state or federal law to the contrary, each license granted hereunder is subject to the City's right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory compensation to be paid for use of public ways or property, and to impose and/or collect such municipal, occupation, or license taxes as are authorized by state and federal law. City will provide thirty (30) days' notice to affected carriers and providers of any proposed increases with an opportunity for hearing and comments. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2816 - LICENSE; AMENDMENT OF GRANT 
A.  A new license application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways which are not included in a license and license agreement previously granted hereunder. The license application supplement shall consist of such information as would have been required but was not included in the initial license application pursuant to Section 3-2809. 
B.  If ordered by the City to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted license, the City shall grant a license amendment without further application. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2817 - LICENSE; RENEWAL APPLICATIONS; RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS 
A.  Unless applicable state or federal law establishes a different time period for renewal, a licensee that desires to renew its license hereunder shall not more than one hundred eighty (180) days nor less than sixty (60) days before expiration of the current license, file an application with the City for renewal of its license which shall include updated information required for a license application. A license may be renewed by either submitting information in duplicate to the City Manager as set forth in Section 3-2809 or submitting affidavits in duplicate attesting that the information submitted for the initial license application remains unchanged except to the extent modified by prior amendments or attachments to said affidavits. Upon filling a license renewal, the applicant shall pay all fees as provided herein. 
B.  Within sixty (60) days after receiving a complete application hereunder, the Mayor and City Council shall make a determination on behalf of the City granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part. If the application is denied, the determination shall include the reasons for denying approval of the application. The standards enumerated in Section 3-2810 shall apply when determining to grant or deny the application, plus a determination of the applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and the license agreement. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2818 - LICENSE; OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL 
    No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the licensee's performance of the license agreement of the requirements of this Chapter and all applicable laws, statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations have been cured or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the licensee has been approved by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2819 - FRANCHISE AND FEES 
A.  To the extent permitted by law and except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier or provider who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in public ways and who provides telecommunications service, including but not limited to local exchange service, to persons or areas within the City, shall first obtain a franchise granting the use of such public ways from the City for the purpose of providing telecommunication service pursuant to this Chapter, and pay all the fees as provided herein. 
B.  A person providing telecommunications services on purely a resale basis through another grantees' facilities is exempt from the provisions of this Chapter, except to the extent that such resellers have an obligation to pay their pro rata share of all taxes and fees prescribed under City Codes and passed through to them by the wholesaler pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. 86-810. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2820 - FRANCHISE APPLICATION 
    All telecommunications carriers required to obtain a franchise pursuant to Section 3-2819 shall apply for a franchise from the City hereunder by submitting information in duplicate to the City Manager which shall include the following: 
a.  The identity of the applicant. 
b.  The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the franchise application. 
c.  A general description of applicant's existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the geographic area to be covered by the franchise. To the extent permitted by the Laws of Nebraska, public access, with the exception of the Operator, to such descriptions, which are stamped, marked, or otherwise certified by a company representative to be or constitute proprietary trade secrets, with the specific exception of the present location of lines in the right-of-way, will be denied under the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. Section 84-712.05(3). 
d.  A general description of the telecommunications service that the applicant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the City. 
e.  Information sufficient for the City to determine whether applicant is subject to licensing or franchising. 
f.  Information sufficient for the City to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be provided by the applicant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any municipal tax, or permit, license or franchise fee. 
g.  Copies of the applicant's pertinent Certificate(s) of Convenience and Necessity issued by the Nebraska Public Service Commission. 
h.  A copy of the relevant portions of the applicant's Certificate of Convenience and Necessity application may be filed in lieu of items (c), (d) and (e) above. 
i.  Such other information as the City may require for purposes of this Chapter. 
j.  The effect, if any, on the operation of the City's Electrical Distribution System due to the capacity requirements necessary to accommodate additional utility or telecommunications facilities, as recommended and approved by the Operator. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2821 - FRANCHISE; DETERMINATION BY THE CITY 
    After receiving a complete application hereunder, the City Manager shall make a recommendation to the Mayor and City Council to grant or deny the franchise application in whole or in part. If the application is recommended for denial, the recommendation shall include the reasons for denial. The Mayor and City Council shall grant or deny the franchise application in whole or in part after receiving a recommendation of the City Manager. The decision of the Mayor and City Council on the application shall be made within sixty (60) days of the filing of a complete application; provided time may be extended upon request of the applicant or to permit the City to obtain additional information relevant to the application. The following standards shall apply when determining to grant or deny the franchise application: 
a.  The legal status of the applicant. 
b.  The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's facilities. 
c.  The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the application is granted. 
d.  The damage or disruption, if any, to existing or future public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the application is granted, giving consideration to an applicant's willingness and ability to mitigate and/or repair same. 
e.  The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways. 
f.  The availability of alternate routes or locations for the proposed facilities. 
g.  Applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations, rules and policies. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2822 - FRANCHISE; AGREEMENT 
    No franchise granted hereunder shall be effective until the Mayor and City Council have approved a written agreement with the applicant setting forth the particular items and provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public ways will be granted. A franchise granted hereunder shall be limited to a grant of rights to use specific public ways and defined portions thereof, as may be indicated in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2823 - FRANCHISE; NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT 
    No franchise granted hereunder shall confer any exclusive right, privilege or franchise to occupy or use the public ways or property for the purpose of providing telecommunications services or any other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2824 - FRANCHISE; RIGHTS GRANTED AND TERM 
A.  No franchise granted hereunder shall convey any right, title or interest in public ways but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and occupy specified portions of the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the Grant. 
B.  No franchise granted hereunder shall authorize or excuse a franchisee from securing such further easements, leases, permits or other approvals as may be required to lawfully occupy and use public ways. 
C.  No franchise granted hereunder shall be construed as any warranty of title. 
D.  Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a franchise granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of not more than five (5) years from the date of execution of the franchise agreement by the Mayor following approval by the Mayor and City Council. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2825 - FRANCHISE; CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 
    All franchisees shall obtain permits and pay all fees required by law prior to commencement of construction. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2826 - FRANCHISE; COMPENSATION TO CITY 
    In the absence of state, federal or other law to the contrary, each franchise granted hereunder is subject to the City's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory compensation to be paid for use of public ways and/or such municipal, franchise or occupation taxes as are authorized by state and federal law. City will provide thirty (30) days' notice to affected carriers and providers of any proposed increases with an opportunity for hearing and comments. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2827 - RESERVED 
3-2828 - FRANCHISE; AMENDMENT OF GRANT 
A.  A franchise application supplement and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways which are not included in a franchise and franchise agreement previously granted hereunder. The franchise application supplement shall consist of such information as would have been required but was not included in the initial franchise application pursuant to Section 3-2820. 
B.  If ordered by the City to locate or relocate its Telecommunications Facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted franchise, the City shall grant a franchise amendment without further application. 
C.  To the extent the franchisee amends its pertinent Certificate(s) of Convenience and Necessity issued by the Nebraska Public Service Commission, it must amend its franchise agreement and pay the corresponding fee. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2829 - FRANCHISE; RENEWAL APPLICATIONS; RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS 
A.  Unless applicable state or federal law establishes a different time period for renewal, a franchisee that desires to renew its franchise hereunder shall not more than one hundred eighty (180) days nor less than sixty (60) days before expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the City for renewal of its franchise which shall include updated information required for a franchise application. A franchise may be renewed by either submitting information in duplicate to the City Manager as set forth in Section 3-2820 or submitting affidavits in duplicate modified by prior amendments or attachments to said affidavits. Upon filing a franchise renewal, the applicant shall pay all fees as provided herein. 
B.  Within sixty (60) days after receiving a complete application hereunder, the Mayor and City Council shall make a determination on behalf of the City, either granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part. If the application is denied, the determination shall include the reasons for denying approval of the application. The standards enumerated in Section 3-2821 shall apply when determining to grant or deny the application, plus a determination of the applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and the license agreement. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2830 - FRANCHISE, OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL 
    No Franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the franchisee's performance of the franchise agreement or of the requirements of this Chapter and all applicable laws, statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations have been cured or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the licensee has been approved by the City Manager of his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2831 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE, GENERAL DUTIES 
A.  All Grantees shall comply with all requirements of the Kearney City Code. 
B.  All Grantees shall provide written confirmation sufficient for customary land survey and land title insurance purposes concerning the location of its facilities in public ways and disclaiming any interest in public ways where it has no license or franchise to construct or operate its facilities. 
C.  Any act that a grantee is or may be required to perform pursuant to this Ordinance, a license or franchise or applicable agreement or law shall be performed at the grantee's expense. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2832 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; INTERFERENCE WITH THE PUBLIC WAYS 
    No Grantee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to interfere with the use of the public ways by the City, or other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways. All such facilities shall be moved by and at the expense of the Grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the City. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2833 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; DAMAGE TO PROPERTY 
    Any Grantee or any Person acting on a Grantee's behalf that impairs or damages any public way, or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto, shall restore said public way or other property in conformance with Section 3-2840 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2834 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; NOTICE OF WORK 
    Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no Grantee, or any Person acting on the Grantee's behalf, shall commence any non-emergency work in or about the public ways without providing three (3) working days advance written notice to the City. Any private property owner whose property will be affected by a Grantee's work shall be afforded the same notice. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2835 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; REPAIR AND EMERGENCY WORK 
    In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a Grantee may commence such repair and emergency response work as required under the circumstances, provided the Grantee shall notify the Director of Public Works and Director of Utilities as promptly as possible, before such repair or emergency work or as soon thereafter as possible if advance notice is not practicable. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2836 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES 
    Each Grantee shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state and local requirements. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2837 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES 
A.  Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the City, a Grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public ways whenever the City Manager or his/her designee shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for: 
(1)  The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any City or other governmental entity public improvement in or upon the public ways. 
(2)  The operations of the City or other governmental entity in or upon the public ways. 
(3)  The vacation of a public street or the release of a utility easement. 
(4)  Public health and safety reasons. 
B.  Provided the City has complied with the One Call Notification System Act, the City shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunication facility within the public ways as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling or work of any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the City unless directly or proximately caused by the willful, intentional or malicious acts of the City. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2838 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE, REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED FACILITIES 
    Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the City, any Grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances within the public ways shall at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public ways. If such Grantee fails to remove such facilities or appurtenances, the City may cause the removal and charge the grantee for the costs incurred. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 
a.  Upon expiration or termination of the Grantee's license or franchise. 
b.  Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways. 
c.  If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise. 
d.  If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit. 
e.  If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the Grantee's license or franchise. 
f.  Any such other circumstances deemed reasonably necessary by the City Manager in order to protect public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2839 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES 
    The City retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located within the public ways as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. The City shall use its best efforts to notify the grantee prior to cutting or removing the grantees telecommunication facilities. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2840 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; RESTORATION OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
    The Grantees shall comply with the following: 
A.  When a Grantee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public ways, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property including trees, landscaping and grounds to substantially the same condition which existed before the work was undertaken. 
B.  If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required hereunder, the Grantee shall temporarily restore the affected ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the Grantee's sole expense and the Grantee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. 
C.  A Grantee or other person acting on its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such public ways. 
D.  The City Manager may order Grantees to perform such restoration work by a date certain. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2841 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; FACILITIES MAPS 
    Each Grantee shall provide the City with an accurate as-built map or maps certifying only the location of all of the grantees telecommunications facilities within the public ways. Each Grantee shall provide updated as-built maps annually unless no material changes have occurred. To the extent permitted by the Laws of Nebraska, public access, with the exception of the Operator, to maps stamped, marked, or otherwise certified by a company representative to be or constitute proprietary trade secrets, with the exception of the present locations of lines, will be denied under the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. Section 84-712.05(3). Commencing on January 1, 2002 the "As-Built" Facilities Map must be delivered in digital form with GPS coordinates locating all facilities to at least sub-decimeter accuracy. The digital format will be compatible with the City's Geographic Information System (GIS) system so that it can be displayed as a layer or theme in the City's GIS system. Commencing January 1, 2002, the digital "As Built" Facilities Map will be updated and delivered to the City monthly, except that delivery will not be required if no change to the Facility has been made in the preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2842 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION 
    Within ten (10) days of a written request from the City Manager or designee each Grantee shall furnish the City Manager with information sufficient to demonstrate: 
a.  That Grantee has complied with all requirements of this Chapter. 
b.  That all taxes and fees due the City in connection with the telecommunications services and facilities provided by the Grantee has been property collected and paid by the Grantee. 
c.  That all books, records, maps and other documents maintained by the Grantee with respect to its facilities within the Public Ways shall be made available for inspection by the City Manager or designee at reasonable times and intervals and shall remain proprietary and confidential to the extent provided by law if so requested in writing by Grantee. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2843 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; LEASED CAPACITY 
    A Grantee which enters into interconnection and resale agreements with any telecommunications carrier or provider in order to provide telecommunications service, including but not limited to local exchange service, to persons or areas within the City, shall: 
a.  Furnish the City with a notice of any such interconnection or resale agreement which shall contain the following information: 
1.  The identity and legal status of the transferee. 
2.  The name, address, and telephone number of an officer or agent of the transferee. 
3.  Sufficient general information concerning the proposed lease or agreement and the transferee for the City to make a determination concerning whether said transferee is subject to filling a registration or an application for franchise pursuant to this chapter. 
b.  The proposed transferee, lessee, or person shall comply with all applicable requirements of the City Code. 
c.  Notice as provided herein shall be submitted to the City Manager within ten (10) business days of execution of such agreement by the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2844 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; GRANTEE INSURANCE 
    Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each Grantee occupying or using public ways or property shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the Grantee and the City, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, representatives and employees as additional named insured with: 
a.  Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than: 
(1)  Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person; 
(2)  Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and, 
(3)  Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability. 
b.  Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each person and Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each accident. 
c.  Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
d.  Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less than three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) 
e.  The liability insurance policies required by this Section shall be maintained at all times by the grantee. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the City Clerk of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
f.  Within sixty (60) days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no event later that thirty (30) days prior to said cancellation, the Grantee shall obtain and furnish to the City replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2845 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; GENERAL INDEMNIFICATION 
    In addition to and distinct from the insurance requirements of this Chapter, each grantee shall agree as part of its license or franchise agreement to defend, indemnify and hold the City and its officers, officials, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of suit or defense arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the acts, omissions, failure to act or misconduct of the Grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its Telecommunications Facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Chapter or by a license or franchise agreement made or entered into pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2846 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES 
    All grantees are required to cooperate with the City and with each other as follows: 
a.  By March 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the Director of Public Works and Director of Utilities with a schedule of their proposed construction activities which may affect the Rights-of-Way for that year. 
b.  Each grantee shall meet with the City or grantees and users of the public ways annually or as determined by the City to schedule and coordinate construction. 
c.  All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated to minimize public inconvenience, disruption and/or damages. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2847 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF GRANTEE 
    The grantee shall file with the City Manager a copy of any order issued by the Nebraska Public Service Commission or notification filed with the commission in connection with any change of ownership or control of the grantee. Following the filing of such order or notification, the City shall notify the grantee or its successor whether a new license or franchise is required as a result of the change of ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2848 - RESERVED 
3-2849 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF GRANT 
    A license or franchise granted by the City to use or occupy public ways may be revoked for any one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  Construction or operation at an unauthorized location. 
b.  Unauthorized transfer of control of the Grantee. 
c.  Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise. 
d.  Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of the grantee's franchise or license assets or an interest therein. 
e.  Misrepresentation or fraud by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the City. 
f.  Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways. 
g.  Failure to relocate or remove Facilities as required in this Chapter. 
h.  Failure to pay lawfully permitted taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the City. 
i.  Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee. 
j.  Violation of a material provision of this Chapter or the City Code. 
k.  Violation of a material term of a license, franchise or associated agreement. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2850 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE 
    In the event that the City Manager believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, the grantee shall be given written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, be provided a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and be given a reasonable period of time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, to furnish evidence: 
a.  That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation of noncompliance. 
b.  That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance. 
3-2851 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; HEARING 
    In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence pursuant to Section 3-2850 reasonably satisfactory to the City Manager, the City Manager shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the Mayor and City Council. The Mayor and City Council shall provide a grantee with notice and reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning this matter. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2852 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS 
    Based on a preponderance of the evidence that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with a material provision of this Chapter or its license or franchise or associated agreement, the City Council shall determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, and issue a written decision relating thereto, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors: 
a.  Whether the misconduct was egregious. 
b.  Whether substantial harm resulted. 
c.  Whether the violation was intentional. 
d.  Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements. 
e.  Whether there is a history of overall compliance. 
f.  Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2853 - CONSTRUCTION; CODES 
    Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations including, but not limited to, the International Building Code, National Electrical Code, National Electric Safety Code, Uniform Plumbing Code and A.N.S.I. standards. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
3-2854 - CONSTRUCTION; APPLICATIONS 
    Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted by letter to the Director of Public Works. To the extent permitted by the Laws of Nebraska, public access, with the exception of the Operator, to applications, along with accompanying documents and plans, which are stamped, marked, or otherwise certified by a company representative to be or constitute proprietary trade secrets, with the specific exception of present location of lines in the right-of-way, will be denied to the public under the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. Section 84-712.05(3). The applicant shall pay all associated fees and shall include any additional information as requested by the Director of Public Works. The application shall be accompanied by five (5) sets of drawings, plans and specifications. The plans shall include a title sheet, a vicinity map and construction drawings on standardized sheets drawn to scale. The drawings, plans and specifications shall be accompanied by five (5) sets of half (1/2) size drawings and shall be of sufficient detail to demonstrate: 
a.  That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations. 
b.  The location and route of all Facilities to be installed on existing utility poles, subject to the provisions of Section 3-2856. 
c.  The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public way. 
d.  The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations, if known, which are within the public way along the underground route proposed by the applicant. 
e.  The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the city, but not within the public ways. 
f.  The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures and facilities within or adjacent to the public ways. 
g.  A summary of the total length of the project and the footage that occupies public right-of-way. 
h.  That the applicant has notified all other utilities occupying the right-of-way and existing within the City of the applicant's proposed construction. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2855 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; AUTHORITY TO ATTACH OR CONSTRUCT TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES ON CITY'S EXISTING OR FUTURE OWNED UTILITY POLES 
    Operator has entered into a long-term Professional Retail Operations Agreement with the City for lease of City's Distribution System, which includes the electric distribution facilities consisting of wires, poles and appurtenant fixtures, meters, services, distribution transformers, and street lighting owned by the City on the effective date of the execution of the Professional Retail Operations Agreement, as such Distribution System may be modified from time to time by Operator. Grants of licenses or franchises which authorize attachment to or construction of telecommunication facilities on City's existing or future owned utility poles shall be subject to review and approval of Operator as provided in Section 3-2856. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2856 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE; CONDITIONS FOR ATTACHING TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES ON CITY'S EXISTING OR FUTURE OWNED UTILITY POLES 
    No Grantee shall construct, attach, or maintain any telecommunications facilities on City's existing or future owned utility poles, unless the Grantee shall have complied with the following conditions: 
    The Grantee has received the written approval of Operator for the construction or attachment of its telecommunications facilities on City's existing or future owned utility poles, as evidenced by the execution of a Joint Pole Agreement between the Grantee and the Operator. 
A.  The Grantee has received the written approval of Operator for the construction or attachment of its telecommunications facilities on City's existing or future owned utility poles, as evidenced by the execution of a Joint Pole Agreement between the Grantee and the Operator. 
B.  The Grantee has paid to Operator any applicable fees or pole rentals as set forth in the Joint Pole Agreement. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2857 - CONSTRUCTION; ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION 
    All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a representative of the applicant that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2858 - CONSTRUCTION; TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN 
    All permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or along any public way used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed. 
    Contractor(s) shall provide, erect and maintain necessary barricades, suitable and sufficient lights, danger signals, signs, and other traffic control devices. They shall take all necessary precautions to protect the work and safeguard the public. Streets closed to traffic shall be protected by effective barricades, and obstructions shall be illuminated during hours of darkness. Warning signs shall be provided to control and direct traffic properly. All signage shall be in compliance with all Federal, State and local requirements. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2859 - CONSTRUCTION; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT 
    Within thirty (30) days, or a longer period of time which is reasonable under the circumstances after submission of all plans and documents required of the applicant and payment of the permit fees lawfully required by the City, the Building Inspection Department, if satisfied that the application, plans and documents comply with all requirements of this Chapter, shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as the Director of Public Works and Director of Utilities may deem necessary or appropriate; provided, however, the issuance of a construction permit which includes construction upon City's existing or future owned utility poles, shall be subject to the provisions of Section 3-2856. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2860 - CONSTRUCTION; CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE 
    Subject to the provisions in this Ordinance regarding emergency work, the permittee shall submit a written construction schedule to the Director of Public Works and Director of Utilities ten (10) working days before commencing any work in or about the public ways. The permittee shall further provide written notification to the Director of Public Works and Director of Utilities not less than five (5) working days in advance of any excavation or work in the Public Ways. Before any work is commenced, requisite approvals and permits from the City and City Staff must first be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2861 - CONSTRUCTION; COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT 
    All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The Director of Public Works, Director of Utilities and Building Official or their respective representatives and designees shall be provided access to the work and such further information as he or she may require to ensure compliance with such requirements; provided, however, all construction practices and activities upon City's existing or future owned utility poles shall be subject to the provisions of Section 3-2856. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2862 - CONSTRUCTION; DISPLAY OF PERMIT 
    The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made available for inspection by the Director of Public Works, Director of Utilities and Building Official or their respective designees at all times when construction work is occurring. (Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2863 - CONSTRUCTION; NONCOMPLYING WORK 
    Upon order of the City Manager all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans or specifications for the work, or the requirements of this Chapter shall be removed. The permittee, at its expense in cooperation with other existing facility owners, shall relocate any facilities which are not located in compliance with permit requirements and then provide as-built maps to the City to show conformance. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2864 - CONSTRUCTION; AS-BUILT DRAWINGS 
    Within thirty (30) days after completion of construction, the permitee shall furnish the Public Works Department with two (2) complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and certified to the City as accurately depicting only the location of all telecommunication facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. To the extent permitted by the Laws of Nebraska, public access, with the exception of the Operator, to "As-Built" drawings stamped, marked, or otherwise certified by a company representative to be or constitute proprietary trade secrets, with the exception of the present location of lines, will be denied under the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. Section 84-712.05(3). Commencing on or before January 1, 2002, "As-Built" drawings must be delivered in digital format acceptable to the City. Digital versions of all previous "As-Built" drawings will also be delivered to the City, if available, on or before January 1, 2002. The drawing files will be tied to the Facilities Map so that "As-Builts" for the portion of the system being viewed on the Facilities Map can be easily selected and displayed. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2865 - CONSTRUCTION; LOCATION OF FACILITIES 
    Unless otherwise required in current or future City ordinances regarding underground construction requirements, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions unless hardship or a valid reason to locate elsewhere can be demonstrated to the City Manager: 
a.  A franchisee with written authorization to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles, subject to the provisions of Section 3-2856, and then only if surplus space is available. If either of the foregoing do not exist, Grantee, with prior written approval of the Director of Utilities, may construct additional poles. 
b.  Whenever all existing telephone, electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within public ways, a franchisee with written authorization to occupy the same public ways must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground. 
c.  Whenever all new or existing telephone, electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within public ways, a franchisee that currently occupies the same public ways shall concurrently relocate its facilities underground at its expense. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2866 - CONSTRUCTION; CONDUIT OCCUPANCY 
    No additional poles may be erected on the public rights-of-way by the telecom providers, unless specifically authorized by the City Council. In furtherance of the public purpose of reduction of right-of-way excavation, it is the goal of the City to encourage both the shared occupancy of underground conduit as well as the construction, whenever possible, of excess conduit capacity for occupancy of future Right-of-Way occupants. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
3-2867 - FEES; APPLICATION 
    Fees shall be paid in connection with the administration of this Article as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. Applicants for a license or franchise shall be responsible for Compliance with the provisions of Section 3-2856 and for payment of the fees to the Operator. 
(Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
3-2868 - FEES; PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE AND APPLICATION FEE 
    Prior to the acceptance of an application by the City, the applicant shall participate in a conference with the City Manager and city staff for the purpose or reviewing the application, confirming information and identifying issues related to compliance with this Chapter and the issuance of a license or franchise. 
(Ord. No. 6470, 12-8-98) 
ARTICLE 29. - ITINERANT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS, AND SOLICITORS 

3-2901 - PURPOSE 
    The purpose of this Article is to prevent fraud and other crimes, to protect citizens of Kearney from undue invasions of privacy, from undue annoyance and harassment, and to maintain the health, safety and welfare of residents of the City, by means of regulation of itinerant and transient merchants, peddlers, and solicitors. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001) 
3-2902 - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this Article, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
1.  Itinerant merchant shall include the terms "transient merchant," "transient vendor," and "itinerant vendor" and means any person, firm or corporation who or which shall engage in, do or transact any temporary or transient business in the City, either in one (1) locality or location or in traveling from place to place in the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, shall hire, lease, use or occupy any building or structure, motor vehicle, tent, car, boat or public room or any part thereof, including rooms in hotels, lodging houses, or houses of private entertainment, or any private or vacant lot or property for a period of less than one (1) year, for the exhibition or sale of such goods, wares or merchandise. This definition shall include principals and their agents and employees, and persons forming partnerships. No person shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader or merchant, or by reason of conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as part of the business in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, unless the transient merchant is engaging in sales on property owned by and adjacent to a local merchant under the terms of an agreement whereby the local merchant is compensated for the use of his property according to a percentage of sales by the itinerant merchant. 
2.  Peddler shall mean any person who shall carry from place to place any goods, wares or merchandise and offer to sell or barter the same, or actually sell or barter the same. All such persons who do not keep a regular place of business, whether it be a house or a vacant lot or elsewhere, open at all times in regular business hours and at the same place, who shall offer for sale goods, wares and merchandise, shall be deemed peddlers under this chapter. All persons who keep a regular place of business, open at all times in regular business hours and at the same place, who shall, elsewhere than at such regular place of business, personally or through their agents, offer for sale or sell and, at the time of such offering for sale, deliver goods, wares and merchandise, shall also be deemed peddlers as above, but this Section shall not apply to those who sell or offer for sale in person, any item set forth in Section 3-2904 of this Article. This Article shall not include any peddler who sells to permitted dealers or retailers only, but shall apply to any person who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  Solicitor shall mean any person, whether a resident of the City or not, traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance from house to house or from street to street, or operating from a fixed location on or near a street or house not owned by that person, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, subscriptions or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sale or not; or soliciting money or anything of value on behalf of himself or herself, or another, whether or not in exchange for goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001; Ord. No. 8087, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 8150, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 8342 , § 1, 5-14-2019) 
3-2903 - REGISTRATION PERMIT REQUIRED 
    It is unlawful for any itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor, other than a solicitor doing business by appointment, to engage in any such business within the City of Kearney without first obtaining and possessing a valid registration permit therefore in compliance with the provisions of this Article. In addition to the permit required under this Section, any person who shall sell edible products must also obtain the applicable food license or health permit under the provisions of state law. No permit shall be issued by the City without such proof being presented at the time application is made to the Chief of Police for an itinerant merchant, peddler or solicitor permit. 
    A permit issued under this Article shall not be used or represented in any manner as an endorsement by the City of Kearney, or by any department, officer or employee thereof. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001; Ord. No. 7914, 7-8-2014) 
3-2903.01 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8087, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 8150, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 8343 , § 1, 5-14-2019) 
3-2903.02 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8087, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 8343 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
3-2904 - EXEMPTIONS FROM ARTICLE 
    The provisions of this Article shall not apply to, nor shall the terms peddler, solicitor, or itinerant merchant be construed to include, the following: 
1.  Persons, including farmers or farmers' cooperative associations, selling, offering for sale or soliciting orders for the following items grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale: Newspapers, firewood, Christmas trees, vegetables, or fruits; provided, that a dairy who uses on the streets of the City one (1) or more delivery trucks or vehicles, may sell and deliver from its trucks, or vehicles, milk, butter, cream and eggs, dairy products, and frozen food products on customer subscribed routes. 
2.  The sale of food, beverages, goods, wares or other merchandise within an established farmers markets or special event containing multiple vendors. 
3.  Persons soliciting on behalf of a candidate for public office or on behalf of a political party. 
4.  Salesman or agents for wholesale houses or firms who solicit orders from, or sell to, retail dealers in the county for resale or other commercial purposes or to manufacturers for manufacturing or other commercial purposes. 
5.  Sales to wholesale or retail merchants, by sample, for future delivery made by representatives of established wholesalers or manufacturers. 
6.  A manufacturer taxable on intangible property by the state who peddles the goods, wares or merchandise manufactured by him at the plant, the intangible property of which is taxed by the state and who peddles no other goods, wares or merchandise. 
7.  Yard sales conducted on residentially zoned property. 
8.  The distribution of goods for which there is no charge. 
9.  Persons giving, selling or offering for sale goods, wares or merchandise, or soliciting orders for sale of same who qualify as bona fide nonprofit organizations under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code or which are organized and operated exclusively for nonprofit, religious, charitable, educational or civic purposes or where persons selling or offering for sale goods, wares or merchandise, or soliciting orders for sale of the same do so in an event held exclusively for nonprofit, religious, charitable, educational or civic purposes. 
10.  The sale of merchandise or services through an event sponsored by a governmental subdivision. 
11.  Any and all activities specifically authorized in a valid agreement with the city. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001; Ord. No. 8150, 6-13-2017) 
3-2905 - APPLICATION 
    At the time of application, applicants for a registration permit shall present a valid driver's permit or other acceptable form of identification and file with the Chief of Police a written sworn application signed by the applicant showing the following: 
A.  The local, and permanent, address and phone number of the applicant. 
B.  The place or places in the City where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business, and the length of time which it is proposed such business shall be conducted. 
C.  The identification of any automotive vehicle being used. 
D.  A statement of the nature of the merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant. 
E.  The name, address, and phone number of the individual, partnership, firm, or corporation for whose account the business will be carried on, if any. 
F.  A disclaimer of City liability relating to any action caused or charged against the applicant. 
G.  Such other relevant information as may be required for the investigation of the applicant. 
H.  Thumbprint of applicant affixed by the Chief of Police. 
I.  The applicant's Nebraska sales tax permit number and Federal tax identification number. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001; Ord. No. 7914, 7-8-2014) 
3-2906 - INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE 
    Upon receipt of such application, a copy shall be referred to the Chief of Police, who shall cause within three (3) work days after the receipt thereof such an investigation of the applicant to the extent permitted by law and facilities, and, if applicable, the individual, partnership, firm or corporation who the applicant is representing, to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same who shall notify the applicant that his/her application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Similarly, if the business responsibility of the individual, partnership, firm or corporation who the applicant is representing is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same who shall notify the applicant that his/her application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. 
    No permit shall be issued to any person: 
A.  who has been convicted of or who is currently under indictment for a felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude within ten years preceding the date of the filing of such application with the Chief of Police. 
B.  who is under the age of sixteen. 
C.  whose permit has previously been revoked for one of the following: 
1.  Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for a permit. 
2.  Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection with the selling of goods, wares, or merchandise. 
3.  Any violation of this Article and its stipulations contained within. 
4.  Conviction of the permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
5.  Conducting the business permitted under this Article in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to threaten the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
    If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant and, if applicable, the individual, partnership, firm or corporation the applicant is representing, are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on the application the approval and who shall notify the applicant that his/her application has been approved. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001; Ord. No. 7914, 7-8-2014) 
3-2907 - FEES 
    All solicitors, peddlers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise, magazines, publications, wares, and services shall pay an occupation tax in accordance with the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. No proration of the tax provided for by this article shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 7914, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 8150, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 8342 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
3-2908 - SALES; RESTRICTIONS 
    All solicitations to private residences, including but not limited to homes, residences, rooming houses, duplexes, and apartments shall occur only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., unless otherwise posted and prohibited by the private property owner or by someone with apparent authority to act for the owner. This regulation does not apply where the solicitor is on the property by the express, prior invitation of the person residing on the premises. A person engaged in solicitation shall not: 
A.  Make physical contact with the person being solicited unless that person's permission is obtained. 
B.  Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation. 
C.  Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation. 
D.  Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that he/she does not wish to give anything to or buy anything from that solicitor. 
E.  Represent the issuance of any permit or registration under this Article as an endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation. 
F.  Enter upon any private premises when the same is posted with a sign stating, "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitation" or other words to that effect. 
G.  Block, obstruct, or unduly hinder passage on public sidewalks or passageways, restrict or interfere with the ingress or egress of the abutting property owner or tenant; create or become a public nuisance; increase traffic, congestion or delay; constitute a hazard to life, health or property; or obstruct adequate access for fire, police, sanitation or emergency vehicles. For the purposes of this Article, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether an area is blocked, obstructed, passage is hindered, or the public is impeded or inconvenienced. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001; Ord. No. 8150, 6-13-2017) 
3-2909 - REGISTRATION PERMIT; CONTENTS 
    A permit issued under this Article shall contain a permit number, the name of the permit holder, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the name of the employer, if any, the date of issuance, the date of expiration, a listing of the places which the applicant has identified as the place or places at which he intends to do business, and the signature of the Chief of Police or his authorized agent. Every permit shall set out the prohibition of nighttime solicitation set forth in Section 3-2908. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001) 
3-2910 - REGISTRATION PERMIT; TO BE CARRIED AND EXHIBITED 
    Every peddler and solicitor or itinerant merchant shall carry the permit issued to him under this chapter on his person at all times while engaged in selling, peddling or soliciting in the City. It shall also be the duty of every peddler and solicitor to exhibit such permit when requested so to do by any law enforcement officer or other department personnel designated by the Chief of Police, or any person with whom the peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant attempts to do business. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001) 
3-2911 - REGISTRATION PERMIT; TO BE POSTED 
    The permit to the permittee hereunder by the Chief of Police shall be posted in a conspicuous place if the permittee is using a vehicle or a building in his/her business and otherwise must be kept by the person and exhibited at any time upon request. 
    Any person who shall exercise the vocation of an itinerant merchant, peddler or solicitor shall display the permit, and permit expiration date issued by the Chief of Police. Transient merchants shall post conspicuously in their place of business the permit issued hereunder, which permit shall be shown at the request of any citizen or law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001; Ord. No. 7914, 7-8-2014) 
3-2912 - REGISTRATION PERMIT; NOT TRANSFERABLE 
    Each peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant must secure a personal permit. No permit shall be used at any time by any person other than the person to whom it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001) 
3-2913 - PERMITTEE; FURTHER REQUIREMENTS 
1.  No itinerant merchant shall advertise, represent or hold any sale as an insurer, bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, trustee, estate, executor, administrator, receiver, wholesaler or manufacturer's closing out sale, or as a sale of any goods damaged by smoke, fire, wreck, water or otherwise, or in any similar form, unless he or she shall have first so stated under oath before the Chief of Police or his designee, either in the application form required hereunder, or in a supplementary application subsequently filed and copied on the permit, all the facts relating to the reasons and character of such sale so advertised or represented; including a statement of the names of the persons from whom the goods, wares or merchandise were obtained, the date of delivery to the person applying for the permit, and the place from which such goods, wares and merchandise were last taken, and all details necessary to locate exactly and fully identify all goods, wares and merchandise to be so sold. 
2.  Any false statement in an application, either original or supplementary, under this Section, and any failure on the part of the permittee to comply with all requirements of this Section, shall subject such itinerant merchant, peddler or solicitor to the same penalty as if he had no permit. 
3.  No itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall conduct business or sales upon or from any public property, including but not limited to, public streets including right-of-way, sidewalks, alleys, drives, parking lots, parks, unless authorized by the City Council in accordance with the terms of Section 19-4301, of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001) 
3-2914 - REGISTRATION PERMIT; REVOCATION 
    Permits issued pursuant to this Article may be revoked by the City Manager, after notice has been issued. Said notice shall include the City Manager's reasoning for such revocation. Notice shall be sent by registered mail, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his/her last known permanent address. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001) 
3-2915 - REGISTRATION PERMIT; APPEAL OF DENIAL, REVOCATION 
    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Manager or the Chief of Police in regard to the denial of an application for a permit under this Article or in connection with the revocation of a permit shall have the right to appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Council, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the decision has been mailed to such person's last known permanent address, a written statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The Council shall set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be sent by registered mail, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his/her last known permanent address. The order of the Council on such appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001; Ord. No. 7914, 7-8-2014) 
3-2916 - REGISTRATION PERMIT; INTERSTATE COMMERCE EFFECT OF ARTICLE 
    Nothing in this Article shall be construed or enforced so as to be in derogation of interstate commerce. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001) 
3-2917 - SALES; POLICE ENFORCEMENT 
    It shall be the duty of the City police to examine all places of business and persons subject to the provisions of this Article and to enforce the provisions herein against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001) 
3-2918 - VIOLATIONS OF ARTICLE; PENALTY 
    Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-111 of this Code. Each distinct act or violation of the terms of this Article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 6775, 4-10-2001) 
ARTICLE 30. - RESTAURANT AND DRINKING PLACE OCCUPATION TAX 

3-3001 - INTENT AND PURPOSE 
A.  The City Council determines that persons engaging in restaurant and drinking place businesses are benefited from tourism and recreational activity that places unique demands on the City's resources but which is activity that should be promoted and encouraged. Further, residents and non-residents who patronize these businesses are enjoying a discretionary activity that is dependent upon, and generating revenue from, the business's location within the city and the business's access to the services provided by the city. Subjecting the business's revenue to taxation for general city purposes is fair, reasonable, and just. 
B.  Pursuant to the authority of Nebraska Revised Statute R.R.S. 1943, Section 16-205, the City Council finds, determines, and declares that restaurant and drinking place business form a discrete class of occupation engaged in within the City and it is appropriate that a tax be imposed on this class of businesses for the purpose of constructing a youth baseball and softball complex. This determination is made with due recognition of the inherent value of business conducted within the City and the relation business has to the municipal welfare and the expenditures required of the City, and with consideration of the just, proper and equitable distribution of tax burdens within the City. 
C.  The City Council further determines that some activity or revenue that might fall within the scope of this ordinance should be excluded from its scope because (i) the activity has a primary purpose other than to generate revenue for the business by the sale of food or drink, (ii) because the revenue is generated from activity that does not have the discretionary characteristics and qualities that support using restaurant or drinking place revenue as a measure of taxation, and/or, (iii) the sale of food or drink is primarily intended to encourage and support civic, charitable, educational, or religious activities of a nonprofit corporation. 
(Ord. No. 7945, 11-25-2014, effective February 1, 2015) 
3-3002 - DEFINITIONS 
    As used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
A.  DRINKING PLACE shall mean any establishment offering on premises consumption of food and/or non-alcoholic beverages. Such businesses include, but are not limited to, bars, taverns, night clubs, dance halls, restaurants, and arenas. 
1.  The term does not include a place offering beverages on premises owned or operated by a civic, charitable, educational, religious, governmental, or political organization exempt from income taxes under the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
B.  FOOD shall include all edible refreshment or nourishment, whether solid, semi-solid, liquid or otherwise. 
C.  PERSON shall mean any natural person, individual, partnership, association, organization or corporation of any kind or character engaging in the business of operating a drinking place or restaurant. 
D.  RESTAURANT shall mean any place that is kept, used, maintained, or advertised as a place where food is prepared and sold for immediate consumption on the premises. It shall also include the sales of food in a restaurant with facilities for consumption on the premises even if the food and beverages are not actually consumed on the premises, including the receipts from prepared "take out," "drive through," or "to go" food. 
1.  This term includes, but is not limited to, cafes, grills, bistros, delicatessens, coffee shops, bakeries, lunch counters, sandwich stands, temporary stands, grocery stores, convenience stores, supermarkets, arenas, push carts, lunch wagons, ice cream trucks, or other mobile facilities from which food ready for consumption is sold. The term includes a space or area within a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, boarding house, hospital, office building or reception hall where food is sold or consumed if a separate charge is made for such food. A restaurant may also be a drinking place. 
2.  The term does not include: 
(i)  a place operated by a religious, civic, educational, charitable, governmental, or political organization exempt from income taxes under the United States Internal Revenue Code where food is offered solely to its members or students; 
(ii)  a public or private daycare center that offers food solely to its employees or the children staying at the center; 
(iii)  a convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged or infirmed, or substance abuse facility that offers food solely to its residents; 
(iv)  premises where food is obtained solely from vending machines operated by coin, cards, or other per-purchase operation regardless of whether the food may be consumed on the premises; 
(v)  temporary stands at festivals or other similar events from which food ready for consumption is sold unless entrance to the place at which the food is sold is subject to an admission charge; or 
(vi)  a place offering food on premises owned or operated by a civic, charitable, educational, religious, governmental, or political organization exempt from income taxes under the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
E.  TAXPAYER shall mean any person engaged in the business of operating a drinking place or restaurant as herein defined who is required to pay the tax herein imposed. 
(Ord. No. 7945, 11-25-2014, effective February 1, 2015; Ord. No. 8087, 6-28-2016) 
3-3003 - TAX IMPOSED; COLLECTION OF TAX 
A.  Beginning February 1, 2015 at 4:00 a.m. and in each calendar month thereafter there is hereby imposed a restaurant and drinking place occupational tax upon each and every person operating a drinking place or restaurant within the City for any period of time during a calendar month. The amount of such tax shall be one percent (1%) of all gross receipts for each calendar month derived from the drinking places and restaurant subject to this tax. Such tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts resulting from the sales of food within the corporate limits of the City which are subject to the sales and use tax imposed by Article 22 of Chapter 3 of the Kearney City Code. 
B.  The person engaged in operating a drinking place or restaurant may itemize the tax levied on a bill, receipt, or other invoice to the purchaser, but each person engaged in such business shall remain liable for the tax imposed by this Article. 
(Ord. No. 7945, 11-25-2014, effective February 1, 2015) 
3-3004 - RETURN; ADMINISTRATIVE FEE 
A.  Each and every person engaged in the business of operating a drinking place or restaurant within the City shall prepare and file, on or before the 25th day of January, April, July, and October of each year on a form prescribed and furnished by the Director of Finance, a return for the taxable three-month period, and at the same time pay to the City the tax herein imposed. The return shall be verified and sworn to by the officer in charge of the business. The return shall be considered filed on time if mailed in an envelope properly addressed to the Director of Finance, postage prepaid and postmarked before midnight of the 25th of the appropriate month. 
B.  As reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, a taxpayer may deduct and withhold from the taxes otherwise due and paid two percent (2%) of the amount paid to the City. 
(Ord. No. 7945, 11-25-2014, effective February 1, 2015) 
3-3005 - TAX CUMULATIVE 
A.  The levy of the tax under this Article is in addition to all other fees, taxes, excises and licenses levied and imposed under any contract or any other provisions of this Code or ordinances of the City, in addition to any fee, tax, excise or license imposed by the state. 
B.  Payment of the tax imposed by this Article shall not relieve the person paying the same from payment of any other tax now or hereafter imposed by contract or ordinance or by this Code, including those imposed for any business or occupation he or she may carry on, unless so provided therein. The occupational taxes imposed by this Article shall be cumulative except where otherwise specifically provided. 
(Ord. No. 7945, 11-25-2014, effective February 1, 2015) 
3-3006 - USE OF REVENUE 
    The one percent (1%) occupation tax imposed by this Article shall be used for the purpose of constructing a youth baseball and softball complex. 
(Ord. No. 7945, 11-25-2014, effective February 1, 2015) 
3-3007 - FAILURE TO FILE RETURN; DELINQUENCY; ASSESSMENT BY DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 
A.  If any person neglects or refuses to file a return or make payment of the taxes as required by this Article, the Director of Finance shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be reasonably available, of the amount of taxes due for the period or periods for which the taxpayer is delinquent, and upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in addition thereto (1) interest on such delinquent taxes, at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, or fraction thereof from the date when due and, when applicable, (2) a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) thereof. 
B.  The Director of Finance shall give the delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated taxes, penalty, and interest, which notice must be served personally or by certified mail. 
C.  Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment, and such assessment shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the Director of Finance ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing by certified mail; however, within such ten (10) day period the delinquent taxpayer may petition the Director of Finance for a revision or modification of such assessment and shall, within such ten-day period, furnish the Director of Finance the facts and correct figures showing the correct amount of such taxes. 
D.  Such petition shall be in writing, and the facts and figures submitted shall be submitted in writing and shall be given under oath of the taxpayer. 
E.  Thereupon, the Director of Finance may then modify such assessment in accordance with the facts which he or she deems correct. Such adjusted assessment shall be made in writing, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the taxpayer within ten (10) days; and all such decisions shall become final upon the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of service, unless proceedings are commenced within that time for appeal in the District Court. 
(Ord. No. 7945, 11-25-2014, effective February 1, 2015) 
3-3008 - ADMINISTRATION OF ARTICLE; MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
A.  The administration of the provisions of this Article are hereby vested in the Director of Finance, or his/her designee, who shall prescribe forms in conformity with this Article for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the tax imposed hereunder, and for the proper administration and enforcement hereof. 
B.  All notices required to be given to the taxpayer under the provisions of this Article shall be in writing. Notices shall be mailed by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the taxpayer at his or her last known address. 
C.  It shall be the duty of every taxpayer to keep and preserve suitable records and other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he/she is liable hereunder. 
1.  Records of the gross revenue by which this tax is measured shall be kept separate and apart from the records of other sales or receipts in order to facilitate the examination of books and records as necessary for the collection of this tax. 
2.  It shall be the duty of every such taxpayer to keep and preserve for a period of four (4) years all such books, invoices and other records, which shall be open for examination at any time by the Director of Finance or his/her duly designated persons. If such person keeps or maintains his books, invoices, accounts or other records, or any thereof, outside of the state, upon demand of the Director of Finance he/she shall make the same available at a suitable place within the City, to be designated by the Director of Finance, for examination, inspection and audit by the Director of Finance or his/her duly authorized persons. The taxpayer shall reimburse the City for the reasonable costs of the examination, inspection and audit if the Director of Finance determines that the taxpayer paid ninety percent (90%) or less of the tax owing for the period of the examination. 
3.  The Director of Finance, in his/her discretion, may make, permit or cause to be made the examination, inspection or audit of books, invoices, accounts or other records so kept or maintained by such person outside of the state at the place where same are kept or maintained or at any place outside the state where the same may be made available, provided such person shall have entered into a binding agreement with the City to reimburse it for all costs and expenses incurred by it in order to have such examination, inspection or audit made in such place. 
D.  For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for the purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any person, the Director of Finance or his/her duly authorized persons, may conduct investigations concerning any matters covered by this Article; and may examine any relevant books, papers, records or memoranda of any such person. 
(Ord. No. 7945, 11-25-2014, effective February 1, 2015) 
3-3009 - RECOVERY OF UNPAID TAX BY ACTION AT LAW 
A.  The Director of Finance may also treat any such taxes, penalties or interest due and unpaid as a debt due the City. 
B.  In case of failure to pay the taxes, or any portion thereof, or any penalty or interest thereon when due, the City may recover at law the amount of such taxes, penalties and interest in any court of Buffalo County, Nebraska or of the county wherein the taxpayer resides or has its principal place of business having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected. 
C.  The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the Director of Finance, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due. 
D.  The City Attorney may commence an action for the recovery of taxes due under this Article and this remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies, or remedies provided in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 7945, 11-25-2014, effective February 1, 2015) 
3-3010 - SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES FOR FAILURE TO PAY TAX; HEARING 
    If the City Manager or the City Manager's designee, after holding a hearing, shall find that any person has willfully evaded payment or collection and remittance of the tax imposed by this Article, such official may suspend or revoke any City license, permit or other approval held by such tax evader. Said person shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than seven (7) days after notice is given of the time and place of the hearing to be held, addressed to the last known place of business of such person. Pending the notice, hearing and finding, any license, permit or other approval issued by the City to the person may be temporarily suspended. No suspension or revocation hereunder shall release or discharge the person from civil liability for the payment or collection and remittance of the tax, nor from prosecution for such offense. 
(Ord. No. 7945, 11-25-2014, effective February 1, 2015) 
3-3011 - SUNSET PROVISION 
    The occupation tax imposed by this chapter shall terminate and collections of the tax shall cease no later than January 31, 2025 at 12:00 P.M. 
(Ord. No. 7945, 11-25-2014, effective February 1, 2015) 
ARTICLE 31. - FOOD TRUCKS 

3-3101 - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this Article, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
1.  FOOD TRUCK VENDOR shall mean any person offering food or beverages for sale from a cart, truck or other vehicle prepared for immediate consumption. 
2.  FOOD TRUCK PERMIT shall mean written authorization by the City Clerk's Office to operate a food truck in the City as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 8344 , § 1, 5-14-2019) 
3-3102 - LOCATION OF FOOD TRUCKS ON CITY OWNED PROPERTY 
    The City of Kearney has designated a specific area owned by the City of Kearney, or public right-of-way for food truck vendors to operate in or engage in food truck operations on; this designated area is located in the parking lot located north of the Museum of Nebraska Arts (MONA) only in any of the parking stalls along the northern most edge of this parking lot. A food truck may apply for a Food Truck Permit issued by the City of Kearney to specifically operate in this area only. No other parking of food trucks shall be allowed in any other City owned property including parking lots, streets, sidewalks, public right-of-way or parking stalls unless participating through a City park or City Council approved event. 
(Ord. No. 8344 , § 1, 5-14-2019) 
3-3103 - FOOD TRUCK PERMIT 
    A food truck desiring to operate in the designated area described in Section 3-3102 may apply for a Food Truck Permit issued by the City of Kearney by presenting an application to the City Clerk for a Food Truck Permit. In order to obtain a Food Truck Permit, the following requirements are required at time of application: 
1.  The applicant must provide proof of insurance with a minimum coverage amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) together with an insurance certificate listing the City of Kearney as a Certificate Holder. This insurance certificate must remain valid for the duration of the Food Truck Permit. 
2.  The applicant must further agree that it will hold the City of Kearney harmless from any and all claims of any kind which result from its use of the designated public parking areas allowed for Food Truck Vendor use as a part of this Food Truck Permit. 
3.  The applicant shall provide to the City Clerk at the time of application his/her State of Nebraska Department of Agriculture food safety/consumer protection permit(s) for each food truck. 
4.  The fee for an annual Food Truck Permit will be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. No proration of the tax provided for by this article shall be permitted. 
5.  There shall be no more than five (5) annual Food Truck Permits issued per year for the designated area described in Section 3-3102. 
6.  The Food Truck Permit is valid for one (1) year and shall remain in effect until December 31 of the year of issuance. Should any food truck vendor violate these provisions, the City Clerk or Chief or designee shall have the discretion to revoke the food truck permit. 
(Ord. No. 8344 , § 1, 5-14-2019) 
3-3104 - FOOD TRUCK PERMIT RULES 
1.  The holder of the Food Truck Permit will be allowed to park in the parking lot located north of the Museum of Nebraska Arts (MONA) only in any of the parking stalls along the northern most edge of this parking lot. No other parking of food trucks shall be allowed in any other parking lots other than this designated area unless participating through a City park or City Council approved event. Any events of the City of Kearney or MONA will have priority over the Food Truck Permit. 
2.  Hours of operations for Food Truck Permits shall be between 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. daily. Food Truck Vendors may only park in the above-referenced area during these time periods. 
3.  Food Truck Vendors must be completely mobile. Food Truck Vendors cannot place coolers on the ground or provide chairs and tables for customers. Food Truck Vendors may not use electrical connections of the City of Kearney. Generators are acceptable provided they are attached to the food truck. 
4.  No Food Truck Vendor may use any device which produces loud noise or use or operate any loud speaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device to attract public attention. 
5.  All trash or debris accumulating within thirty (30) feet of any food truck shall be collected by the owner and deposited in a trash container. All Food Truck Vendors selling food or beverages must provide trash receptacles adjacent to or as a part of their vehicles. Food Truck Vendors may not discharge or dump any material of any kind from their vehicle onto City of Kearney property. 
6.  The holder of a Food Truck Permit must conspicuously display such Permit in its vehicle at all times so that it is visible and can be seen by law enforcement checking the status of the Permittee. 
7.  City and MONA events will have priority for use of parking in the MONA parking lot over a Food Truck Permit. If either the City or MONA are having an event in the parking lot, Food Truck Permittees will be required to vacate the lot. 
8.  Food trucks participating in a City park or City Council approved event are not required to obtain a Food Truck Permit. 
9.  Should any Food Truck Permittee violate these provisions, the City Clerk or Chief of Police or designee shall have discretion to revoke the Food Truck Permit. 
(Ord. No. 8344 , § 1, 5-14-2019) 
3-3105 - FEES 
    All food truck vendors shall pay an occupation tax in accordance with the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. No proration of the tax provided for by this article shall be permitted. 
    Food trucks are subject to the Restaurant and Drinking Place Occupation Tax regulations set forth in Article 30 of Chapter 3. 
(Ord. No. 8344 , § 1, 5-14-2019) 
Chapter 4 - FIRE REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

4-101 - FIRE ZONES 
    For the purpose of this Code, the entire City is declared to be and is hereby established as a fire district. Within said fire district there shall be fire zones designated as Fire Zones 1, 2 and 3, and each such zone shall include such territory or portions of the City as illustrated, outlined and designated on a certain map on file in the office of the City Clerk, being marked and designated as "Fire Zones of the City of Kearney," which is hereby adopted as the fire zoning map of the City for the application of the regulations included in this Code. Whenever in this Code, reference is made to any fire zone, it shall be construed to mean one of the fire zones hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 2753, 2(12.2), 12-27-77; Ord. No. 4080, 1, 3-28-89; Code 1980, 14-1) 
4-102 - MOVING FIRE EQUIPMENT, ETC., OUTSIDE CITY DURING EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT EMERGENCY; REQUIRED 
    The Fire Department shall forthwith move its fire and other emergency equipment and personnel outside the City and place them in immediate operation whenever ordered to do so by the State Emergency Management Agency and to such place as it shall direct, either in the event of an emergency as defined by the "Nebraska Disaster and Civil Defense Act of 1973, as currently amended," or in connection with any program for practice and training. 
(Code 1958, 2.2; Code 1980, 14-2; Ord. No. 6208, 12-23-96) 
State Law reference- Disaster and civil defense, Neb. Rev. Stat. 81-829.36, et seq.; Moving fire equipment outside city limits in event of disaster or emergency, Neb. Rev. Stat. 81-829.65 
4-103 - MOVING FIRE EQUIPMENT, ETC., OUTSIDE CITY DURING emergency management EMERGENCY; PERSONNEL COVERED BY WORKER'S COMPENSATION 
    The personnel of the Fire Department shall be considered as fully protected by the State worker's compensation law in the course of any movement and operation of the fire and other emergency equipment of the City as provided by the preceding section. The City Manager shall arrange with the insurance carrier that the policy of insurance against liability of the City arising under the worker's compensation law shall be amended by rider or otherwise so as to cover such movement and operation of the fire and other emergency equipment and personnel of the City, if such insurance policy does not now include that coverage. 
(Code 1958, 2.3; Code 1980, 14-3; Ord. No. 6208, 12-23-96) 
4-104 - MOVING FIRE EQUIPMENT, ETC., OUTSIDE CITY DURING emergency management EMERGENCY; APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW 
    The "Nebraska Disaster and Civil Defense Act of 1973, as currently amended" shall insofar as applicable be a part of the two (2) preceding sections. 
(Code 1958, 2.4; Code 1980, 14-4; Ord. No. 6208, 12-23-96) 
ARTICLE 2. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

4-201 - FIRE DEPARTMENT; COMPOSITION 
    The existing volunteer fire companies of the Kearney Volunteer Fire Department, as they may be increased or decreased, are hereby declared to constitute the City Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 2753, 5(12.41), 12-27-77; Ord. No. 3158, 1, 2-12-80; Code 1980, 14-16) and (Code 1958, §12.24-1; Ord. No. 2753, 6(12.42), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-222 
4-202 - DUTIES GENERALLY 
    It shall be the duty of the fire companies of the City to keep their apparatus, hose, engines and other equipment in serviceable condition and to respond as quickly as possible with safety to all fires and to remain thereat until dismissed by the Chief or officer in charge of the City Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 2753, 5(12.41), 12-27-77; Ord. No. 3158, 1, 2-12-80; Code 1980, 14-18) 
4-203 - OFFICERS GENERALLY 
    There are hereby created the offices of the chief, two (2) assistant chiefs, four (4) captains, and four (4) lieutenants. (Ord. No. 2753, 5(12.41), 12-27-77; Ord. No. 3158, 1, 2-12-80; Code 1980, 14-19) 
4-204 - CONTROL OF MEMBERS 
    The members of the City Fire Department shall be under the command and control of the Chief at all fires. It shall be the duty of each and all members of the City Fire Department to obey the orders of the Chief and follow his/her directions. 
(Ord. No. 2753, 5(12.41), 12-27-77; Ord. No. 3158, 1, 2-12-80; Code 1980, 14-20) 
4-205 - POLICE POWERS OF CHIEF 
    It shall be the duty of the Chief of the City Fire Department to preserve and maintain order at all fires and for the purpose thereof he/she is hereby empowered and authorized to call upon the police officers of the City to aid him/her in the performance of this duty. 
(Code 1958, 12-26; Ord. No. 2753, 6(12.44), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-21) 
4-206 - WATCHING PREMISES AFTER FIRES 
    It shall be the duty of the City Fire Department after the engines are withdrawn and the firefighters dismissed from any fire within the City to have and keep charge of the premises for twenty-four (24) hours thereafter or until the probable danger of smolder fire is past and a reasonable time had for the investigation of the cause of the fire; and, during this time, the Chief or his/her subordinate officer(s) shall cause strict watch to be kept and guard the premises of the fire. 
(Code 1958, 12.27; Ord. No. 2753, 6(12.45), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-22) 
4-207 - INVESTIGATION AND REPORT OF FIRE; REPORT TO STATE FIRE MARSHAL 
    The Chief of the City Fire Department or his/her designated officer(s) shall investigate and determine to the best of his/her ability the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire hereafter occurring in the City and report the same to the City Manager. Such investigation shall commence immediately after the occurrence of the fire. The officer making such investigation shall forthwith notify the State Fire Marshal and shall within one (1) week of the occurrence of the fire furnish the Fire Marshal a written report of all facts relating to the cause and origin of the fire and such other information as may be called for by the form provided by the State Fire Marshal. 
(Code 1958, 12.28 and 12.29; Ord. No. 2753, 6(12.46) and 6(12.47), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-23 and 14-24) 
4-208 - DEPARTMENT RECORDS 
    The Chief of the City Fire Department shall keep a record of all fires and fire alarms, their location, the class of building or structure damaged or destroyed, the purpose for which it was used, the cause of the fire, the amount of loss, the amount of insurance and such other information as may be relevant. He/she shall include in such report a record of any injury that may have been sustained by any person on account thereof. Such record shall at all times be available for the inspection of the City Manager. 
(Code 1958, 12.30; Ord. No. 2753, 6(12.48), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-25) 
4-209 - DEPARTMENTAL REPORT 
    The Chief of the City Fire Department shall submit an annual report to the City Manager summarizing the operation of the department for the preceding year, and shall include therewith an inventory of the property of the department. 
(Ord. No. 2753, §6(12.49), 7, 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-26) 
4-210 - DUTIES OF ASSISTANT CHIEF 
    It shall be the duty of the Assistant Chiefs of the City Fire Department to assist the Chief in matters pertaining to the City Fire Department and to exercise the powers and duties the Chief during the absence or disability of the Chief. 
(Ord. No. 2753, 5(12.41), 12-27-77; Ord. No. 3158, 1, 2-12-80; Code 1980, 14-27) 
4-211 - DUTIES OF MEMBERS GENERALLY 
    It shall be the duty of each member of the City Fire Department to prevent as far as within his/her power the unnecessary destruction of the contents of any building or structure on fire. 
(Ord. No. 2753, 5(12.41), 12-27-77; Ord. No. 3158, 1, 2-12-80; Code 1980, 14-28) 
4-212 - EXPULSION OF MEMBERS 
    Any member of the City Fire Department who shall willfully and without good cause disobey any order of the Chief when at a fire may be summarily expelled from the company and City Fire Department by the Council of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2753, 5(12.41), 12-27-77; Ord. No. 3158, 1, 2-12-80; Code 1980, 14-29) 
4-213 - INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTERS AND FIRE EQUIPMENT 
    Any person who shall willfully offer any hindrance to, or interfere with, any firefighter in the performance of his/her duty at a fire, or while going to a fire, or shall in any manner willfully injure any fire engine, apparatus or other equipment for putting out fires, or shall give any false fire alarm shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1958, 12.25; Ord. No. 2753, 6(12.43), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-30) 
4-214 - DEPARTMENTAL EXPENDITURES 
    No obligations, except in emergencies and with regard to minor expenditures, shall be incurred on behalf of the City Fire Department unless authorized by the City Manager. 
(Code 1958, 12.32; Ord. No. 2753, 6(12.50), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-31) 
ARTICLE 3. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

4-301 - INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE; ADOPTION 
    There is hereby adopted as a fire code by the City for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion those publication known as the International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, including Appendix Chapters B,C,D,E,F and G, the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are in conflict with the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the City, the said publications are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City and within two (2) miles thereof. One (1) printed copy of said publications shall be kept in the office of the Fire Administrator for use and examination of the public and one (1) copy shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Code 1958, 12.1; Ord. No. 3865, 1, 9-23-86; Ord. No. 3916, 1, 5-12-87; Code 1980, 14-43; Ord. No. 6178, 9-24-96; Ord. No. 6548, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 7334, 3-27-2007) 
State Law reference- Adoption of standards codes, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-132 
4-301.1 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE; PURPOSE 
    The purpose of this Code is to prescribe regulations consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding, to a reasonable degree, of life and property from the hazardous from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials, and devices and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises. 
(Ord. No. 6178, 9-24-96; Ord. No. 7334, 3-27-2007) 
4-301.2 - INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE; AMENDMENTS 
    The International Fire Code, 2006 Edition adopted by the provisions of this article is hereby amended, altered, changed, and modified as follows: 
    Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Kearney, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." 
    Section 102.2 Administrative, Operational and Maintenance Provisions. The administrative, operational, and maintenance provisions of this Code shall apply to: 
1.  Conditions and operations arising after the adoption of this Code. 
2.  Existing conditions and operations. 
  Each reference to the International Existing Building Code shall mean the International Building Code. 
  Each reference to the International Electric Code shall mean the National Electric Code. 
  Each reference to the International Mechanical Code shall mean the Uniform Mechanical Code. 
  Each reference to the International Plumbing Code shall mean the Uniform Plumbing Code. 
    Section 102.6 Referenced Codes and Standards. Referenced standards adopted by reference. 
  Life Safety Code 2000 
  Appendices adopted the International Fire Code 2006 
  Appendix B/Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings 
  Appendix C/Fire Hydrants Locations and Distribution 
  Appendix D/Apparatus Access Roads excluding Section D103.1 
  Appendix E/Hazard Categories 
  Appendix F/Hazard Ranking 
  Appendix G/Cryogenic Fluids/Weight and Volume Equivalents 
    Section 105.1.1 Permits Required. Permits required by this Code shall be obtained from the appropriate City of Kearney Department (Planning, Zoning, Building Services, Fire Department). Permit fees, if any, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the designed code official. 
    Section 308.3.1 Open-Flame Cooking Devices of the Code is hereby deleted and repealed. 
    Section 308.3.1.1 Liquefied-Petroleum-Gas-Fueled Cooking Devices of the Code is hereby deleted and repealed. 
(Ord. No. 7334, 3-27-2007; Ord. No. 8084, 6-28-2016) 
4-302 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE; STOVES; ETC., TO BE SHIELDED 
    All stoves, ranges, fireplaces, ovens and furnaces within all buildings shall be so placed and protected by sufficient and durable shields that fire or heat therefrom may not ignite any wall, floor or ceiling of the house, nor the furniture or fixtures therein. 
(Code 1958, 12.3; Code 1980, 14-46) 
4-303 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE; OPEN BURNING 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, open burning within the City is hereby prohibited. The Fire Department may, with the approval of the City Manager, conduct controlled training burns or controlled burning of combustible vegetation necessary for public safety. 
(Code 1958, 12.6; Code 1980, 14-47; Ord. No. 6548, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 7334, 3-27-2007) 
4-304 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE; HOMEMADE OIL-BURNING DEVICES 
    No homemade oil-burning stoves or devices that burn crankcase drainings shall be permitted within the City. 
(Code 1958, 12.7; Code 1980, 14-48) 
4-305 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2753, 2(12.8), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-49; Ord. No. 7334, 3-27-2007) 
4-306 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE; HAY, ETC., NOT USED FOR AGRICULTURAL FARMING PROHIBITED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, suffer or permit any hay, straw, trash, dry litter or other combustible substance, unhoused or uncovered and unprotected from fire on any lot, lots or parcels of land in the City, that is not used exclusively for agricultural farming. The term "agricultural farming" as used in this section excludes truck farming, truck patches, gardens and cultivation of isolated lots not within the outlying districts of the City where general farming is carried on. 
(Code 1958, 12.20; Ord. No. 2753, 2(12.12), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-50) 
4-307 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6178, 9-24-96; Ord. No. 7334, 3-27-2007) 
4-308 - FIRE PREVENTION; OUTDOOR FIREPLACES 
    The term "Outdoor fireplaces" shall include Fire Pits, Portable Fire Pits, and Chimineas. These residential outdoor fireplaces use wood as a fuel and are used for contained recreational fires located at a private residence for the purpose of outdoor cooking and personal enjoyment. Outdoor fireplaces do not include barbeque grills that use propane or charcoal as a fuel and used primarily for outdoor cooking. Portable Fire Pits are defined as being commercially designed and intended to confine and control outdoor wood fires. Chimineas are defined as an outdoor patio fireplace, usually made from clay, intended to confine and control outdoor wood fires. Fire pits are usually constructed of steel, concrete and/or stones and constructed above ground with a heavy steel screen cover. All outdoor fireplaces shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Clearances. A minimum ten-foot clearance shall be maintained between the outdoor fireplace and combustible walls, roofs, fences, decks and other combustible material. 
b.  Construction. Outdoor fireplaces shall be constructed of concrete or approved non-combustible materials. The fire fuel area and openings shall be completely enclosed by steel screening or an approved non-combustible screening material with openings in screening to be not larger than 1/2-inch square. Vent stacks and chimneys shall have a steel screen cover made of heavy wire mesh or other non-combustible material with openings not larger than 1/2-inch square or as approved by the Fire Chief. Fire fuel areas for fire pits shall be covered with a steel screen cover made of heavy wire mesh or other non-combustible material with openings not larger than 1/2 -inch square. Not permitted are barrels, half-barrels, drums or similarly constructed devices. 
c.  Size. The fuel area for a fire pit shall not be larger than three (3) feet in diameter and a height of more than two (2) feet. 
d.  Location. Outdoor fireplaces shall be placed on a stable non-combustible surface such as a concrete pad. Outdoor fireplaces shall not be located on combustible balconies or on any balcony above the first floor that are attached to a multiple family dwelling of three or more living units located one above the other. Outdoor fireplaces shall not be located under any combustible balcony or any overhanging part of a structure attached to a multiple family dwelling of three or more living units. 
e.  Type of Materials Being Burnt. Burn untreated wood. Petroleum products, rubbish, grass, leaves, cardboard, plastics, rubber or any material that may flow out of the containment or cause excessive heat, smoke, or offensive smell shall not be permitted. 
f.  Amount of Materials Being Burnt. Limit the amount of material being burnt to ensure the flames are confined inside the fuel area of the outdoor fireplace and the flames do not extend into the chimney or above the pit. Follow the manufacture's recommendation on the maximum amount of fuel to be used at one time. 
g.  Supervision. Outdoor fireplaces shall be under constant supervision by at least one responsible person of age 18 or older from the ignition of the fire until the fire is completely extinguished and embers are cool and the fire will not rekindle. 
h.  Provisions for Protection. A garden hose connected to a water supply or other approved fire extinguishing equipment shall be readily available for use. 
i.  Wind and Weather Conditions. Outdoor fireplaces shall not be operated when winds are blowing over 10 mph and wind direction will cause smoke, embers, or other burning materials to be carried by the wind toward any building or other combustible materials. Outdoor fireplaces shall not be operate when weather conditions are extremely dry. 
j.  Maintenance. The owner is responsible to ensure proper maintenance and care is accomplished in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. At the minimum the outdoor fireplace will be checked regularly for the appearance of cracks and other physical deterioration or loose parts. 
k.  Discontinuance. Smoke from any outdoor fireplace shall not create a nuisance for neighboring property owners. The fire shall be extinguished immediately upon the complaint of the neighboring property owner of any smoke nuisance. The fire chief is authorized to require outdoor fireplace use to be immediately discontinued if the use of the outdoor fireplace is determined by the chief to constitute a hazardous condition to occupants of surrounding property. 
l.  Permit. A site plan showing the location of the fire pit on the property and a detailed drawing of the construction of the fire pit shall be submitted to the Fire Department for review. Approved plans will serve as the permit. A permit will not be required for Portable Fire Pits or Chimineas provided they are commercially designed and have been approved by an independent testing laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 6802, 7-24-2001) 
ARTICLE 4. - REMOVAL OF FIRE DAMAGED, COMBUSTIBLE BUILDINGS 

4-401 - REMOVAL OF FIRE DAMAGED, COMBUSTIBLE BUILDINGS; REQUIRED 
    When any wooden or combustible building or structure within the jurisdiction of the City of Kearney shall be damaged by fire or other casualty to the extent of fifty-one percent (51%) of its value exclusive of foundation, it shall not be repaired or rebuilt, but shall be taken down and removed within thirty (30) days from the date of the casualty. Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to remove these damaged building or structure within thirty (30) days from the date of the casualty thereto shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor as defined in Section 1-111 and each day that they fail to comply shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2753, 2(12.9), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-58; Ord. No. 7334, 3-27-2007) 
ARTICLE 5. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 

4-501 - REMOVAL OF FIRE DAMAGED, COMBUSTIBLE BUILDINGS; REMOVAL BY CITY 
    In the event that any owner of the building or structure damaged as provided by this division is not within the jurisdiction of the court or cannot be found within the county, it shall be the duty of the City Manager, at the expense of the City, to have the building or structure removed and the cost thereof charged as a special assessment against the lot or parcel of ground on which it stood with proper deductions from the amount of the special assessment, when certified to the County Clerk for collection as other taxes, for the sale of materials salvaged from the damaged building or structure, if any. 
(Code 1958, 12.18; Ord. No. 2753, 2(12.10), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-59) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-1722 and 18-1722.01 
4-502 - REMOVAL OF FIRE DAMAGED, COMBUSTIBLE BUILDINGS; SUIT FOR COLLECTION OF COSTS 
    The City Manager, when the removal is made by him/her as provided in the preceding section, shall immediately bring and diligently prosecute an action in the name and on behalf of the City in any court having jurisdiction thereof for the recovery of the expenditure of the City in the removal of the building or structure and the costs of the action; provided, however, that the removal by the City Manager and the collection of the expenditure by suit, or otherwise, shall not bar any prosecution nor any penalty provided by this Code. 
(Code 1958, 12.19; Ord. No. 2753, 2(12.11), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-60) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-1722 and 18-1722.01 
ARTICLE 6. - FIREWORKS 

4-601 - FIREWORKS; DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    FIREWORKS: Any composition or device designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible affect by combustion, deflagration or detonation and which meets the definition of common or special fireworks set forth by the United States Department of Transportation in Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations. 
    CONSUMER FIREWORKS: 
A.  Any of the following devices that (i) meet the Code of Federal Regulations requirements set forth in 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 and 1507, as such regulations existed on January 1, 2010, and (ii) are tested and approved by a nationally recognized testing facility or by the State Fire Marshal: 
1.  Any small firework device designed to produce visible effects by combustion and which is required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission set forth in 16 C.F.R., as such regulations existed on January 1, 2010; 
2.  Any small device designed to produce audible effects such as a whistling device; 
3.  Any ground device or firecracker containing fifty (50) milligrams or less of explosive composition; or 
4.  Any aerial device containing one hundred thirty (130) milligrams or less of explosive composition. 
B.  Class C explosives as classified by the United States Department of Transportation shall be considered consumer fireworks. 
C.  Consumer fireworks does not include: 
1.  Rockets that are mounted on a stick or wire and project into the air when ignited, with or without report; 
2.  Wire sparklers; 
3.  Nighttime parachutes; 
4.  Fireworks that are shot into the air and after coming to the ground cause automatic ignition due to sufficient temperature; 
5.  Firecrackers that contain more than fifty (50) milligrams of explosive composition; and 
6.  Fireworks that have been tested by the State Fire Marshal as a response to complaints and have been deemed to be unsafe. 
    SALE: Includes barter, exchange or gift or offer therefor, and each such transaction made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. 
(Ord. No. 2651, 3, 4-26-77; Code 1980, 14-68; Ord. No. 6925 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 7906, 6-24-2014; Ord. No. 7992, 5-12-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1241 
4-602 - GENERALLY 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, offer for sale, bring into this City, or discharge any fireworks other than consumer fireworks; except: 
A.  Any display fireworks purchased from a licensed distributor; or 
B.  Any display fireworks purchased by the holder of a display permit issued pursuant to Section 28-1239.01 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, as amended; or 
C.  Any fireworks brought into this State for storage by a licensed distributor and held for sale outside of this State; 
D.  Any fireworks furnished for agricultural purposes pursuant to written authorization from the State Fire Marshal to any holder of a distributor's license; or 
E.  Toy cap pistols or toy caps, each of which does not contain more than twenty-five hundredths (0.25) of a grain of explosive material. 
(Ord. No. 2651, 1, 4-26-77; Code 1980, 14-69; Ord. No. 7992, 5-12-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1245 
4-603 - PERMIT TO SELL CONSUMER FIREWORKS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale consumer fireworks in the City without first having made application for and received a permit to do so from the City Fire Administrator. Such permit shall be as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule and the funds received from the permits will be placed in the Fire Prevention Account of the Fire Department as a line item for fireworks safety and education training programs and material. The permit to sell consumer fireworks shall at all times be displayed at the place of business of the holder thereof. Applicants shall also pay an occupation tax as provided in Section 4-605 of this Code. Such permits shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2651, 2, 4-26-77; Code 1980, 14-70; Ord. No. 5338, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6925, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 7241, 3-14-2006; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 7992, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. 8002, 6-9-2015) 
4-604 - DATES OF LAWFUL SALE 
    Consumer fireworks may be sold or offered for sale in the City on June 28 through and including July 4 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2651, 4, 4-26-77; Code 1980, 14-71; Ord. No. 6547, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 6577, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 6925, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 7897, 5-27-2014; Or. No. 8002, 6-9-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1249 
4-605 - TEMPORARY FIREWORKS STANDS 
A.  Any person having obtained a permit to sell consumer fireworks may sell or offer for sale such fireworks only from a temporary stand or enclosure erected or placed on real estate for that purpose. No fireworks shall be sold from permanent buildings or structures in the City. 
B.  If fireworks are to be sold from a temporary stand or enclosure, such stand or enclosure shall be of wood or steel frame construction covered with metal or wood. 
C.  Any temporary enclosure or stand shall be permitted only in those areas of the City zoned for business or manufacturing, and only after a permit is obtained as described in section 4-603 for the sale of permitted fireworks. 
D.  Such temporary enclosures or stands shall be permitted to remain on real estate where consumer fireworks are sold for only the period beginning on June 24 through and including July 7 of each year. 
E.  Any person, as part of obtaining a permit, must pay an additional fee by separate check as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. This deposit will be refundable if the temporary stand is cleaned up and removed by 5:00 p.m. July 7 of that calendar year. 
F.  Any such temporary stand or enclosure shall not be located closer than twenty-five feet (25') from any building, and at least one hundred feet (100') from any station where gasoline and oil for motor vehicles is sold. Such temporary stand or enclosure shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet in size. 
G.  Only approved electric space heaters with tip-over safety switches may be used for heating. A minimum distance of three (3) feet of clear space between the face of the space heater to fireworks and other combustible materials must be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2651, 5, 4-26-77; Code 1980, 14-72; Ord. No. 5338, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 6547, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 6925, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 8002, 6-9-2015) 
4-606 - AGE LIMITATION 
    Any person who shall sell or offer for sale fireworks in the City, or any person employed by another to sell or offer for sale such fireworks, must be at least eighteen (18) years of age, except that persons who are age fourteen (14) through eighteen (18) inclusive may, when working in the direct presence and supervision of an adult twenty-one (21) years of age or older, sell or offer for sale such fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 2651, 6, 4-26-77; Ord. No. 4007, 1, 4-12-88; Code 1980, 14-73) 
4-607 - DISCHARGING FIREWORKS, PREMISES WHERE SAME ARE SOLD 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge fireworks in or upon the premises where fireworks are sold; provided, that, this regulation shall not be construed to include the use of toy pistols using what is commonly known as caps. 
(Ord. No. 2651, 7, 4-26-77; Code 1980, 14-74) 
4-608 - DISCHARGING FIREWORKS; ENDANGERING PROPERTY 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot off or discharge or ignite any fireworks, rockets, powder, firecrackers or any other dangerous matter in or about or in the vicinity of any building within the City at any time in such a manner as to expose any building or other property to danger of fire therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 2753, 4(12.26(a)), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-75) 
4-609 - DISCHARGING FIREWORKS; WHEN PERMISSIBLE 
    Permissible fireworks may be discharged, exploded or used in the City on June 28 through and including July 4 of each year; provided, that on such days the discharge and explosion of fireworks shall be permitted during the following times: June 28 through July 2 - 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; July 3 and July 4 - 8:00 a.m. to midnight. The sale, discharge or exploding of fireworks within the City on any dates or times other than as set out in this section shall be unlawful except that persons holding an approved display permit from the State Fire Marshal may conduct public exhibitions or displays of fireworks on the dates authorized by the permit. Permit holder shall file a copy of the permit with the City Clerk at least 24 hours prior to the event. 
(Ord. No. 2651, 9, 4-26-77; Code 1980, 14-76; Ord. No. 6109, 4-23-96; Ord. No. 6547, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 6925, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 7897, 5-27-2014) 
4-610 - FIRE EXTINGUISHER 
    All fireworks stands or displays shall have a suitable fire extinguisher. Such extinguisher shall be mounted properly with easy access. 
(Ord. No. 2753, 4(12.26(b)), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-77) 
4-611 - STORAGE 
    Excess fireworks or fireworks not on display shall be stored in an enclosed area no closer than fifteen feet (15') to the display. 
(Ord. No. 2753, 4(12.26(c)), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-78) 
4-612 - ROCKETS PROHIBITED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, display, ignite or shoot off pop bottle rockets or troft rockets. 
(Ord. No. 2753, 4(12.26(d)), 12-27-77; Code 1980, 14-79) 
4-613 - THROWING FIRECRACKERS, EXPLOSIVES PROHIBITED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any firecracker, firework or any object which explodes upon contact with another object: 
A.  From, at, or into a motor vehicle. 
B.  Onto any street, highway or sidewalk. 
C.  At or near any person. 
D.  Into any building. 
E.  Into or at any group of persons. 
(Ord. No. 2651, 8, 4-26-77; Code 1980, 14-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1242 
4-614 - PROHIBITED IN PARKS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any fireworks or explosives in any City park. (Code 1980, 14-81) 
4-615 - WEATHER HAZARD 
    The City Council reserves the power to ban or further limit the sale/discharge of fireworks in the event of dry weather or other weather hazards. 
(Ord. No. 6925, 12-10-2002) 
4-616 - USE OF INDOOR PYROTECHNIC SPECIAL EFFECTS MATERIALS 
    The use of indoor pyrotechnic special effects materials and theatrical flammable material used during a group(s) performance for public entertainment shall be prohibited in any building not protected with an approved fire sprinkler system. 
    Aspirating theatrical flammable material and/or alcohol aspirated by any method into the air and ignited to produce a fire ball or flame thrower affect shall be prohibited in any part of a building not protected with an approved fire sprinkler system or in rooms with a ceiling height of fifteen (15) feet or less. 
(Ord. No. 7263, 6-13-2006) 
ARTICLE 7. - FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS 

4-701 - FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS; STORAGE 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, there shall be no storage in excess of five (5) gallons of gasoline, diesel fuel or other flammable liquids, used as fuel or vehicle energy in any residential district or upon any lot where there is located a family residence, dwelling, apartment house or tenement, without first obtaining a special use permit in accordance with section 17 of the Zoning Code. 
(Code 1958, 12.7-1; Ord. No. 3516, 1, 4-13-82; Code 1980, 14-89) 
4-702 - STORAGE TANKS "TEMPORARILY OUT OF SERVICE" 
    Underground tanks which are not in active service shall be treated as "temporarily out of service" by taking the following steps: 
A.  Secure the fill line cap, gage opening cap and pump suction or discharge line, if disconnected, against tampering and product leakage. 
B.  Assure that the vent line is open. 
C.  Notify the building inspection department that the tank is out of service temporarily. 
    An underground tank shall not be left in "temporarily out of service" condition as provided in this section for a period in excess of six (6) months without specific approval of the State Fire Marshal's office. 
(Code 1958, 12.40; Ord. No. 2753, 8, 8(12.68), 12-27-77; Ord. No. 3965, 2, 11-24-87; Code 1980, 14-98) 
4-703 - ABANDONMENT OF INACTIVE TANKS 
    Underground tanks which are not in active service and which do not comply with Chapter 81 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, as amended, shall be abandoned in accordance with provisions of the office of the State Fire Marshal. 
(Code 1958, 12.41; Ord. No. 2753, 8(12.69), 12-27-77; Ord. No. 3965, 3, 11-24-87; Code 1980, 14-99) 
4-704 - DRAINAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL 
    Flammable liquids unloading and dispensing operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to prevent flammable liquids from entering public sewer and drainage systems or natural waterways. If spillage should occur which is likely to result in such entry of flammable liquids, the person in control of the operation or premises shall immediately notify the Fire Department and initiate other remedial steps appropriate for the situation. Crankcase drainage and flammable and combustible liquids shall not be dumped into sewers but shall be stored in approved tanks or tight drums outside of any building until removed from the premises, but in no case shall the same be permitted longer than thirty (30) days. "Approved" shall mean approved by the State Fire Marshal's office. 
(Code 1958, 12.42; Ord. No. 2753, 8(12.70), 12-27-77; Ord. No. 3965, 4, 11-24-87; Code 1980, 14-100) 
ARTICLE 8. - FIREFIGHTER RETIREMENT SYSTEM 

4-801 - RETIREMENT SYSTEM; APPLICATION 
    The provisions of this Article shall apply to all firefighters employed by the City of Kearney. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 1, 4-23-91) 
4-802 - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this Article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
A.  REGULAR INTEREST shall mean the net rate of interest earned by the Pension Fund each Plan year as determined by the Retirement Committee in conformity with actual and expected earnings on its investments; 
B.  REGULAR PAY shall mean the average salary of a firefighter for the five (5) years preceding the date such firefighter elects to retire; 
C.  SALARY shall mean the base rate of pay, excluding overtime, callback pay, clothing allowances, and other such benefits as reported on the participant's federal income tax withholding statement including the firefighters' contribution picked up by the City as provided in subsection B of section 4-805 of this Article. 
D.  RETIREMENT COMMITTEE shall mean the retirement committee created pursuant to section 4-814 of this Article; 
E.  RETIREMENT VALUE shall mean the accumulated value of the firefighters' employee account and employer account; 
F.  GROUP ANNUITY CONTRACT shall mean the contract or contracts issued by one (1) or more life insurance companies or designated trust to the Retirement Committee in order to provide the benefits described in this Article. Annuity conversion rates contained in any such contract shall be specified on a sex neutral basis; 
G.  STRAIGHT LIFE ANNUITY shall mean an ordinary annuity payable for the life of the primary annuitant only, and terminating at his/her death without refund or death benefit of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 2, 4-23-91) 
4-803 - PRIOR SERVICE 
    A firefighter shall be credited with all years of his/her service after April 21, 1991 for the purpose of determining vested retirement benefits under the provisions of this Article. (Ord. No. 5245, 3, 4-23-91) 
4-804 - CITY MAINTAIN 
    Commencing on April 21, 1991 the City shall keep and maintain a Firefighters Retirement System Fund for the purpose of investing payroll deductions and City contributions to the retirement system established pursuant to the provisions of this Article. Regular interest shall begin to accrue on the contributions transferred into the fund. Such funds shall be invested in the manner prescribed in section 4-816 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 4, 4-23-91) 
4-805 - FIREFIGHTER CONTRIBUTION 
A.  Each firefighter participating in the retirement system established pursuant to the provisions of this Article shall contribute to the retirement system a sum equal to six and one-half percent (61/2%) of his/her salary. Such payment shall be made by regular payroll deductions from his/her periodic salary and shall be credited to his/her employee account on a monthly basis. Each such account shall also be credited with regular interest. 
B.  The City shall pick up the firefighters' contributions required by this section for all compensation paid on or after April 21, 1991, and the contributions so picked up shall be treated under the United States Internal Revenue Code, except that the City shall continue to withhold federal income taxes based upon such contributions until the Internal Revenue Service or the Federal courts rule that pursuant to section 414(h) of the United State Internal Revenue Code, such contributions shall not be included as gross income of the employee until such time as they are distributed or made available. The City shall pay the employee contributions from the same source of funds which is used in paying earnings to the employee. The City shall pick up the employee contributions by a salary deduction either through a reduction in the cash salary for the employee or a combination of a reduction in salary and offset against a future salary increase. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 5, 4-23-91) 
4-806 - CITY CONTRIBUTION 
A.  The City shall contribute to the retirement system a sum equal to thirteen percent (13%) of each such participating firefighter's periodic salary. Such payment shall be credited to his/her employer account on a monthly basis. Each such account shall also be credited with regular interest. 
B.  The City shall contribute any additional amounts necessary to fund retirement or other retirement plan benefits not provided by employee contributions or City contributions to the employer account required by subsection A of this section. Such additional contributions shall be accumulated in an unallocated employer account of the Firefighters Retirement System Fund and used to provide the excess benefits, if any, specified in section 4-809 to 4-811 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 6, 4-23-91) 
4-807 - ANNUITY OPTIONS 
A.  At any time before the retirement date, the retiring firefighter may elect to receive his/her pension benefit either in the form of a straight life annuity or any optional form of annuity benefit specified in the group annuity contract. The retiring firefighter may further elect to defer the date of the first (1st) payment to the first (1st) day of any specified month prior to age seventy (70). In any case, the amount of the pension benefit shall be the amount purchased or otherwise provided by the retirement value as of the date of the first (1st) payment. 
B.  Any retiring firefighter whose pension benefit is less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month on the straight life annuity option shall be paid a lump sum settlement equal to the retirement value in lieu of annuity. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 7, 4-23-91) 
4-808 - RETIREMENT OPTIONS, RETIREMENT DATE 
A.  A firefighter may: 
1.  Elect to retire and receive a pension benefit based on his/her full retirement value upon the attainment of age fifty-five (55); or 
2.  Retire or be retired as a result of disability, as determined under section 4-811 of this Article, at any age. 
B.  A firefighter who is eligible to retire pursuant to subdivision A.1. of this section but does not, shall continue to contribute to his/her employee account and the City shall continue to contribute to his/her employer account 
C.  The first of the month immediately following the last day of work shall be the retirement date. (Ord. No. 5245, 8, 4-23-91) 
4-809 - FIREFIGHTER DEATH OTHER THAN IN THE LINE OF DUTY 
    When prior to retirement any firefighter participating in the retirement system established pursuant to the provisions of this Article dies other than in the line of duty, the entire retirement value shall be payable to the beneficiary specified by the deceased firefighter prior to his/her death or to the deceased firefighter's estate in the event that no beneficiary was specified. The retirement value may be received by the beneficiary in the form of a single lump sum payment, straight life annuity, or any other optional form of benefit specified in the group annuity contract. 
    In the event the surviving spouse or minor children of such deceased firefighter die before the aggregate amount of pension payments received by the firefighter and his/her surviving beneficiaries, if any, equals the total amount in the employee's account, including interest, the difference between the total amount in the employee's account and the aggregate amount of pension payments received by the retired firefighter and his/her surviving beneficiaries, if any, shall be paid in a single sum to the firefighter's duly qualified personal representative, except that if the difference is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), the City may pay the same to such claimant or claimants as the Retirement Committee, in its discretion, determines to be entitled to the funds. 
    To the extent that the retirement value at the date of death exceeds the amount required to purchase the specified pension, the excess will be applied to increase the amount of the pension benefit. In the event that the pension benefit is payable, the retirement value of the firefighter's retirement account who died after the age of fifty (50) shall be deposited in the unallocated employee account. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 9, 4-23-91) 
4-810 - FIREFIGHTER DEATH IN THE LINE OF DUTY 
    When prior to retirement any firefighter participating in the retirement system established pursuant to the provisions of this Article dies in the line of duty or in case death is caused by or is the result of injuries received while in the line of duty, the entire retirement value shall be payable to the beneficiary specified by the deceased firefighter prior to his/her death or to the deceased firefighter's estate in the event that no beneficiary was specified. The retirement value may be received by the beneficiary in the form of a single lump sum payment, straight life annuity, or any other optional form of benefit specified in the group annuity contract. For a firefighter who is survived by a spouse or minor children, a retirement pension of fifty percent (50%) of regular pay shall be paid to the surviving spouse, or upon his/her remarriage or death, to the minor child or children during such child's or children's minority subject to deduction of the amounts paid as workers' compensation benefits on account of death, as provided in section 4-812 of this Article. 
    In the event the surviving spouse or minor children of such deceased firefighter dies before the aggregate amount of pension payments received by the firefighter and his/her survivor beneficiaries, if any, equals the total amount in the employee's account, including interest, the difference between the total amount in the employee's account and the aggregate amount of pension payments received by the retired firefighter and his/her surviving beneficiaries, if any, shall be paid in a single sum to the firefighter's duly qualified personal representative, except that if the difference is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), the City may pay the same to such claimant or claimants as the Retirement Committee, in its discretion, determines to be entitled to the funds. 
    To the extent that the retirement value at the date of death exceeds the amount required to purchase the specified retirement pension, reduced by any amounts paid as workers' compensation benefits, the excess shall be applied to increase the amount of the pension benefit. In the event that the specified retirement pension is payable, the retirement value shall be deposited in the unallocated employer account. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 10, 4-23-91) 
4-811 - FIREFIGHTER DISABLED IN THE LINE OF DUTY 
    In case any firefighter shall become permanently and totally disabled from accident or other cause, while in the line of duty, and such firefighter because of such disability is unable to resume the duties he/she was performing at the time of injury, such firefighter shall forthwith be placed upon the roll of pensioned firefighters at the regular retirement pension of fifty percent (50%) of regular pay, as defined in section 4-802 of this Article. In case of temporary total disability of a firefighter received while in the line of duty, he/she shall receive his/her salary during the continuance of such disability for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months that such disability has become permanent, then the salary shall cease and he/she shall be entitled to the benefits for pensions in case of total and permanent disability. All payments of pension or salary provided by this section shall be subject to deduction of amount paid under the Nebraska Workers' Compensation Act. Total payments to a disabled firefighter in excess of amounts paid as workers' compensation benefits, shall not be less than the retirement value at the date of disability. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 11, 4-23-91) 
4-812 - TEMPORARY DISABILITY, WORKERS' COMPENSATIONS 
    No firefighter shall be entitled during any period of temporary disability to receive in full both his/her salary and his/her benefits under the Nebraska Workers' Compensation Act. All Nebraska workers' compensation benefits shall be payable in full to such firefighter as provided in the Nebraska Workers' Compensation Act, but all amounts paid by the City or its insurer under the Nebraska Workers' Compensation Act to any disabled firefighter entitled to receive a salary during such disability shall be considered as payments on account of such salary and shall be credited thereon. The remaining balance of such salary, if any, shall be payable as otherwise provided in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 12, 4-23-91) 
4-813 - TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT; VESTING SCHEDULE 
    In the event a firefighter quits or is discharged, the firefighter may request and receive as a lump sum all of the contribution he/she has made toward his/her employee account including regular interest earned from April 21, 1991. Such firefighter, if vested, may in lieu thereof, receive a deferred pension benefit in an amount purchased by the retirement value at the date of retirement. The retirement value shall consist of the accumulated value of the firefighter's employee account, less any lump sum distributions received prior to retirement, together with a vested percentage of the firefighter's employee account plus regular interest from the date of termination to the date of retirement. The vesting schedule is as follows: 
A.  If the terminating firefighter has been a member of the system for less than four (4) years, such vesting shall be nil: and 
B.  If the terminating firefighter has been a member of the paid department of the City for at least four (4) years, such vesting percentage shall be forty percent (40%). Such vesting percentage shall be fifty percent (50%) after five (5) years, sixty percent (60%) after six (6) years, seventy percent (70%) after seven (7) years, eighty percent (80%) after eight (8) years, ninety percent (90%) after nine (9) years, and one hundred percent (100%) after ten (10) years. 
    The deferred pension benefit shall be payable on the first (1st) of the month immediately following his/her fifty-fifth (55th) birthday. At the option of the terminating firefighter, such pension benefit may be paid as of the first (1st) of the month after such member attains the age of fifty (50). Such election may be made by the firefighter any time prior to the payment of the pension benefits. 
    In the event that the terminating firefighter shall not be credited with one hundred percent (100%) of his/her employee account, the remainder shall first be used to meet the expense charges incurred by the City in connection with administering the firefighter retirement system and the remainder shall then be used to reduce the City contribution which would otherwise be required to fund pension benefits. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 13, 4-23-91) 
4-814 - RETIREMENT COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED 
    A retirement committee shall be established to supervise the general operation of the retirement system established pursuant to the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 14, 4-23-91) 
4-815 - RETIREMENT COMMITTEE, MEMBERS 
    The Retirement Committee established pursuant to section 4-814 of this Article shall consist of six (6) members of which four (4) members shall be selected by the active paid firefighters. Two (2) members shall be designated by the Council. The members who are not participants in such retirement system shall have a general knowledge of retirement plans. Members of the Council of such City, active members of the Fire Department, and members of the general public may serve on the Retirement Committee. The committee members shall be appointed to four-year terms commencing April 21, 1991. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the term by a person with the same representation as his/her predecessor. Members of the Retirement Committee shall, subject to approval by the Council, be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in carrying out their duties. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 15, 4-23-91) 
4-816 - AUTHORIZED INVESTMENTS 
A.  The funds of the firefighters retirement system shall be invested by the Retirement Committee. The City, subject to the approval of the Retirement Committee, shall contract with an insurance company, trust company, or other financial institution including, but not limited to, brokerage houses, investment managers, savings and loan associations, banks, credit unions, or lenders approved by the Farmers Home Administration or United States Department of Veteran Affairs. 
B.  The Retirement Committee shall establish an investment plan which allows each member of the retirement system to allocate all contributions to his/her employee account to the various investment options or combinations of investment options described in such plan. Each firefighter shall have the option of investing his/her employee account in any proportion, including full allocation, in any investment option offered by the plan. Each firefighter shall be given a summary of the investment plan and a detailed current description of each investment option prior to making or revising his/her allocation. 
C.  Such funds shall be invested pursuant to the policies established by the Nebraska Investment Council. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 16, 4-23-91) 
4-817 - RETIREMENT COMMITTEE, DUTIES 
    It shall be the duty of the Retirement Committee to: 
A.  Elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, and such other officers as the Committee deems appropriate; 
B.  Hold regular quarterly meetings and special meetings upon the call of the chairperson; 
C.  Conduct meetings pursuant to the Public Meetings Law, sections 84-1408 to 84-1414 R.S. Neb.; 
D.  Provide each employee a summary of plan eligibility requirements, benefit provisions, and investment options available to such employee; 
E.  Provide, within thirty (30) days after a request is made by a participant, a statement describing the amount of benefits such participant is eligible to receive; 
F.  Make available for review an annual report of the system's operations describing both (1) the amount of contributions to the system from both employee and employer sources and (2) an identification of the total assets of the retirement system; and 
G.  Have an analysis made of the investment return that has been achieved on the funds of the firefighters retirement system invested by the Committee. Such analysis shall be prepared as of January 1, 1994, and at least once every five (5) years thereafter. The analysis shall be prepared by an independent private organization or public entity which has demonstrated expertise to perform this type of analysis and which is unrelated to any organization offering investment advice or which provides investment management services to the retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 17, 4-23-91) 
4-818 - TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT; TRANSFER OF BENEFITS 
    In the event that after four (4) or more years of employment a firefighter terminates his/her employment for the purpose of becoming a firefighter employed by another first-class city in Nebraska, and such new employment commences within ninety (90) days, such firefighter shall be entitled to transfer to the Firefighters Retirement System Fund of the city by which he/she is newly employed, the full amount of his/her contribution and his/her vested portion of the City's contribution at the time of termination, together with regular interest accrued thereon. The transferred funds shall be administered by the Retirement Committee of the city to which transferred. For the purpose of applying the vesting schedule in section 4-813 of this Article to contributions made following the commencement of new employment, such firefighter shall be deemed a new employee. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 18, 4-23-91) 
4-819 - TAX LEVY 
    In order to provide the necessary amounts to pay for or fund a pension plan established under the provisions of this Article, the Mayor/President and Council may make a tax levy in addition to the multiple levies or the all purpose and exclusive levy which such city is authorized by law to make. 
(Ord. No. 5245, 19, 4-23-91) 
4-820 - ALLOCATION OF INVESTMENT COSTS 
    The City and the Retirement Committee shall develop a schedule of investment costs relating to the investment of the funds in each of the accounts in the Firefighters Retirement System, which costs shall be paid out of the funds in such accounts or assessed to the firefighters as provided in such schedule. The schedule of investment costs shall provide for the allocation of the administrative or record-keeping costs of the various investment options available to the members of the retirement system and shall assess such costs so that each member pays a fair proportion of the costs based upon his/her choice of options and number of transfers among options. All other costs related to the general operation of the retirement system established pursuant to this Article and not allocated or assessed pursuant to the schedule of investment costs shall be considered administrative costs and shall be paid by the City from the unallocated employer account. 
Chapter 5 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE 1. - FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS 

5-101 - FROZEN DESSERTS; DEFINITION 
    The words "frozen dessert" shall mean milk or ice cream mix, whipped cream mix, ice cream, milk sherbet, ice milk, or ice sherbet, frozen yogurt, frozen custards, frozen dietary food, diabetic or dietetic ice cream, diabetic or dietetic ice milk, ice milk mix, frozen malted milk, novelties and other similar products designated as a frozen dessert by the Environmental Health Specialist. 
(Code 1958, 13.25; Code 1980, 15-76) 
5-102 - FROZEN DESSERTS; GENERALLY 
    No food service establishment shall transfer frozen desserts from a container to another or package the same on the street or in any vehicles or in any place except a sanitary room under approved conditions. 
(Code 1958, 13.24; Code 1980, 15-77) 
5-103 - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS; VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS 
    Any person violating any provision of the ordinance and code adopted by this Article shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-111 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1980, 15-19) 
5-104 - SELLING OR VENDING OF MERCHANDISE ON CITY STREETS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS 
    The selling or vending of merchandise, wares, goods, food, drinks, or any other merchandise or materials, including ice cream, is prohibited on the streets of the City of Kearney, either from vehicles, whether motorized or not, or by any other method of traveling about the city, except that the City Council may permit the use of public streets and sidewalks within those areas of the city zoned commercial by businesses abutting the street or sidewalk in accordance with the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-4301. 
(Ord. No. 5762, 6-14-94) 
ARTICLE 2. - GARBAGE AND TRASH 
DIVISION I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

5-201 - GARBAGE AND TRASH; DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this Article, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT: Any nonresidential building or establishment, for profit or nonprofit, including, but not limited to, those used in retail, wholesale, industrial, manufacturing, dining, offices, professional services, automobile service, hotels and motels, restaurants, or shipping and receiving areas. 
    DEBRIS: Demolition materials, broken concrete, broken glass, and like material which is not recyclable. 
    GARBAGE: Rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attend the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable. 
    LANDFILL: Shall mean the Kearney Area Solid Waste Agency Landfill. 
    LIQUID WASTE: Any waste which contains liquids which will readily separate from the solid portion of a waste under ambient temperature and pressure. 
    OIL: A petroleum-based or synthetic oil which is used as a lubricant for internal combustion engines, transmission, gears, or axles and which, through use, storage or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose. This does not include oils used for cooking. 
    OWNER OF LAND: The owner, owner's duly authorized agent, or occupant of any residential dwelling, commercial establishment, or nonprofit organization which shall be in possession of any property in the City of Kearney, whether as owner, occupant, lessee, duly authorized agent of the owner, or tenant. 
    REFUSE: Putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings, industrial wastes, and other such wastes. 
    RESIDENTIAL DWELLING: Any housing structure with at least one (1) unit, including, but not limited to, single-family homes, mobile homes, and multi-family dwellings. 
    RUBBISH: Non-putrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind that will be a detriment to the public health and safety. 
    TRASH: Wastepaper, scrap lumber, packing boxes, crates, paper or pasteboard boxes, cartons, excelsior, hay, straw and other combustible packing materials and refuse, broken glass, tin cans and containers and all other waste materials, except garbage, ashes, manure and dead animals. 
    TREES: Tree limbs, branches, trunks, etc. larger than one (1) inch in diameter. 
    YARD WASTE: Plant material, leaves, grass or shrubbery cuttings or clippings, tree trimmings, hedge clippings, bushes, flowers, roots, branches, tree limbs not over one (1) inch in diameter and other organic materials collected as a result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and gardens. 
(Code 1958, 14.1; Code 1980, 16-1; Ord. No. 5405, 4-14-92) 
5-202 - GARBAGE AND TRASH; GENERALLY 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in, on, or about any dwelling house, building or premises in the City, any decayed vegetable or animal substance, garbage, offal or refuse matter or any substance that may be injurious to the public health or offensive to the residents or inhabitants of the vicinity unless the same is kept in receptacles provided therefor. 
(Code 1958, 14.6; Code 1980, 16-2) 
5-203 - LITTERING PROHIBITED; GENERALLY 
A.  Any person who deposits, throws, discards or otherwise disposes or leaves any litter on any public or private property, or in any waters, commits the offense of littering unless: 
1.  Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such material and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use such property; or 
2.  The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such property for such purpose. 
B.  The word "litter" as used in this section means all waste material susceptible of being dropped, deposited, discarded or otherwise disposed of by any person upon any property in the City, including but not limited to, all rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, trash, debris, bottles, cans, glass containers, or other foreign substances, solid or liquid, of every form, size, kind and description. Waste material, as used in this subsection, shall mean any material appearing in a place or in a context not associated with that material's function or origin. 
C.  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle in violation of this section, the operator of such motor vehicle commits the offense of littering. 
(Code 1980, 16-3; Ord. No. 5405, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 6031, 11-28-95) 
State Law reference- Littering, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-523 
5-204 - LITTERING PROHIBITED; DUTY OF BUSINESS OWNERS, OCCUPANTS 
A.  Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place of business situated within the City including builders and contractors, shall exercise reasonable diligence at all times to keep his/her premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or waste materials thrown or left on said premises by its customers, and to take reasonable measures to prevent same drifting or blowing to adjoining premises. 
B.  Receptacles. Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be placed on the premises accessible to the customers of such business where the above referred to articles of waste may be disposed of. 
C.  Signs. Each and every business establishment shall place upon its premises in a conspicuous place or places in close proximity to the receptacle or receptacles above referred to, a sign or signs which shall, in essence, convey to its customers a request that they use such receptacles for the disposal of waste material. 
(Code 1980, 16-4) 
5-205 - LITTERING PROHIBITED; DUTY OF CUSTOMER 
    It shall be unlawful for any customer going upon the premises of another to in any manner dispose of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or waste materials except in receptacles provided for such purposes. 
(Code 1980, 16-5) 
5-206 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6032, 11-28-95) 
5-207 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; ACCUMULATION GENERALLY 
    No garbage, rubbish, trash, junk or waste shall be thrown or permitted to fall on the ground on private premises or into streets, alleys or vacant lots nor shall it be allowed to accumulate on any premises, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1958, 14.6; Code 1980, 16-17) 
5-208 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; WHERE DEPOSITS UNLAWFUL 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited any rubbish, waste or garbage on any vacant lot, public thoroughfare, street or alley or public property or any place whatsoever except the place provided by the Board of Health. 
(Code 1958, 14.11; Code 1980, 16-18) 
5-209 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; HAULING GARBAGE, ETC., FOR HIRE 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to haul for hire, other than the City, any garbage, trash, refuse or other waste, solid waste, scrap or discarded material, within the City or away from the City; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any person who elects to haul, transport and dispose of his/her own garbage and other waste, and those hauling yard waste and trees, who may do so in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Utilities Department as may be provided from time to time; and further provided that this Section shall also not apply to any person who is hauling recyclable materials as defined by Article 2 of this Chapter, yard wastes and trees, or to a building contractor hauling scrap, debris or waste material from an ongoing construction site. 
(Code 1958, 14.2; Code 1980, 16-19; Ord. No. 5735, 4-12-94) 
5-210 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; GARBAGE CONTAINERS REQUIRED 
    Every household or occupant of any dwelling house or other building used for the housing of persons, and the owner, keeper or manager of every hotel, restaurant, store, wholesale business, retail business or other place where garbage accumulates in the City, shall be required to pay the associated collection fee as set forth in 5-212 and, if using the collection services, shall use only those containers provided by the City for the keeping and storage for collection of garbage, rubbish, trash, or waste materials. Generally, the City will provide individual containers of ninety (90) gallons, or containers of three hundred (300) gallons for shared usage by residential dwellers or individual commercial or business usage, which shall be designed to be capable of being picked up by the City's truck equipment. When determined to be necessary or more efficient by the City Manager or his designee, metal dumpsters may be provided. These containers shall remain the property of the City and reside with the address that they are assigned. These containers shall remain the property of the City. Dumpsters, ninety (90) gallon and three hundred (300) gallon containers, may be provided for the use of some commercial and industrial businesses. 
(Code 1958, 14.4; Ord. No. 3552, 1, 10-12-82; Code 1980, 16-20; Ord. No. 6033, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 8058, 12-22-2015) 
5-211 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; EXCLUSIVE USE OF ASSIGNED PROPERTY 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or permit another to place, any garbage or trash in any receptacle, at any refuse collection point or in any garbage container used in the City container collection service, unless the garbage, trash, or refuse is from the premises served by the container or from the premises at which the container or collection point is located. City service containers, which are located at several points in the City areas, are provided for garbage and trash from residential dwellings, apartment house areas, businesses, and institutions within the City limits, and garbage, trash, and refuse from outside the City limits shall not be placed in the City service containers. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit, or permit another to place or deposit, prohibited garbage, trash, and refuse in City service containers or to put anything on the ground at these locations. No person shall remove any container from the premises to which it is assigned or willfully or intentionally damage any garbage container. 
(Code 1958, 14.7; Ord. No. 3552, 2, 10-12-82; Code 1980, 16-21; Ord. No. 8058, 12-22-2015) 
5-212 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; RATES AND CHARGES 
A.  The following schedule of charges for collection of refuse and garbage shall be levied against each property served: 
1.  Residential unit (single-family, manufactured homes, duplexes, and single units of condominiums). The monthly rate is set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per unit. Curbside collection of recyclables is a free service. 
2.  Multiple residential unit (apartments). The monthly rate is set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per apartment. 
3.  Commercial and industrial units (includes all structures or parts thereof not included as a residential or multiple residential unit. 
The monthly rate schedule shall apply to all commercial and industrial businesses using two (2), three (3), six (6) and eight (8) cubic yard containers. The fee, as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule, is based on the number of containers and the number of collections each week. 
Commercial or industrial businesses that share a common container shall have the above rates prorated as determined by the Director of Utilities. 
Compactor container fees will be negotiated based on compaction ratio, collection costs and disposal costs. 
Commercial and industrial businesses using ninety (90) and three hundred (300) gallon containers shall pay the fees set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
4.  Commercial cardboard (complying with City requirements). Corrugated cardboard will be collected in metal containers from businesses who wish to recycle at a rate as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per once a week collection per container per month. 
5.  Yardwaste (residential and commercial units). Yardwaste will be collected once per week at a rate as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per month per ninety (90) gallon container. 
6.  Roll-off box: Roll-off boxes for special projects will be serviced at a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per pull. Box rent shall accrue at the rate as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per day. Landfill disposal fees are additional to the rate shown here and will be the responsibility of the customer. 
7.  Three (3) yard and six (6) yard containers for special projects are available for a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
B.  Sanitation service charges will be billed with water and/or sewer use fees. Charges will be collected at the same time, in the same manner, and by the same officers as water and sewer charges are collected by the City. If not paid within twenty (20) days after billing, it shall be deemed delinquent, and the water service to such user or property may be discontinued, in accordance with Nebraska statutes, until charges are paid. 
C.  Commercial or industrial properties and others to be served by dumpster units or other trash containers shall purchase and maintain City-approved dumpster units and trash containers. 
D.  All residential and commercial rates are mandatory unless the commercial or residential units are unoccupied. Unoccupied shall mean that the premise is vacant and the water service to the premises is off. 
E.  All applicable rates shall be prorated based on the date service began or ended. 
F.  If the rates or charges billed for collection of garbage and refuse are not paid to the City of Kearney by the due date as indicated on the utility bill, such bill shall become subject to a delinquency fee of five percent (5%) of the total bill. 
(Ord. No. 3763, §1-3, 7-23-85; Ord. No. 4086, 1, 3-14-89; Code 1980, 16-22; Ord. No. 5318, 10-22-91; Ord. No. 5413, 4-28-92; Ord. No. 5642, 7-27-93; Ord. No. 6034, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 6263, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 6601, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 7260, 5-9-2006; Ord. No. 7754, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 8058, 12-22-2015) 
5-213 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; MAINTENANCE OF CONTAINERS 
A.  Generally; definitions. Every garbage container required by this Article shall be maintained in a sanitary condition by the owner of the property to which it has been assigned; the container shall be thoroughly cleansed as needed by washing or scrubbing. Physical maintenance and repair of the container shall be done as prescribed by an administrative policy approved by the City Manager. 
1.  COMMERCIAL GARBAGE CONTAINER OR DUMPSTER: Any plastic or metal container used by businesses or apartment buildings. 
2.  RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE CONTAINER: Any ninety (90) gallon or three hundred (300) gallon container for household use. 
B.  Purchase; replacement; retrieval. 
1.  Commercial dumpsters shall be purchased by the business as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule to which they are assigned to accommodate all refuse from the business initially or any subsequent expansion of the business requiring more containers because of increased amounts of refuse. The business shall also be responsible for damage by vandalism or fire and for washing or keeping the dumpster(s) clean. Any other damage, such as lids, wheels, etc., shall be repaired by the City, including replacement of the container at the end of its normal life. 
2.  Residential containers shall be purchased by the owners of newly constructed dwellings to remain at the dwelling and shall be maintained by the City except for normal washing to maintain its sanitary condition. Whenever damage results as a result of vandalism on days other than the normal collection day or as a result of fire due to the deposit of any refuse by the owner or occupant, the cost of replacing the container shall be the expense of the owner of the property to which it has been assigned. Also, containers left at the curb on days other than normal collection days may be collected by the City. The owner or occupant may retrieve their container by paying a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Code 1958, 14.4; Ord. No. 3552, 4, 10-12-82; Ord. No. 5152, 1, 8-14-90; Code 1980, 16-23; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 8058, 12-22-2015) 
5-214 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; CERTAIN MATERIALS PROHIBITED 
    Materials impregnated with urine, poisons, explosives, dangerous or corrosive chemicals, clothing taken from persons with infectious diseases, heavy metals or metal parts, lumber, rocks, bricks, concrete blocks, tires, crates, yard waste, trees, lead acid batteries, oil, appliances, liquid wastes, and other refuse from construction or remodeling shall not be placed in garbage containers provided by the City, and it shall be the duty of each property owner or tenant occupying the premises to maintain the containers assigned for use of that premises. Damage to any container shall immediately be reported to the City Manager by the party to whom the container is assigned or by the party who has damaged the container. 
(Ord. No. 3552, 5, 10-12-82; Code 1980, 16-24) 
5-215 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; PROTECTION OF CONTENTS OF CONTAINERS 
    Garbage containers shall be kept closed tightly, except during the collection or deposit of garbage, trash or refuse or solid waste. The contents of all containers and receptacles shall be so protected that the wind cannot blow out and scatter the same over the streets, alleys and premises of the City. 
(Code 1958, 14.4; Ord. No. 3552, 6, 10-12-82; Code 1980, 16-25) 
5-216 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; ASHES GENERALLY 
    No smoldering or burning materials of any type or nature whatsoever, including hot or live ashes, shall be placed or deposited in any of the City's garbage containers. 
(Code 1958, 14.8; Ord. No. 3552, 7, 10-12-82; Code 1980, 16-26) 
5-217 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; TRASH BURNERS 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant occupying any premises within the City limits to have in his/her possession or to use any open trash burner or incinerator or to burn any trash in any manner whatsoever within any residential area in the City. Incinerators which have been duly approved by the State may be used in the business or commercial areas in the City only in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code, State law and City ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Code 1958, 14.10; Code 1980, 16-27) 
5-218 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; CONVEYANCES 
A.  No person shall carry, cart, haul or convey any manure, rubbish, garbage, waste, yard waste, trash or any other refuse matter through the streets, alleys or public places of the City except in some tight vehicle, trailer, conveyance, box or bed so made, placed and loaded that none of its contents shall be spilled or strewn over, on or along such street, alley or public place. 
B.  When any garbage, trash, paper, leaves, waste, manure, yard waste or any refuse which may be blown or dropped from the truck vehicle or conveyance is being hauled or conveyed through the streets or alleys, the truck or vehicle or conveyance shall at all times, while in motion, be kept covered with a canvas, wood, or metal cover free from holes, except that construction debris may be covered with a net, which shall cover the entire portion of the load in the truck or vehicle and shall be firmly and closely attached to both sides and ends thereof. 
C.  No person shall carry, cart, haul or convey any garbage in any wagon, truck, trailer or any other conveyance unless the same is watertight, and is cleaned and disinfected with sufficient frequency so as not to cause offense to the eye or nose and is enclosed. 
D.  The Council may at any time by resolution provide that all said conveyances be constructed or provided with metal bodies or beds. 
(Code 1958, 14.11; Code 1980, 16-28; Ord. No. 6275, 5-13-97) 
5-219 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS AND MANURE 
    It shall be the duty of all property owners and tenants occupying premises upon which manure of any kind accumulates to provide suitable sealable and leak-proof receptacles therefor. Such receptacle shall be emptied promptly and completely at all such times as may be necessary to prevent the same from becoming injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or welfare of individuals or the public. Dead animals shall not be buried within the City nor within two (2) miles of the City in and above the course of ground water that is used for drinking purposes by the City. 
(Code 1958, 14.5; Code 1980, 16-29) 
5-220 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; SANITARY LANDFILL ESTABLISHED 
    The Council hereby designates the Kearney Area Solid Waste Agency Landfill, located northwest of the city, as the designated place or depository for garbage, trash and refuse generated by the citizens of the city or collected by the City garbage collection system. Persons using the sanitary landfill shall be subject to such regulations, including payment of fees, as may be established for its use by resolution of the Kearney Area Solid Waste Agency. 
(Code 1958, 14.9; Ord. No. 3552, 8, 10-12-82; Code 1980, 16-30; Ord. No. 6035, 11-28-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 13-1701, et seq., 13-2001, et seq., and 81-1501, et seq. 
5-221 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; FLAMMABLE MATERIALS 
    Highly inflammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection or disposal but shall be disposed of as directed by the Fire Administrator at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof. 
(Code 1980, 16-31) 
5-222 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; RULES AND REGULATIONS 
    The City Manager shall be empowered and authorized to promulgate rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the Council, concerning the garbage collection policies of the City which deal with subjects or matters concerning garbage collection not provided for by ordinance or resolution of the Council. The City Manager may authorize seasonal collection programs, such as neighborhood or self-service trash dumping. 
(Ord. No. 3552, 9, 10-12-82; Code 1980, 16-32) 
5-223 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS 
    The City of Kearney will provide for collection of refuse once per week for single family residential dwellings with 90-gallon containers. Each owner of land within the City shall separate from other refuse and not place in the garbage containers any yard wastes and other banned materials, such as lead/acid batteries, stoves, refrigerators and other appliances, oil, liquid waste and trees. 
(Ord. No. 5405, 4, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 8058, 12-22-2015) 
5-224 - COLLECTION REGULATIONS; ENFORCEMENT 
    Any person who violates any provision of this Division shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. Each day any such violation of this Division continues shall constitute a separate offense. Containers found or observed being used in violation of this Article may be collected by the City. The owner or occupant may retrieve their container by paying a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 5405, 5, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 6036, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
DIVISION II. - RECYCLING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Waste reduction and recycling, Neb. Rev. Stat. 81-15, 158.01 et seq. 

5-225 - DEFINITIONS 
    As used in this Article, the following words shall, unless the context otherwise clearly required, have the following meanings: 
    CITY MANAGER: Shall mean the City Manager of the City of Kearney or such City Manager's designated agent. 
    NON-RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: All other garbage, refuse, trash and waste materials not specifically defined as a "recyclable material," as defined below. 
    RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Shall mean the following: 
(a)  Newsprint (newspapers, but not including slick paper advertisements included in a newspaper); 
(b)  Aluminum cans and metal (tin) cans and containers; 
(c)  Glass bottles (but not including window glass); 
(d)  Waste motor oil; 
(e)  Automobile batteries; 
(f)  Cardboard; 
(g)  Rubber by-products and tires; 
(h)  Plastics; 
(i)  Plastic milk jugs; and/or 
(j)  Restaurant grease. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94) 
5-226 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
    No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or association shall for hire use the public rights-of-way to collect or transport any recyclable materials within the City limits of the City without having first obtained a permit as hereafter provided. All permits shall be issued for a one-year period commencing January 1 and ending on December 31 of each year, and no permit issued shall be transferable. No permit shall be granted until the applicant shall present a receipt for the fee and a certificate or policy of liability insurance as hereafter required to the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94) 
5-227 - APPLICATION 
    Application for such permit shall be made in writing to the City Clerk and shall include the address from which such business shall be conducted and shall be signed by the owner of said business. The application shall state the make, model, year and license number for each motor vehicle to be used by the applicant hereunder. 
    By signing an application, haulers thereby agree to indemnify and save harmless the City of Kearney from and against all claims, suits, damages, costs, losses, fines, penalties and expenses, including pollution clean-up costs which, in any manner, accrue, result or arise out of the conduct of the haulers' business activities in collecting recyclable materials, and the hauler further agrees to comply with all the terms and conditions of the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act (Section 13-2001, et seq., Laws 1992 LB1257). 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94) 
5-228 - PERMIT FEES 
    Every person who shall, for hire or reward, engage in the business of collecting or transporting recyclable materials or shall offer such service to the public shall pay an annual permit fee or any fractional part thereof as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
5-229 - APPROVAL 
    Upon filing with the City Clerk such application, together with a receipt showing payment of the license fee as provided for, said application shall be considered by the City Clerk. If the application complies with this Ordinance, all required fees have been paid and proof of insurance has been provided, and it does not appear that any City ordinance or state law will be violated by the operation, the City Clerk shall issue the license. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94) 
5-230 - COPIES 
    The City Clerk shall provide a copy of the license for each truck to be used. A copy shall be carried in each truck and securely fastened in a conspicuous place so as to be readily seen at all times. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94) 
5-231 - OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITY 
    The provisions of this Article shall apply to the person in immediate control or possession of any vehicle carrying recyclable materials, to all persons owning any vehicle used during any violation, and to all persons employing the person in such immediate control or possession for the purpose of hauling, depositing or dropping recyclable materials. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94) 
5-232 - OPERATOR RECORDS 
    A permit holder shall maintain records showing the customers served, the origin, amount and types of recyclables collected, the fees charged for collection, destination of recyclables, and the amount of revenue received for resale of the various types of recyclables, and shall make such records available for inspection and review by employees or agents of the City, upon reasonable notice. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94) 
5-233 - INSURANCE 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle hereunder or permit the same to be operated unless the permit holder shall first have provided proof of insurance in the form of an original certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 (one million dollars) to the City Clerk for general liability and automobile liability. Worker's compensation, including employer's liability, shall be carried and evidenced in such certificate with at least the following limits: 
(a)  $100,000 each accident; 
(b)  $500,000 policy limit; and 
(c)  $100,000 each employee. 
    Such insurance shall remain in full force and effect during the term of the permit. The haulers' general liability and automobile liability policies shall also name the City of Kearney as an additional insured. Said policies are to be issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Nebraska. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94) 
5-234 - EXCEPTIONS 
    The provisions of this Article shall not apply to: 
(a)  Garbage trucks or other vehicles operated by the City of Kearney collecting solid or liquid waste, trash, refuse, garbage or recyclable materials. 
(b)  Any person transporting recyclables in interstate commerce through the City of Kearney where such recyclable materials do not have their origin or destination within the City of Kearney or within its two mile zoning jurisdiction. 
(c)  The United States or the State of Nebraska. 
(d)  Commercial or private recyclers hauling and disposing of their own recyclable materials which originated or were generated at their place of residence or commercial facility. 
(e)  Haulers of recyclable materials collected from commercial businesses which do not require the materials to be placed upon the City's rights-of-way for collection. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94) 
5-235 - USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY 
    Recyclers shall not require or permit recyclable materials which they are collecting to be placed on the City's rights-of-way in such a manner as to impede, obstruct or interfere with the collection of solid waste materials by the trucks operated by the City of Kearney. All recyclable materials placed upon the rights-of-way for pick up by the recycler shall not be left upon the City right-of-way for a period longer than eight (8) hours. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94) 
5-236 - COLLECTION 
(a)  Placement for collection: Recyclable materials may be placed for collection on the right-of-way, but not on sidewalks or traveled portions of the street. 
(b)  Donation to others: Nothing in this ordinance is intended to prevent any person from donating or selling recyclable materials to any person, club, business, civic organization, charitable organization or any other organization. 
(c)  Recyclable materials shall be kept in closed or sealed plastic bags, plastic barrels or other containers in such a manner that the materials cannot be blown about or scattered by animals or otherwise scattered. 
(d)  The collection and handling of recyclable materials shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94) 
5-237 - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION 
    Permits granted under this Article may be suspended or revoked at any time by the City Manager for any violation of this Ordinance. The City Manager shall first hold a hearing, after reasonable notice to the permit holder concerning such revocation or suspension. The City Manager may, at any time, refuse to grant a permit on the basis of inadequate information supplied by the applicant or upon the basis of reasonable proof that the applicant disposed of recyclable materials improperly. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94) 
5-238 - APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL 
    Any person aggrieved by the issuance, denial, suspension, cancellation or revocation of any permit provided for in this Article, may, within five (5) days of receipt of written notice of the entry of such order or decision, appeal to the City Council by filing a Notice of Appeal with the City Clerk of the City of Kearney. The appeal to the Council shall be set for hearing before the City Council at its next regularly convened Council Meeting. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94) 
5-239 - PENALTY 
    Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-111 of this Code. Each distinct act or violation of the terms or provisions of this Division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 5736, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 6037, 11-28-95) 
ARTICLE 3. - HEALTH AND SANITATION 

5-301 - GENERALLY; ADOPTION OF STATE HEALTH DEPARTMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS 
    The rules and regulations of the Department of Health of the State as revised, adopted and promulgated in pamphlet form, dated September 27, 1954, are filed with the City Clerk, and such rules and regulations, together with any alterations or amendments thereto, are incorporated herein by reference, insofar as the same are applicable to cities of the first class, the same as though copied at full length in this Chapter. 
(Code 1958, 16.1; Code 1980, 17-1) 
5-302 - GENERALLY; ADDITIONAL HEALTH RULES AND REGULATIONS 
    The Board of Health may make and promulgate such rules and regulations, in addition to and not in conflict with the rules and regulations referred to in the preceding section, as may be expedient or necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this Chapter and when made and published in the manner provided for ordinances, shall have the full force and effect of an ordinance of the City. 
(Code 1958, 16.2; Code 1980, 17-2) 
5-303 - BOARD OF HEALTH; CREATED 
    There is hereby created and established a Board of Health in and for the City. 
(Code 1958, 16.3; Code 1980, 17-16) 
5-304 - BOARD OF HEALTH; COMPOSITION 
    The Board of Health shall consist of five (5) members and shall be composed of the Mayor/President and Vice-President of the Council, a City Physician to be appointed by the Mayor/President, subject to the approval of the Council, the Chief of Police and the City Manager. 
(Code 1958, 16.3; Code 1980, 17-17) 
5-305 - BOARD OF HEALTH; OFFICERS 
    The Mayor/President of the Council shall be the Chairperson of the Board of Health, the Chief of Police shall be its secretary and the City Physician shall be the medical adviser of the Board. In the absence or disability of the Mayor/President, the Vice-President of the Council shall perform the duties of the Chairperson of the Board. 
(Code 1958, 16.3; Code 1980, §17-18) 
5-306 - BOARD OF HEALTH; QUORUM 
    A majority of the members of the Board of Health shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1958, 16.3; Code 1980, 17-19) 
5-307 - BOARD OF HEALTH; RECORDS 
    The Board of Health shall keep a record of all its transactions, orders, notices and of such other action taken by it, which records shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be made public records of the City and shall be accessible to the public for inspection in the office of the Clerk at all reasonable hours. 
(Code 1958, 16.4; Code 1980, 17-20) 
5-308 - BOARD OF HEALTH; SUBSTITUTES 
    In the absence or disability of any member of the Board of Health, the Mayor/President may appoint a substitute for the duration of such absence or disability. The substitute so appointed shall have the power to do and perform all and every act as the regular member of the Board while serving on the Board. 
(Code 1958, 16.4; Code 1980, 17-21) 
5-309 - BOARD OF HEALTH; DUTIES GENERALLY 
    It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to safeguard the health of the people of the City, to prevent nuisances and unsanitary conditions and to abate the same and to enforce the provisions of this Code and ordinances of the City relating or pertaining to the health or sanitary conditions of the City. 
(Code 1958, 16.5; Code 1980, 17-22) 
5-310 - BOARD OF HEALTH; POWER OF QUARANTINE 
    The Board of Health, in case of a virulent epidemic that is dangerous to life, is hereby empowered to quarantine the entire City and permit no one to leave or come into the City during the period of quarantine. To enforce the quarantine the Board may, and if necessary shall, call to its aid every adult inhabitant of the City between the ages of eighteen (18) and sixty (60) years. It shall be unlawful for any person so called to refuse to aid the City in the manner directed by the Board of Health, in the enforcement of the quarantine. 
(Code 1958, 16.6; Code 1980, 17-23) 
ARTICLE 4. - NUISANCES 

5-401 - GENERALLY; DEFINITION 
    For the purposes of this Article, the word "nuisance" is hereby defined as any person doing an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either: 
A.  Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; or 
B.  Offends decency; or 
C.  Is offensive to the senses; or 
D.  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage; or 
E.  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or 
F.  Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. 
(Ord. No. 2840, 1, 6-13-78; Code 1980, 23-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-230 and 18-1720 
5-402 - GENERALLY; ILLUSTRATIVE ENUMERATION 
    The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain in or upon any private lot, building, structure or premises, or in or upon any street, avenue, alley, park or parkway, or at any other public or private place, of any one or more of the following conditions or things are hereby declared to be and constitute nuisances; provided that this enumeration shall not be deemed to be conclusive: 
A.  Any putrid, unsound or unwholesome meat, hides, skins, feathers or the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish or fowl. 
B.  Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits or like places which are not securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or malodorous. 
C.  Filthy, littered or trash-covered cellars, house-yards, barnyards, stable-yards, factory-yards, vacant areas in rear of stores, vacant lots, houses, buildings or premises. 
D.  Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from flies and the elements, or which is kept or handled in violation of any provision of this Code or ordinance of the City. 
E.  Liquid household waste, human excreta, butcher's trimmings, parts of fish or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any quantity; provided, nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in receptacles in a manner provided by the Code Enforcement Officer of the City, nor the dumping of non-putrefying waste in a place and manner provided by the Code Enforcement Officer. 
F.  Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron, wire metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery, broken glass, broken plaster, and all trash or abandoned material, unless the same be kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. 
G.  Accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates, packing crates, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw or other packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal not neatly piled, or any other waste materials, when any of said articles or materials create a condition in which flies or rats may breed or multiply, or which may be a fire danger or which are so unsightly as to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof. 
H.  Any unsightly building, billboard, wind turbine, or other structure, or any old, abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure or any building or structure commenced and left unfinished, which said buildings, billboards or other structures are either a fire hazard, a menace to the public health or safety, or are so unsightly as to depreciate the value of property in the vicinity thereof. 
I.  All places used or maintained as junk yards, or dumping grounds, or for the wrecking and disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons, which said places are kept or maintained so as to essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others, or which are so unsightly as to tend to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof. 
J.  Stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground. 
K.  Stockyards, pig pens, cattle pens, chicken pens or any other place, building or enclosure, in which animals or fowls of any kind are confined, or premises on which are stored tankage or any other animal or vegetable matter, or on which any animal or vegetable matter including grain is being processed, when said places in which said animals are confined, or said premises on which said vegetable or animal matter is stored, are maintained and kept in such a manner that foul and noxious odors are permitted to emanate therefrom, to the annoyance of inhabitants of the City, or are maintained and kept in such a manner as to be injurious to the public health. 
L.  Pits or excavations within the City not being used for the purpose of building where such pits or excavations are made and the leaving of any such pits or excavations in an exposed condition for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or longer. 
M.  Permitting, maintaining or allowing weeds, rank grass, sweet clover, any growth of worthless vegetation twelve (12) inches or more in height, and other plants of rank growth as defined by Nebraska Statutes and the Nebraska Department of Health Regulations on lots and grounds and on the streets and alleys on which the same abut. 
N.  The burning or disposal of refuse, sawdust, oil, fuel oil or other materials in such a manner as to cause or permit ashes, sawdust, suet, gases or other materials arising from such burning to damage the property of the residents of the City or to injure and endanger the health, comfort or repose of persons, or to injure the property of any person. 
O.  The throwing, depositing, placing or accumulation of litter on any lot, tract or piece of ground within this City. The term "litter" shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, paper, rag and ashes; 
2.  Wood, plaster, cement, brick or stone building rubble; 
3.  Grass, leaves and worthless vegetation; 
4.  Offal and dead animals; and 
5.  Any machine or machines, vehicle or vehicles, wind turbines, or parts of a machine, vehicle, or wind turbine which have lost their identity, character, utility or serviceability as such through deterioration, dismantling or the ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to perform their intended functions, or are cast off, discarded or thrown away or left as waste, wreckage or junk. 
P.  Any structure or part of a structure which remains or is damaged to present a dangerous or unsafe condition to the public including, but not limited to, structures damaged by fire, damaged by natural events or elements such as wind, tornadoes, earthquakes, flooding or settling of the ground; damaged by insect infestation; damaged due to the failure to provide reasonable maintenance; structures occupied or unoccupied which have broken windows, animals, insects, transients, or create an attraction to children; structures which, in the opinion of the building official, present an unsafe or dangerous condition to those on or near the property; unfinished structures where no occupancy permit has been issued and any building permit has lapsed for more than thirty (30) days; after eighteen (18) months from the date of the first building permit and where no inspection for newly completed work has been requested from the City within the last forty-five (45) days. 
Q.  Any wind turbine which has been in disuse for more than twelve (12) months. 
(Code 1958, §16.15-16.17, 19A.1, 21.41; Ord. No. 2840, 2, 6-13-78; Code 1980, 23-2; Ord. No. 5409, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 7351, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 7871, 2-11-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-230 and 18-1720 
5-403 - GENERALLY; ENFORCEMENT; EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION 
    The City Manager and the Chief of Police shall enforce the provisions of this Article against all nuisances within the City. The jurisdiction of the City shall extend to, and the territorial application of this chapter shall include, all territory within the city limits and within two (2) miles thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2840, §3, 4, 6-13-78; Code 1980, §23-3, 23-4; Ord. No. 5657, 9-14-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-1720 
5-404 - GENERALLY; PROHIBITED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. Any person shall, upon conviction of violating any provision of this Article, be guilty of an infraction for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1958, 19A.3; Ord. No. 2840, 9, 6-13-78; Code 1980, 23-5; Ord. No. 5409, 4-14-92) 
5-405 - GENERALLY; INSPECTION 
    The building official or his/her designee shall have the authority and it shall be his/her duty to enter into and examine at any and all times all buildings, lots and places or all descriptions within the City for the purpose of ascertaining the conditions thereof so far as the public health and safety may be affected thereby. If the property owner or occupant of any building or premises in the City prevents or attempts to prevent any employee of the City or its agent from entering or examining such building or premises for the purpose described above during reasonable hours, the City may then request an administrative search warrant from the district court. 
(Ord. No. 7351, 5-8-2007) 
5-406 - GENERALLY; NOTICE TO ABATE 
    Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the City or within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, the City Manager or his/her duly designated officer of the City shall give written notice to abate and remove the nuisance to the owner or the owner's duly authorized agent or to the occupant of the property, if any, upon which such nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance. 
(Code 1958, §16.7, 19A.2; Ord. No. 2840, 6, 6-13-78; Code 1980, 23-6; Ord. No. 5409, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 7351, 5-8-2007) 
5-407 - GENERALLY; CONTENTS OF NOTICE 
    This notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this Article shall contain: 
A.  An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing with the City within five (5) days from receipt of the notice. 
B.  The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary. 
C.  A description of what constitutes the nuisance. 
D.  A statement of acts necessary to abate and/or remove the nuisance. 
E.  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the City may abate such nuisance by having the work done and assess the cost and expense thereof against such property in the same manner as other special taxes are levied and assessed or may collect the costs from the owner of the property by civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2840, 6, 6-13-78; Code 1980, 23-7; Ord. No. 6038, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 5409, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 7351, 5-8-2007) 
5-408 - GENERALLY; SERVICE OF NOTICE 
    The notice to abate and/or remove a nuisance shall be served by personal service or certified mail upon each owner or owner's duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any. 
(Code 1958, §16.18, 19A.2; Ord. No. 2840, 6, 6-13-78; Code 1980, 23-8; Ord. No. 5409, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 6417, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 7351, 5-8-2007) 
5-409 - GENERALLY; HEARING 
A.  The building official is designated as the representative of the governing body for the purposes of conducting hearings requested by any recipient of a notice to abate a nuisance. 
B.  The recipient of a notice to abate a nuisance may request a hearing before expiration of the waiting period by filling a request for such hearing on a form available in the office of the building official. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to rules adopted by the building official and made available to the public in the office of the building official. The party requesting such hearing shall be given written notice no less than three (3) days in advance of the scheduled hearing. No action to abate the nuisance shall be taken by the City pending the outcome of the hearing. If the building official determines that the notice to abate a nuisance is without sufficient basis, the notice shall be rescinded. If the notice to abate is determined to have sufficient basis, the recipient shall be allowed the original waiting period to voluntarily abate the nuisance commencing with the date of the building official's determination and in default thereof, the City may take necessary action to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 7351, 5-8-2007) 
5-410 - GENERALLY; ABATEMENT BY CITY 
    Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of this Article to either request a hearing with the City or to comply with the order to abate and remove the same within five (5) days after receipt of the notice, the City Manager or other duly designated officer of the City shall proceed to abate such nuisance by having all necessary work done, and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof for submission to the Council. 
(Code 1958, 16.19; Ord. No. 2840, 6, 6-13-78; Ord. No. 3251, 1, 7-8-80; Code 1980, 23-9; Ord. No. 5409, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 7351, 5-8-2007) 
5-410.1 - LITTER; ABATEMENT BY CITY 
    The costs and expenses of any work performed by the City to abate and remove "littering" nuisances as defined at Section 5-402 subparagraph "O" shall be paid by the owner. If unpaid within two (2) months after such work is done, the City may either: (a) levy and assess the cost and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefited in the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied and assessed, or (b) recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 6417, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 7351, 5-8-2007) 
5-411 - GENERALLY; CITY'S COSTS DECLARED LIEN 
    The City may levy and assess any and all costs and expenses incurred by the City in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this Chapter upon the lot, piece or parcel of ground so benefited in the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied and assessed. After levy as special taxes, the same shall constitute a lien against the property so benefited, which lien shall be certified to the County Clerk and collected as provided by law. Such lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2840, 6, 6-13-78; Code 1980, 23-10; Ord. No. 5409, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 7351, 5-8-2007) 
5-412 - GENERALLY; ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF ENFORCEMENT 
    Whenever a nuisance exists, in addition to the procedure for abatement allowed by section 5-408, the City may proceed by a suit in the District Court to enjoin and abate the same, in the manner provided by law; or it may elect to enforce the provisions of this Article by complaint filed in the County Court; or it may proceed under both methods of enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2840, 5, 6-13-78; Ord. No. 3251, 2, 7-8-80; Code 1980, 23-11; Ord. No. 5409, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 7351, 5-8-2007) 
5-413 - REQUEST FOR APPEALS HEARING; CONDUCTED 
    Any person aggrieved by the determination of the building official to abate a nuisance provided for in this Article, may, within five (5) days of receipt of written notice to abate a nuisance, appeal to the City Council by filing a Notice of Appeal with the City Clerk of the City of Kearney. The appeal to the City Council shall be set for hearing before the City Council at its next regularly convened Council Meeting. 
(Ord. No. 5409, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 7351, 5-8-2007) 
5-414 - PENALTY 
    Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of an Infraction and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-112 of this Code. Each distinct act, or violation of the terms or provisions of this Article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 6417, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 7351, 5-8-2007) 
ARTICLE 5. - DISEASED TREES 

5-501 - DEFINITION 
    For the purposes of this Article, the words "city manager" shall mean any person authorized by the City Manager. 
(Code 1958, 19A.4; Code 1980, 23-25) 
5-502 - DEEMED NUISANCE 
A.  Trees of all species and varieties of elm, zelkova and planera infected with the fungus Ceratocystis ulmi, as determined by laboratory analysis, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be removed and burned. 
B.  Trees, or parts thereof, of elm, zelkova or planera in a dead or dying condition that may serve as breeding places for the European Elm Bark Beetle, (Scolytus multistriatus) and the native Elm Bark Beetle (Hylurgopinus rufipes) are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be removed and burned. 
(Code 1958, 19A.5; Code 1980, 23-26) 
5-503 - ENFORCEMENT OF THIS ARTICLE 
    The City Manager is charged with enforcement of this Article, and to that end may enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for purposes of inspecting trees thereon, and may remove such specimens as are required for purposes of analysis to determine whether or not the same are infected. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the City Manager from entering on private property for purposes of carrying out his/her duties hereunder or to interfere with such City Manager in the lawful performance of his/her duties under the provisions of this Article. 
(Code 1958, 19A.6; Code 1980, 23-27) 
5-504 - NOTICE FOR REMOVAL; CONTENTS 
    If trees on private property are found to be infected or in a dead or dying condition, the City Manager shall give to the owner of the premises where the same are situated, written notice of the existence of such disease or of the dead or dying condition of such trees or parts thereof, and require the removal and burning of the same under the direction and supervision of the City Manager. Such notice shall also notify the owner of the premises that if such tree is not removed and burned after ten (10) days' notice by publication or personal service, the City will proceed with the removal and burning of the same and assess the cost thereof against the property. 
(Code 1958, 19A.7; Code 1980, 23-28) 
5-505 - NOTICE FOR REMOVAL; SERVICE 
    Service of such notice shall be by personal service where the owner of the premises is a resident of the City; where the owner is a nonresident of the City, such notice shall be served by registered mail, addressed to such owner at his/her last-known address, and by publication at least one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
(Code 1958, 19A.8; Code 1980, 23-29) 
5-506 - REMOVAL OF DISEASED TREES; TREES ON PRIVATE LANDS 
A.  After due notice has been served upon the owner of such premises, it shall thereupon become his/her duty to cause such tree to be removed and burned under the direction and supervision of the City Manager. In lieu thereof, the person charged with such removal and burning may enter into an agreement with the City that such work be accomplished by the City at his/her expense and the expense and any interest shall be and are hereby declared to be a lien upon such property whereon such tree was situated, from the time the same becomes due until paid. The agreement shall be in such form as the City Attorney may prescribe, to be filed in the office of the Register of Deeds of this County. 
B.  If the owner fails, neglects or refuses to remove or burn such tree, the City Manager may, ten (10) days after notice is served, enter upon such private property and proceed with the removal and burning of the same, and the costs thereof shall be assessed against the real estate in the manner hereinafter provided. The City Manager shall, not later than the fifteenth (15th) day of August of each year, report such costs to the Council, whereupon the Council shall at a regular Council meeting, by resolution, assess such costs together with any assessment expenses against such real estate; provided, that notice of the time of such meeting of the Council shall be given in the manner provided by law. 
C.  When such assessment has been made, payment shall be made to the Director of Finance and Administration. If the amount of the assessment has not been paid by the first (1st) day of September following such assessment, the Director of Finance and Administration shall certify such amount to the County Treasurer for collection as other taxes. Such assessment shall be a lien upon such real estate from the date of assessment and shall become delinquent on the first (1st) day of December after the date of assessment and shall draw interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum from such date until paid. 
(Code 1958, 19A.9; Code 1980, 23-30) 
5-507 - REMOVAL OF DISEASED TREES; TREES ON PUBLIC LANDS 
    Infected trees, or trees or parts thereof in a dead or dying condition on public lands, shall be removed and burned by the City Manager within five (5) days of his/her discovery that such condition exists, and the cost thereof shall be borne by the City without being assessed to the abutting property owner. 
(Code 1958, 19A.10; Code 1980, 23-31) 
5-508 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE NOT EXCLUSIVE 
    Imposition of any penalty for a violation of this Article shall not be construed as a waiver of the right of the City to collect the costs of removal of such tree in accordance with the provisions of this Article and the provisions of this Code in such case made and provided, where it is necessary for the City to remove such tree in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
(Code 1958, 19A.11; Code 1980, 23-32) 
ARTICLE 6. - WEEDS 

5-601 - WEEDS; DEFINITION 
    As used in this Article, the term "weed" shall mean and include any plant commonly known as a weed, and shall include, but not be limited to, those plants defined as weeds, including restricted and prohibited noxious weeds as defined and determined by the Director of Agriculture of the State of Nebraska and any other rank growth of vegetation including bindweed (convolvulus arvensis), puncture vine (tribulus terrestris), leafy spurge (euphorbia esula), Canada thistle (cirsium arvense), perennial peppergrass (lepidium draba), Russian knapweed (centaurea picris), Johnson grass (sorghum halepense), nodding or musk thistle, quack grass (agropyron repens), perennial sow thistle (sonchus arvensis), horse nettle (solanum carolinense), bull thistle (cirsium lanceolatum), buckthorn (rahmnus sp.) (tourn), hemp plant (cannabis sativa), and ragweed (ambrosiaceae). 
(Ord. No. 4021, 1(1), 5-24-88; Code 1980, 35-1; Ord. No. 5408, 4-14-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-230 
5-602 - WEEDS; DUTY TO CUT WEEDS 
    The owner(s), occupant(s), or owner's duly authorized agent in charge of any lot, block, piece or parcel of land in the City, are hereby required to keep such real property, including abutting or adjoining streets, alleys and parkings, free and clear of all weeds, and shall cut and maintain as close to ground level as possible such weeds before the same blossoms or matures or attains a size sufficient to interfere in any manner with the health, convenience, property use or pleasure of persons living near or adjacent to such premises or persons using the streets, alleys or sidewalks and, in any event, prior to the weeds attaining a height of twelve (12) inches, and shall not permit the seeds therefrom to be scattered upon the same or adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 4021, 1(2), 5-24-88; Code 1980, 35-2; Ord. No. 5408, 4-14-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-230 
5-603 - WEEDS; NUISANCE 
    The Council does hereby declare the permitting, allowing or maintaining of any growth of twelve (12) inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation to be and constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 5408, 4-14-92) 
5-604 - WEEDS; NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS 
    The City Clerk shall, at least once each year during the months of May, June, July or August, cause to be published, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, a notice in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE 
    Notice to Property Owners, Owner's Duly Authorized Agents, Occupants, and Persons in Possession of Property pursuant to Chapter 5, Article 6 of the Kearney City Code, all property owners, owner's duly authorized agents, occupants and persons in possession of any tract, lot, block, piece or parcel of land in the City of Kearney are hereby notified that all weeds and noxious vegetation and other rank growth of vegetation now growing on private property in the City of Kearney, Nebraska, must be cut and maintained as close to ground level as possible within seven (7) days of publication of this Notice. 
    The permitting, allowing or maintaining of any growth of twelve (12) inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation has been declared to constitute a nuisance. The maintenance of a weed nuisance is punishable as an infraction. 
    If the owner, occupant or person in possession of any real estate shall fail, neglect or refuse to cut any weeds, noxious vegetation or rank growth of vegetation growing thereon and abate and remove the nuisance as directed, within five (5) days after receipt of notice, or request a hearing with the City, the City may have such work done. The costs and expenses of any such work shall be paid by the owner. If unpaid for two (2) months after such work is done, the City may either (a) levy and access the cost and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefited in the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied and assessed, or (b) recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys. 
    In the event the Council of the City of Kearney must cause such weeds, noxious vegetation and other rank growth of vegetation to be cut, such real estate may be cleaned of any refuse, debris, or other obstruction, if necessary, to permit the cutting of any such vegetation by machine. 
    If such vegetation is cut or caused to be cut by the City of Kearney, and/or if any refuse, debris, and other obstructions are caused to be removed to permit such cutting, the City shall charge a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule for each hour required to do the work, with a minimum charge as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule. In addition, an administrative fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be charged for each tract of land, lot, block or parcel of real property cut by the City and the total of all costs and expenses shall be reported to the Council for levy and assessment or for recovery in a civil action as the Council directs. 
    BY ORDER OF THE KEARNEY CITY COUNCIL 
    City Clerk 
    (Publication Date) 
(Ord. No. 4021, 1(3), 5-24-88; Code 1980, 35-3; Ord. No. 5408, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 6418, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
5-605 - WEEDS; REMOVAL OF WEEDS BY CITY; AUTHORIZATION 
    If the owner, occupant, or owner's duly authorized agent in charge of any lot, block, piece or parcel of ground, including abutting or adjoining streets, alleys and parkings, within the City fails, neglects or refuses to cut any weeds thereon and maintains a weed nuisance, the City may give notice to abate and remove such nuisance to each owner or owner's duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any, by personal service or certified mail. If within five (5) days after receipt of such notice, the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing with the City and fails to comply with the order to abate and remove such nuisance, the City may do or have such work done, including any necessary clearing of any refuse, debris, litter or other obstructions and removal of the cut weeds. The costs and expenses of any such work shall be paid by the owner. If unpaid for two (2) months after such work is done, the City may either (a) levy and access the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefited in the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied and assessed, or (b) recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground in the adjoining streets and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 4021, 1(4), 5-24-88; Code 1980, 35-4; Ord. No. 5408, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 6418, 7-14-98) 
5-606 - WEEDS; REMOVAL OF WEEDS BY CITY; MAINTENANCE AFTER INITIAL CUTTING 
    In the event a property owner, owner's agent or occupant fails, neglects or refuses to maintain the property and keep it mowed after an initial cutting by the City during the calendar year, the City may re-notify the owner or owner's duly authorized agent and the occupant, if any, by personal service or certified mail, to abate and remove the nuisance and may, if said owner or occupant neither requests a hearing nor removes and abates the nuisance within five (5) days after receipt of such notice, re-enter the property to cut and maintain the weeds, which costs and expenses may be assessed against the property, if not paid by the owner, or the City may file a civil action against the owner to recover costs and expenses of the work upon the property and adjoining streets and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 4021, 1(5), 5-24-88; Code 1980, 35-5; Ord. No. 5408, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 6418, 7-14-98) 
5-607 - WEEDS; REMOVAL OF WEEDS BY CITY; FEES 
    If weeds or vegetation are caused to be cut and removed by the City, and/or if any refuse, debris, litter or other obstructions are caused to be removed to permit such cutting, the City shall charge a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule for each hour with a minimum charge as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule. In addition, an administrative fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be charged for each tract of land, lot, block, piece or parcel of real property cut by the City and the total of all costs and expenses shall be reported to the Council for levy and assessment, or for recovery in a civil action as the Council directs. 
(Ord. No. 4021, 1(6), 5-24-88; Code 1980, 35-6; Ord. No. 5408, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 6418, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 7359, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
5-608 - WEEDS; REMOVAL OF WEEDS BY CITY; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS 
    The Public Works Director shall keep an accurate record of the costs of cutting weeds and noxious vegetation growth from each specific lot, block, piece or parcel of land and he/she shall report the same to the City Clerk, whereupon the City Clerk shall mail a statement of such cost to the last known address of the owner, occupant or person in charge of such property, and if such costs are not paid within two (2) months from the mailing of such notice, the Council may proceed to levy and assess the costs and expenses thereof against the property as a special assessment, and the City Clerk shall certify such assessment to the County Clerk for collection of payment to the City the same as other assessments and taxes are collected, or the Council may direct the City Manager to file a civil action against the owner to recover costs and expenses of the work upon the property and adjoining streets and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 4021, 1(7), 5-24-88; Code 1980, 35-7; Ord. No. 5408, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 6418, 7-14-98) 
5-609 - WEEDS; PENALTY 
    Any owner, occupant, or person in charge of any lot, block, piece or parcel of land within the City who creates, allows, permits or maintains a weed nuisance or violates the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of an infraction. Each distinct violation, and each day any such violation of the Article continues, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4021, 1(8), 5-24-88; Code 1980, 35-8; Ord. No. 5408, 4-14-92) 
Chapter 6 - LIBRARY 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

6-101 - LIBRARY; ESTABLISHED; HOW DESIGNATED 
    There is hereby established in the City a public library which shall be perpetually kept and maintained by the City and shall be known as the Kearney Public Library. 
(Code 1958, 18.2; Code 1980, 20-1; Ord. No. 5406, 1, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 8333 , § 1, 3-12-2019) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 51-201 
6-102 - LIBRARY; DEFINITIONS 
    For purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    BASIC SERVICES: Shall include, but not be limited to, free loan of circulating print and non-print materials from the local collection, general reference, information services, internet access, classes and programs. 
    BOARD: Shall be construed to mean the "Library Advisory Board" of the City. 
    LIBRARY OR PUBLIC LIBRARY: Shall mean the Kearney Public Library. 
    NONBASIC SERVICES: Shall include, but not be limited to, use of: 
Photocopying equipment; 
Media equipment; and 
Computers and meeting room spaces. 
(Ord. No. 5406, 2, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 8333 , § 2, 3-12-2019) 
6-103 - LIBRARY; FUND 
    There is hereby created a public library fund which shall consist of the following: 
A.  The proceeds of the tax levy authorized for such purpose; 
B.  All funds donated for the maintenance and support of the library; 
C.  All monies collected for violation of rules and regulations established by the Library Board; and 
D.  All other monies received for the use and support of the library regardless of the source. (Code 1958, 18.3; Code 1980, 20-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 51-215 
6-104 - LIBRARY; DONATIONS FOR BENEFIT OF LIBRARY 
    Any person may make any donation of money, lands or property for the benefit of the public library. The title to the property donated may be made to and shall vest in the City for the public library and such property shall thereafter be exempt from taxation. 
(Code 1958, 18.7; Code 1980, 20-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 51-215 
6-105 - LIBRARY; EXPENDITURE OF LIBRARY FUNDS 
    All taxes levied or collected and all funds donated or in any way acquired for the erection, maintenance or support of the City public library, shall be kept for the use of the City public library, separate and apart from the other funds of the City. 
(Code 1958, 18.4; Code 1980, 20-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 51-209 
6-106 - LIBRARY; COLLECTION OF PENALTIES 
    Penalties imposed or accruing by any bylaw, rule or regulation of the Library Board may be recovered in a civil action before any court having jurisdiction. Such action shall be instituted in the name of the City and moneys collected in such actions shall be forthwith placed in the City treasury to the credit of the Library Fund. 
(Code 1958, 18.6; Code 1980, 20-5) 
6-107 - LIBRARY; AVAILABILITY 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the public library shall be available to the free use of the inhabitants of the City, subject always to such reasonable regulations as the City may adopt to render such library of the greatest use to the inhabitants of the City. The City may exclude from the use of the library and reading rooms any person who willfully violates or refuses to comply with the rules and regulations established for the governing thereof. 
(Code 1958, 18.5; Code 1980, 20-6; Ord. No. 5406, 3, 4-14-92) 
6-108 - REPEALED 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8329, § 1, adopted February 26, 2019, repealed § 6-108. Former § 6-108 pertained to library; circulating libraries, works of art, etc. and derived from § 18.8 of the Code of 1958; and § 20-7 of the Code of 1980. 
6-109 - LIBRARY; DISPOSITION OF MONEYS RECEIVED 
    All moneys received by the Library Board or by any librarian or assistant from any source for the use and support thereof, shall be paid to the Director of Finance and Administration. 
(Code 1958, 18.9; Code 1980, 20-8) 
6-110 - LIBRARY; DAMAGES, ETC., TO LIBRARY PROPERTY 
    No person shall write upon, injure, deface, tear, damage or destroy any book, newspaper, plate, engraving, art print, art copy or any other property or thing of value belonging to, on loan to, or in the care of the public library, or, without proper authorization, remove, take or carry off any book, record, DVD, CD or other property of the library, or fail to return any book, record, DVD, CD or other property of the library at the time of the expiration of its loan period. A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-112 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, 18.10; Ord. No. 3315, 1, 1-27-81; Code 1980, 20-9; Ord. No. 5406, 4, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 8333 , § 3, 3-12-2019) 
6-111 - LIBRARY; NONDISCRIMINATION 
    No service of the library shall be denied to any person because of race, sex, religion, age, color, national origin, ancestry, physical handicap or marital status. 
(Ord. No. 5406, 5, 4-14-92) 
ARTICLE 2. - LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD 

6-201 - LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD; CREATED 
    There is hereby created a Library Advisory Board in and for the City. 
(Ord. No. 5406, 6, 4-14-92) 
6-202 - COMPOSITION 
    The Library Advisory Board shall consist of five (5) members chosen from the citizens at large. Neither the Mayor nor any member of the Council shall be a member of the Library Advisory Board. The City Manager and the Library Director shall be ex-officio members of the Board. 
(Code 1958, 2.22; Code 1980, 2-99; Code 1980, 20-23; Ord. No. 5406, 6, 4-14-92) 
6-203 - METHOD OF SELECTION 
    The members of the Kearney City Library Advisory Board shall be chosen by appointment by a majority vote of the members of the Council. 
(Ord. No. 3172, 1, 3-11-80; Code 1980, 20-24; Ord. No. 5406, 6, 4-14-92) 
6-204 - TERMS 
    The Board members first appointed shall hold their office, three (3) for terms of four (4) years, and two (2) for terms of two (2) years from the first (1st) day of July following their appointment, and their successors shall each serve four (4) year terms. A Board member shall serve a maximum of two (2) consecutive terms. Interim appointments for terms of less than two (2) years shall not be considered a term. 
(Res. No. 79-33, 4-10-79; Code 1980, 20-25; Ord. No. 5406, 6, 4-14-92) 
6-205 - FILLING VACANCIES 
    In case of vacancies by resignation, removal, illness or any other reason, the Mayor, with Council's approval, shall immediately appoint a new member to the Board for the unexpired vacated term. 
(Code 1980, 20-26; Ord. No. 5406, 6, 4-14-92) 
6-206 - OFFICERS 
    At their first (1st) meeting in July, the Board members shall elect a president, secretary, treasurer and such other officers as may be necessary. 
(Code 1980, 20-27; Ord. No. 5406, 6, 4-14-92) 
6-207 - POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY 
    The members of the Board shall have such powers and perform such duties as may be conferred upon and required of them by the Council. The Board is an advisory board, thus having only those powers and duties to advise and recommend to the Council and City Manager as are granted to them by the Council. 
(Code 1980, 20-29; Ord. No. 5406, 6, 4-14-92) 
6-208 - POWERS 
    The Board shall have the power to recommend for adoption and imposition by the Council, general rules, penalties and forfeitures for trespasses upon or injury to the library grounds, rooms, books or other property, for failure to return any book, video tape or other loaned material; or for violation of any bylaw, rule or regulation adopted by the Council for the library, and to recommend reasonable fees, not to exceed the library's actual cost, for nonbasic services. The public library shall make its basic services available without charge to all residents of the City. 
(Ord. No. 5406, 6, 4-14-92) 
6-209 - QUORUM 
    Three (3) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum; provided, any motion, resolution or order passed by the Board in order to be valid shall require the vote or assent of three (3) members of the Board. 
(Code 1980, 20-28; Ord. No. 5406, 6, 4-14-92) 
6-210 - MEETINGS; RECORDS 
    The Board may adopt all procedural rules necessary to provide for regular and special meetings of the Board and for the conduct of its business. The proceedings of the Board shall be recorded and preserved in accordance with the Public Meetings Law, sections 84-1408 R.R.S., et seq. 
(Ord. No. 5406, 6, 4-14-92) 
6-211 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
    The Board shall, from time to time, recommend general bylaws, rules or regulations for the operation and government of the library to the City Manager and file a copy thereof with the City Clerk to be recorded and indexed in the records of the Clerk's office. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Council for approval and adoption, and when so approved and adopted by Council, shall be published in a manner as provided for ordinances, and a copy thereof shall be kept on file at the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. A violation by any person of any such rule or regulations after adoption by the Council shall be deemed a violation of this Code, punishable as an infraction. 
(Code 1980, 20-31; Ord. No. 5406, 6, 4-14-92) 
Chapter 7 - PARK AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

7-101 - SELLING OF GOODS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS 
A.  The selling or vending of goods, wares, merchandise, animals, birds, food or food products, drinks, candy, confections, ice drinks, or any other merchandise, goods or materials, including ice cream, is prohibited within the boundaries or confines of, or upon the streets adjacent to or running through any park area owned, operated or under the jurisdiction of the City of Kearney, except that, the City Park and Recreation Director may authorize community-oriented, nonprofit organizations, local service clubs and similar organizations to operate concessions, or have vendors within the parks or public areas special events under such controls the Director may require including appropriate insurance coverage and a facility request form. The Director, at his/her discretion, may require that the request be submitted to the Advisory Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners and then to City Council for consideration. 
B.  All requests for operation of concessions and conducting exhibits, lectures, and entertainments shall be requested to the City Park and Recreation Director, using the appropriate facility request forms, for consideration. The Director, at his/her discretion, may require that the request be submitted to the Advisory Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners and then to the Council for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 3852, §1, 2, 6-10-86; Code 1980, 26-1; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014; Ord. No. 8117, 11-8-2016) 
7-102 - SELLING OF PROGRAMMED SERVICES IN NON-RENTABLE AND RENTABLE PARK AREAS 
A.  The selling of programmed services is prohibited within the boundaries or confines of any non-rentable park areas owned, operated, or under the jurisdiction of the City of Kearney, except the Director of Park and Recreation may authorize community-oriented, nonprofit or for profit operations, local service clubs and similar organizations to conduct programmed services provided the service is within non-rentable park area and is under such controls the Director may require including appropriate insurance coverage and a facility request form, which includes a hold harmless agreement. The Director, at his/her discretion, may require that the request be submitted to the Advisory Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners and then to City Council for consideration. Some essential requirements for programmed services in a non-rentable park area include: 
1.  The service provided does not significantly block or limit public use. 
2.  The service provided does not require extra maintenance and upkeep by City personnel. 
3.  The service provided does not harm City facilities or grounds. 
4.  The service provided does not create a liability issue. 
B.  The selling of programmed services is prohibited within the boundaries or confines of the following rentable park areas that are owned, operated, and under the jurisdiction of the City of Kearney: trails, shelters and buildings. However, the Director of Park and Recreation may authorize community-oriented, nonprofit or for profit operations, local service clubs and similar organizations to conduct programmed services provided the service is within the rentable park facility under such controls the Director may require including appropriate insurance coverage and a facility request form, which includes a hold harmless agreement. A rental fee associated with the facility requested will apply. The Director, at his/her discretion, may require that the request be submitted to the Advisory Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners and then to City Council for consideration. 
C.  The selling of programmed services is prohibited within the boundaries or confines of the following rentable park areas that are owned, operated, and under the jurisdiction of the City of Kearney: ballfields, tennis courts, inline hockey rink, and other athletic facilities. However, the Director of Park and Recreation may authorize community-oriented, nonprofit or for profit operations, local service clubs and similar organizations to conduct programmed services within the rentable park facility under such controls the Director may require including: 
1.  Appropriate insurance coverage and a facility request form. 
2.  Rental fee. 
3.  Written approval from the applicable athletic association/organization (i.e., Kearney Little League Baseball, KPR Softball, Kearney Tennis Association, etc.). 
    The Director, at his/her discretion, may require that the request be submitted to the Advisory Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners and then to City Council for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 8117, 11-8-2016) 
ARTICLE 2. - ADVISORY BOARD OF PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSIONERS 

7-201 - ADVISORY BOARD OF PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSIONERS; DEFINED 
    For the purpose of this Article, wherever the word "Board" appears it shall be construed to mean the "Advisory Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners" of the City. 
(Code 1958, 2.13; Code 1980, 26-16) 
7-202 - CREATED 
    There is hereby created an Advisory Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners in and for the City. 
(Code 1958, 2.14; Code 1980, 26-17) 
7-203 - COMPOSITION 
    The Board shall be composed of six (6) resident freeholders in the City and two (2) residents of Buffalo County as appointed by the Buffalo County Board of Supervisors. 
(Code 1958, 2.14; Code 1980, 26-18; Ord. No. 5407, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 6953, 4-22-2003; Ord. No. 7670, 9-13-2011) 
7-204 - APPOINTMENT 
    Six (6) members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor/President, subject to the approval of the Council. Two (2) members of the Board shall be appointed by the Buffalo County Board of Supervisors. 
(Code 1958, 2.15; Code 1980, 26-19; Ord. No. 5407, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 6953, 4-22-2003; Ord. No. 7670, 9-13-2011) 
7-205 - TERMS 
    The members of the Board shall serve for a term of five (5) years; provided, the initial members of the Board shall be appointed in such a manner as to provide staggered terms, with one and two (1-2) term(s) expiring each year. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall serve for two years. 
(Code 1958, 2.15; Code 1980, 26-20; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014) 
7-206 - FILLING VACANCIES 
    In case of illness, resignations or vacancy in office for any other reason, the Mayor/President, with Council approval, shall immediately appoint a member to the Board of the unexpired term so created by a vacancy among the six (6) members appointed by the Mayor/President. The Buffalo County Board of Supervisors shall have power to fill vacancies occurring among the two (2) members appointed by the Board of Supervisors. 
(Code 1958, 2.15; Code 1980, 26-21; Ord. No. 5407, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 6953, 4-22-2003; Ord. No. 7670, 9-13-2011) 
7-207 - EX OFFICIO MEMBERS 
    The City Manager and the Chairperson of the County Board of Supervisors shall serve as ex officio members of the Board. 
(Code 1958, §2.15, 2.22; Code 1980, §2-99, 26-22; Ord. No. 5407, 4-14-92) 
7-208 - ELECTION OF CHAIRPERSON AND VICE-CHAIRPERSON 
    At the first meeting of the Board in August of each year, the members of the Board shall meet and elect one (1) of their own members as Chairperson and another one (1) as Vice-Chairperson. 
(Code 1958, 2.16; Code 1980, 26-23; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014) 
7-209 - QUORUM 
    Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1958, 2.16; Code 1980, 26-24; Ord. No. 5407, 4-14-92) 
7-210 - MEETINGS; RECORDS 
    The Board shall adopt all necessary rules providing for regular and special meetings of the Board and for the conduct of its business. The proceedings of the Board shall be set down and preserved in record books which the Board shall provide for that purpose. The records of the Board shall be open to the public as other records of the City. 
(Code 1958, 2.17; Code 1980, 26-25) 
7-211 - SECRETARY 
    The Board shall have the power and authority to employ a secretary, who may or may not be a member of the Board and to pay the secretary out of park and recreation funds with the approval of the Council. The duties of the secretary shall be prescribed by the Board. 
(Code 1958, 2.18; Code 1980, 26-26) 
7-212 - DUTIES GENERALLY 
    The Board is an advisory board, thus having only that duty and power to advise and recommend to the Council and City Manager in the following areas of concern: laying out, improvement, beautification and design of grounds, bodies of water and buildings now owned or hereafter acquired for public parks and recreational facilities and to advise and recommend for program planning and leadership of recreational activities. 
(Code 1958, 2.19; Code 1980, 26-27) 
7-213 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
    The Board may prepare such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary for the management and care of City parks and to insure the orderly use of parks by the public and the protection thereof from acts of vandalism or malicious mischief. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Council for approval and adoption, and when so approved and adopted by Council shall be published in a manner as provided for ordinances, and a copy thereof shall be kept on file at the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. A violation of these rules may be punished by the imposition of a fine by the court in an amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. 
(Code 1958, 2.19; Code 1980, 26-28; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014) 
7-214 - ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES 
    The hiring and dismissing of personnel to conduct functions of the park and recreation department are the duties of the department head and the City Manager. 
(Code 1958, 2.20; Code 1980, 26-29) 
7-215 - DUTIES REGARDING APPROVED AND PROHIBITED TREES LIST 
    It shall be the additional responsibility of the Advisory Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners to study, investigate, counsel, develop, and revise as needed, written plans for the care, preservation, trimming, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, public ways, streets and alleys. Such plans, upon revision(s), shall be made available to the Council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive Approved and Prohibited Trees List for the City of Kearney, Nebraska. The Advisory Board, with assistance from the Park and Recreation Department staff, shall prepare an annual work plan for each calendar year. The Advisory Board, when requested by the Council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Ord. No. 3879, 1, 12-9-86; Code 1980, 26-30; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014) 
ARTICLE 3. - CEMETERY 

7-301 - SALE OF LOTS; PURCHASE PRICE 
    The purchase price of lots and burial spaces in the City cemetery shall be that fixed by the Council as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. Such price shall be adequate to provide for the perpetual care of the lot or burial space as well as the cemetery in general. 
(Code 1958, 9.1; Code 1980, 11-1; Ord. No. 5282, 7-23-91; Ord. No. 6051, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 6320, 9-9-97; Ord. No. 6509, 2-23-99; Ord. No. 6523, 4-13-99; Ord. No. 6569, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 6708, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 6776, 4-24-2001; Ord. No. 6911, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 7119, 9-14-2004; Ord. No. 7121, 9-28-2004; Ord. No. 7262, 6-13-2006; Ord. No. 7344, 4-10-2007; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
7-302 - SALE OF LOTS; RESTRICTIONS IN MEMORIAL FIELD 
    All that portion of Memorial Cemetery which lies west of Avenue I and south of Memorial Drive shall be known as Memorial Field and sales of all lots and burial spaces in Memorial Field shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  No sale or transfer of such burial lots, or the right of interment therein, shall be valid until such sale or transfer shall be duly entered upon the books of the City Manager. 
B.  No trees, shrubs, flowers or other plants shall be planted upon such lot by the purchasers. 
C.  No monument or other stone shall be placed upon such lots except a granite headmarker fourteen (14) inches by twenty-six (26) inches and not less than six (6) inches in depth, and which may, at the option of the owner, have securely attached thereto a bronze plate or plaque on the upper surface thereof, and which may be placed upon a suitable foundation with the upper surface of such marker level with the sod by the section, upon the request and at the expense of the lot owner; provided, however, that the restrictions herein provided as to size and material shall not apply to the placing of horizontal markers furnished gratuitously by the United States of America to deceased United States servicemen or veterans. Monument size for half spaces shall be eight (8) inches by sixteen (16) inches by six (6) inch depth. 
D.  Lots 1 to 20, inclusive, in Memorial Field shall be set aside for the burial of United States War Veterans and such burial spaces shall be furnished in such lots for the burial of United States War Veterans without charge. 
E.  Single burial spaces or half spaces for infant burials may be sold in designated areas by special permission from the City Manager. 
    The resale of any lots or burial spaces by any purchaser shall be subject to the same restrictions as to sale in groups as is hereinbefore set forth. 
(Code 1958, 9.2; Code 1980, 11-2) 
7-303 - SALE OF LOTS; EXECUTION OF CONVEYANCE 
    All certificates of conveyance of cemetery lots owned by the City shall be signed by the Mayor/President and countersigned by the City Clerk, under the seal of the City. 
(Code 1958, 9.3; Code 1980, 11-3) 
State Law reference- Conveyance of cemetery lots, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-243 
7-304 - SALE OF LOTS; RECORDATION OF CONVEYANCE 
    All certificates of conveyance of cemetery lots owned by the City shall be recorded by the City Clerk and may be recorded in the office of the Country Register of Deeds. 
(Code 1958, 9.4; Code 1980, 11-4) 
7-305 - SALE OF LOTS; TRANSFER OF TITLE AFTER SALE BY CITY 
    In order to transfer the title to a cemetery lot shown by a certificate of conveyance, the grantee shall surrender the certificate to the Cemetery Supervisor, who shall cancel the same and note such cancellation in his/her records, and shall issue a new certificate in lieu thereof upon receipt of the fee prescribed for recording expense and service in the case of original certificate of conveyance. 
(Code 1958, 9.5; Code 1980, 11-5) 
7-306 - SPECULATION IN CEMETERY LOTS 
    Burial lots shall not be held and used for speculation, and no lot proprietor shall permit interment in or upon any lot held by him/her for compensation. 
(Code 1958, 9.6; Code 1980, 11-6) 
7-307 - CARE GENERALLY 
    The City agrees to care for all lots, parts of lots or burial spaces in cemeteries of the City, now platted or to be platted, in accordance with the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the City, and to keep the lots and grounds free from weeds. 
(Code 1958, 9.7; Code 1980, 11-7) 
7-308 - BURIAL IN CITY 
    No burial shall be permitted in any church yard or any other place with the City, except that crèches for cremated remains may be constructed subject to approval of the Council. 
(Code 1958, 9.10; Code 1980, 11-10) 
7-309 - ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS 
    The City Manager may prepare such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary for the management and care of the cemeteries, and to insure the orderly use of the cemeteries by the owners of lots and the public and the protection thereof from acts of vandalism or malicious mischief. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Council for approval and adoption, and when so approved and adopted by the Council, shall be published, in the manner provided for the publication of ordinances, and at least three (3) copies thereof shall be kept on file at the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. A violation of these rules may be punished by the imposition of a fine by the court in an amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. 
(Code 1958, 9.11; Code 1980, 11-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-244 and 16-245 
7-310 - ABANDONMENT 
    Lots in the cemetery may be abandoned as provided in Article 7 of Chapter 12 of the Revised Statutes of Nebraska, as amended. 
(Code 1980, 11-12) 
ARTICLE 4. - GOLF ADVISORY BOARD 

7-401 - GOLF ADVISORY BOARD; CREATED 
    There is hereby created a Golf Advisory Board in and for the City. 
(Ord. No. 6003, 8-22-95) 
7-402 - COMPOSITION 
    The Golf Advisory Board shall consist of six (6) members chosen from the citizens at large. Neither the Mayor nor any member of the Council shall be a member of the Golf Advisory Board. The Director of Park and Recreation Department shall be an ex-officio member of the Board. Additionally, one member of the Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall serve as an ex-officio member as chosen by that Board. 
(Ord. No. 6003, 8-22-95; Ord. No. 6010, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014) 
7-403 - APPOINTMENT 
    Names of persons willing to serve the City in the capacity of a member of the Golf Advisory Board shall complete an Expression of Interest form. The members of the Golf Advisory Board shall be appointed by the Mayor/President and approved by the Council. 
(Ord. No. 6003, 8-22-95; Ord. No. 7332, 3-13-2007) 
7-404 - TERMS 
    The Board members shall hold their office for a term of four (4) years. A Board member shall serve a maximum of two (2) consecutive terms. Interim appointments for terms of less than two (2) years shall not be considered a term. 
(Ord. No. 6003, 8-22-95; Ord. No. 6010, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 7332, 3-13-2007) 
7-405 - FILLING VACANCIES 
    In case of vacancies by resignation, removal, illness or any other reason, the Mayor, with Council's approval, shall immediately appoint a new member to the Board for the unexpired vacated term. 
(Ord. No. 6003, 8-22-95) 
7-406 - OFFICERS 
    At their first (1st) meeting in August, the Board members shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson and such other officers as may be necessary. All members of the Golf Advisory Board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 6003, 8-22-95; Ord. No. 7332, 3-13-2007; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014) 
7-407 - POWERS AND DUTIES 
    The Board is an advisory board, thus advising and recommending to the City Council and City Manager on all matters concerning the development and use of the Meadowlark Hills Golf Course. The primary functions and duties include: 
  updating City Council on a long-range plan for the development and improvement for the municipal golf course; 
  capital improvement projects; 
  recommending policies, fees, charges, promotions, tournament requests policies, procedures, and rules for the use of the municipal course; 
  and all other matters relating to the golf course which may be requested by the City Manager or City Council. 
    Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Council for approval and adoption, and when so approved and adopted by Council, shall be published in a manner as provided for ordinances, and a copy thereof shall be kept on file at the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. A violation by any person of any such rule or regulation after adoption by the Council shall be deemed a violation of this Code, punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor, as specified. 
(Ord. No. 6003, 8-22-95; Ord. No. 7332, 3-13-2007) 
7-408 - PARTICIPATION 
    Members of the Golf Advisory Board are expected to attend meetings on a regular basis. Whenever a Board member misses three (3) consecutive meetings or his/her attendance falls below seventy-five (75) percent in a 12-month period, the Mayor/President will formally request, by letter, clarification from the identified board member of the reason for lack of attendance. If no attendance improvement plan can be agreed upon by the Mayor/President and board member, the board member may be asked to consider resignation. 
(Ord. No. 6003, 8-22-95; Ord. No. 7332, 3-13-2007) 
7-409 - QUORUM 
    Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum; provided any motion, resolution or order passed by the Board in order to be valid shall require the vote or assent of four (4) members of the Board. 
(Ord. No. 6003, 8-22-95; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014) 
7-410 - MEETINGS; RECORDS 
    The Board may adopt all procedural rules necessary to provide for regular and special meetings of the Board and for the conduct of its business. The proceedings of the Board shall be recorded and preserved in accordance with the Public Meetings Law, Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1408 R.R.S., et seq. 
(Ord. No. 6003, 8-22-95) 
7-411 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
    The Board shall, from time to time, recommend general bylaws, rules or regulations for the operation and government of the golf course to the City Manager and file a copy thereof with the City Clerk to be recorded and indexed in the records of the Clerk's office. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Council for approval and adoption, and when so approved and adopted by Council, shall be published in a manner as provided for ordinances, and a copy thereof shall be kept on file at the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. A violation by any person of any such rule or regulation after adoption by the Council shall be deemed a violation of this Code, punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor, as specified. 
(Ord. No. 6003, 8-22-95) 
ARTICLE 5. - TREES AND SHRUBBERY 

7-501 - STATEMENT OF INTENT 
    The selection, planting, maintenance, and removal of trees and ornamental plantings along public ways within the City of Kearney substantially affect such matters as pedestrians and vehicle safety, the location and maintenance of utility services, tree maintenance costs, the incidence of tree diseases and the general appearance of the cityscape; therefore, it is hereby found and determined that such selection, planting, maintenance, and removal are matters of city-wide concern over which the City must exercise the control set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007) 
7-502 - APPROVED AND PROHIBITED TREES LIST 
    The Director shall prepare and maintain an "Approved and Prohibited Trees List" for the City, showing thereon the genus, species and variety of trees which may hereafter be planted in or upon any street, parkway, sidewalk space, or other public way within the City, as well as trees that may not be planted in such areas, and all such tree planting shall conform to this list. A current copy of said list shall be made available for inspection by the public at the office of the Director. 
    The term "Director" whenever used in this Article shall mean the Director of Park and Recreation of the City of Kearney, Nebraska or his authorized agent or representative. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014) 
7-503 - LANDSCAPE PLANTING THE RIGHT-OF-WAY SPACE 
    The space between the lot line and existing or projected curb line on each side of every street in the City (hereafter known as the right-of-way space) shall be used only for the location of approved street trees in accordance with Section 7-502 of this Article, turf grass, shrubs, perennial and annual flowering plants, ornamental grasses, vegetable gardens, and ground covers. Shredded wood mulch may be placed around street trees and landscape plantings within the sidewalk space. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007) 
7-504 - STREET TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
    The Director may, subject to approval of the City Manager, request permission to enter upon and plant one or more street trees on property adjacent to public right-of-way pursuant to an easement agreement when there is insufficient land available for the planting and proper growth of the street tree or trees in the public right-of-way. Such easement agreement shall be conditioned upon the owner of the property agreeing to assume ownership and liability for the street tree and the responsibility for its proper maintenance which shall include watering as often as required by necessity, cultivating, mulching, and trimming or its removal if dead, dying, diseased, or hazardous. 
    The determination of insufficient of available land shall be based upon existing roadway width, except in those cases where design work is underway or completed for a roadway project to be constructed within the next year, in which case the new curb location shall control. A List of where such trees have been planted and the reasons for such plantings shall be available at the Park and Recreation Office upon request. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014) 
7-505 - MAINTENANCE OF STREET TREES 
    Except as may otherwise be provided by the City Council for Council-created street tree planting/care programs, the trimming, spraying, removing, and destroying of all trees now existing, the selecting, planting, trimming, spraying, removing, and destroying of all street trees hereafter planted in or upon any street, parkway, sidewalk space, or other public right-of-way within the City, shall be done by and at the expense of the property owner; provided, the Director may, in accordance with the provisions of this Article, issue a permit to any applicant therefore, allowing such person to plant, remove, or destroy any such tree. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007) 
7-506 - MAINTENANCE OF LANDSCAPE PLANTING WITHIN RIGHT-OF-WAY SPACE 
    The owner of the property abutting the sidewalk space shall be responsible for the routine care of such landscape plantings within the sidewalk space, including watering, mowing, raking and disposing of leaves, twigs, and other debris, weed control in accordance with Section 7-502 of this Article, and trimming and pruning of shrubs and other ornamental landscape plantings. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007) 
7-507 - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT 
    Any person desiring to plant, remove, or destroy any street tree in or upon any street, parkway, sidewalk space, or other public way within the City shall first make a written application to the Director so to do, upon forms furnished by the City. Such application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the person, firm, or corporation doing the work, and such other information as the Director may require. At the time of making such application, the applicant shall agree in writing to save the City harmless and to protect the City and the public at all times in connection with such work under such permit, and to do such work in conformance with specifications set forth by the City. Also, at the time of making such application, the applicant shall furnish the Director with the written consent to the issuance of such permit from the owner of the property abutting the public property upon which such work is proposed to be done. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007) 
7-508 - ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, REQUIREMENT PERTAINING TO PLANTING, MAINTAINING, REMOVAL AND DESTRUCTION 
    After inspection of the location in question, if in his opinion it is desirable that such tree be planted, removed, or destroyed, the Director shall issue a permit therefore. Such permit shall set forth the name and address of the owner of the property abutting the public property upon which such work is to done; the name and address of such person who will perform such work; and the location at which such work will be performed. The permittee shall furnish any such street tree to be planted. After planting, such street tree shall be and remain the property of the City, and subject to the provisions of this chapter. The cost of any such street tree and the cost of all such permitted planting, removing, and destroying shall be and remain the permittee's. Failure to obtain a permit may result in removal of the tree by the owner. Such permit shall be subject to the following conditions, which shall be made a part of said permit, and failure to comply therewith shall constitute a violation of this Article: 
a.  Any street tree to be planted shall be planted at the location designated by the Director. All trees when planted shall be not less than one (1) inch in diameter at six (6) inches above the ground surface. No whips shall be planted; 
b.  When a street tree is being removed or destroyed, the stump shall also be removed. All removed trees, including limbs and debris therefrom, shall be removed from the street, parkway, sidewalk space, or other public way within forty-eight (48) hours after being cut, and the ground shall be raked clean of all chips, branches, and debris; 
c.  When a street tree is being felled, it shall be felled away from the roadway or parallel with the roadway, when possible, and the sidewalk and street shall be guarded as to protect pedestrians and vehicles thereon; 
d.  All damage to curbs, sidewalks, and other public property occurring in the performance of such work shall be promptly and properly repaired at the permittee's expense. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014) 
7-509 - WORK ORDERED OR DONE BY THE CITY OF KEARNEY 
    No permit shall be required for any such tree, shrub, or ornamental landscape planting, removing, or destroying ordered or done by the City; however, all such work shall be done in conformance, with the requirements of subparagraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of Section 7-508 of this Chapter. Further, the City may trim all trees in or upon any street, parkway, sidewalk space, or other public way so that there is a clearance of seven (7) feet over sidewalks and fourteen (14) feet over the portion of public streets and alleys used for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 7464, 9-9-2008) 
Cross reference- Streets and Sidewalks, § 9-1222 
7-510 - TREES; DUTY TO TRIM AND MAINTAIN TREES IN RIGHT-OF-WAY 
    The owner(s) or owner's duly authorized agent in charge of any lot, block, piece or parcel of land in the City, are hereby required to maintain, trim or remove any dead, diseased or dangerous limbs, trees or branches that interfere with the health, safety, convenience property use or pleasure of person using the right-of-way space. The City of Kearney Developmental Services Division shall serve as the main point of contact for citizens who have concerns regarding dead, diseased or dangerous branches, limbs or trees that are immediately impacting right-of-way areas. The City of Kearney will follow its policy (DS-11) regarding the maintenance of obstructive or diseased landscape in right-of-way areas. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014) 
7-511 - TREES; NUISANCE 
    The Council does hereby declare the permitting, allowing or maintaining of any damaged, dangerous, dead or diseased branches, limbs or trees to be and constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007) 
7-512 - TREES; NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS 
    The City Clerk shall, on the first Monday of February, May and September of each year cause to be published, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, a notice in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE 
    Notice to Property Owners, Owner's Duly Authorized Agents, and Persons in Possession of Property pursuant to Chapter 7, Article 5 of the Kearney City Code, all property owners, owner's duly authorized agents, and persons in possession of any tract, lot, block, piece or parcel of land in the City of Kearney are hereby notified that all dead, diseased, damaged or dangerous branches, limbs, or trees now growing in the public rights-of-way in the City of Kearney, Nebraska, must be treated, trimmed or removed within thirty (30) days of publication of this Notice. 
    The permitting, allowing or maintaining of any dead, diseased, damaged or dangerous branches, limbs or trees has been declared to constitute a nuisance. The maintenance of a tree nuisance is punishable as an infraction. 
    If the owner or owner's duly authorized agent in possession of any real estate shall fail, neglect or refuse to treat, trim, or remove thereon and abate and remove the nuisance as directed, the City will give notice by personal service or certified mail to the owner or agent. Within five (5) days after the receipt of such notice, the owner or agent may request a hearing with the City to appeal the decision to abate or remove the nuisance by filing a written appeal with the office of the City Clerk. A hearing on the appeal shall be held within fourteen (14) days after the filing of the appeal and shall be conducted by the Tree Appeal Committee as appointed by the City Manager. The Committee shall render a decision on the appeal within five (5) business days after the conclusion of the hearing. If the appeal fails, the City may have work done to abate and remove the dead or diseased tree(s). If the owner/agent does not request a hearing with the City within five (5) days after receipt of such notice or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the City may have such work done. The City may levy and assess all or any portion of the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot so benefitted as a special assessment. The City shall charge an hourly fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule required to do the work, with a minimum charge as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule. In addition, an administrative fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be charged for each tract of land, lot, block or parcel of real property where the tree work was completed by the City and the total of all costs and expenses shall be reported to the Council for levy and assessment or for recovery in a civil action as the Council directs. If unpaid for two (2) months after such work is done, the City may either (a) levy and access the cost and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefited in the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied and assessed, or (b) recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys. 
    BY ORDER OF THE KEARNEY CITY COUNCIL 
    City Clerk 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014; Ord. No. 8119, 11-22-2016) 
7-513 - TREES; REMOVAL OF TREES OR PORTIONS OF TREES; AUTHORIZATION 
    If the owner or owner's duly authorized agent in charge of any lot, block, piece or parcel of ground, including abutting or adjoining streets, alleys and parkings, within the City rights-of-way fails, neglects or refuses to treat, trim, remove dead, diseased, damaged or dangerous trees or portions thereof and maintain a tree nuisance, the City may give notice to abate and remove such nuisance to each owner or owner's duly authorized agent, if any, by personal service or certified mail. Within five (5) days after the receipt of such notice, the owner or agent may request a hearing with the City to appeal the decision to abate or remove the nuisance by filing a written appeal with the office of the City Clerk. A hearing on the appeal shall be held within fourteen (14) days after the filing of the appeal and shall be conducted by the Tree Appeal Committee as appointed by the City Manager. The Committee shall render a decision on the appeal within five (5) business days after the conclusion of the hearing. If the appeal fails, the City may have work done to abate and remove the dead or diseased tree(s). If the owner/agent does not request a hearing with the City within five (5) days after receipt of such notice or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the City may have such work done. The City may levy and assess all or any portion of the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot so benefitted as a special assessment. The City shall charge an hourly fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule required to do the work, with a minimum charge as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule. In addition, an administrative fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be charged for each tract of land, lot, block or parcel of real property where the tree work was completed by the City and the total of all costs and expenses shall be reported to the Council for levy and assessment or for recovery in a civil action as the Council directs. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 8119, 11-22-2016) 
7-514 - TREES; REMOVAL OF TREES OR PORTIONS THEREOF BY CITY MAINTENANCE AFTER INITIAL TREE WORK 
    In the event a property owner or owner's agent fails, neglects or refuses to maintain the right-of-way property and healthy trees after initial City tree maintenance during the calendar year, the City may re-notify the owner or owner's duly authorized agent, if any, by personal service or certified mail, to abate and remove the nuisance and may, if said owner or owner's duly authorized agent neither requests a hearing nor removes and abates the nuisance within five (5) days after receipt of such notice, the City may re-enter the property treat, trim or remove nuisance trees which costs and expenses may be assessed against the property, if not paid by the owner, or the City may file a civil action against the owner to recover costs and expenses of the work upon the property and adjoining street and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 8119, 11-22-2016) 
7-515 - TREES; REMOVAL OF TREES BY CITY; FEES 
    If trees are treated, trimmed or removed by the City, and/or if any refuse, debris, litter or other obstructions are caused to be removed to permit such cutting, the City shall charge an hourly fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule required to do the work, with a minimum charge as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule. In addition, an administrative fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be charged for each tract of land, lot, block or parcel of real property where the tree work was completed by the City and the total of all costs and expenses shall be reported to the Council for levy and assessment or for recovery in a civil action as the Council directs. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
7-516 - TREES; REMOVAL OF TREES BY CITY; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS 
    Development Services/Code Enforcement shall keep an accurate record of the cost of tree maintenance from each specific lot, block, piece or parcel of land and he/she shall report the same to the City Clerk, whereupon the City Clerk shall mail a statement of such cost to the last known address of the owner or owner's duly authorized agent in charge of such property, and if such costs are not paid within two (2) months from the mailing of such notice, the Council may proceed to levy and assess the costs and expenses thereof against the property as a special assessment, and the City Clerk shall certify such assessment to the County Clerk for collection of payment to the City the same as other assessments and taxes are collected, or the Council may direct the City Manager to file a civil action against the owner to recover costs and expenses of the work upon the property and adjoining streets and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014) 
Cross reference- Streets and Sidewalks, Section 9-1225 
7-517 - TREES; PENALTY 
    Any owner, owner's duly authorized agent, or person in charge of any lot, block, piece or parcel of land within the City right-of-way who creates, allows, permits or maintains a tree nuisance or violates the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of an infraction. Each distinct violation, and each day any such violation of the Article continues, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007) 
7-518 - TREES; DESTRUCTION, ETC. OF STREET TREES, PLANTINGS, ETC. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut down, destroy, deface, cut off limbs or in any manner interfere with or molest any trees or to injure any grass, shrubbery or other planting provided for by this Article in the City rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007) 
7-519 - TRIMMING BRANCHES OVERHANGING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
    The owner or owner's duly authorized agent of any lot, piece or parcel of ground abutting or adjacent to any street or sidewalk over which extend the branches of any trees shall at all times keep the branches or limbs thereof trimmed to the height of at least fourteen (14) feet above the surface of the street and at least seven (7) feet above the surface of the walk. Whenever the limbs or branches of any tree extends over street or sidewalk contrary to the provisions of this section so as to interfere with the convenience of the public using the street or sidewalk they are in violation and must take corrective action subject to Sections 7-512, 7-513 and 7-514 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 7464, 9-9-2008; Ord. No. 7903, 6-10-2014) 
7-520 - VISION CLEARANCE 
    No shrubs, trees, bushes or other plant material shall be planted, maintained, allowed to grow and no structure shall be erected so as to hinder vision in the vicinity of an intersection of two (2) streets, within a sight distance triangle bounded by the edges of the roadway or the curb on the two (2) sides and a line diagonally across the corner lot meeting the edges of the roadway or the curb forty (40) feet from their intersection at the corner. No shrubs, trees, bushes or other plant material shall be planted, maintained, allowed to grow and no structure shall be erected on public property so as to hinder vision in the vicinity of an intersection of a driveway and a street or an alley and a street. To hinder vision shall be taken to mean that such plant material has leaves, needles, branches or other foliage during any period of the year, and structures of any type as defined in the zoning ordinance, exist between levels two (2) feet and eight (8) feet above the crown of the street adjacent. Structures in Zoning District C-2 shall be exempt from this regulation. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007) 
7-521 - OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW 
    Landscaping or screening installed in any landscaped area shall not obstruct the view from or to any driveway approach, street, alley, or sidewalk, and shall be consistent with the provisions of Section 7-520 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 7352, 5-8-2007) 
Chapter 8 - POLICE 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

8-101 - POLICE DEPARTMENT; DUTIES 
    The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such further number of regular police officers as may be duly ordered by resolution of the Council. The Chief of Police shall, subject to the direction of the City Manager, have control and management of all matters relating to the Police Department, its officers and members, and shall have the custody and control of all property and books belonging to the department. He/she shall devote his/her whole time to the municipal affairs, interests of the City, and to the preservation of peace, order, safety, and cleanliness thereof. The Department shall execute and enforce all laws of the State and City. It shall be the duty of the Department to protect the rights of persons and property. There shall be a proper police force at all fires. The Department shall take notice of all nuisances, impediments, obstructions, and defects in the streets, avenues, alleys, business places, and residences of the City. The Department shall execute, or cause to be executed, the processes issued and shall cause all persons arrested to be brought before the proper court for trial as speedily as possible. The Chief of Police and all regular police officers shall become thoroughly conversant with the laws of the City, and shall see that the same are enforced and shall make sworn complaints against any person or persons for violation of the same. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-323 
8-102 - POLICE DEPARTMENT; RESERVE OFFICER BOND 
    No appointment of a law enforcement reserve officer shall be valid until a bond in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), payable to the City, has been filed with the City Clerk by the individual appointed, or a blanket surety bond arranged and paid for by the City and bonding all such officers of the City has been filed. Such bonds shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 11, Article 1, Nebraska Revised Statutes. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 81-1444 
8-103 - SALE AND DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED, IMPOUNDED OR UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
    Sale and Disposal of Abandoned, Recovered, Confiscated, Impounded or Unclaimed Property. The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to offer for sale and sell at public auction to the highest bidder for cash all personal property, except motor vehicles dealt with in sections 8-507 to 8-509, which may come within the custody of the Police Department by reason of its being abandoned, recovered, confiscated, impounded or unclaimed. Notice of such sale shall be printed once in a legal newspaper published in the City at least ten (10) days prior to the sale; provided, that no such property shall be offered or sold unless it shall have remained unclaimed by the lawful owner for a period of sixty (60) days after it shall have come within the custody of the Chief of Police or the Police Department, or, in the case of property taken from or deposited by persons arrested, detained or accused of crime, shall have remained unclaimed for a period of sixty (60) days after the discharge, liberation or departure of the person from whom such property was taken or by whom such property was deposited. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the Chief of Police to notify the lawful owner, if known, of any such property at least five (5) days prior to the sale, by certified or registered mail, that it will be sold or otherwise disposed of upon a given date. 
    All money received from the sale of the unclaimed property shall be paid to the Chief of Police, whose duty it shall be to account for such money collected by him/her to the Director of Finance and Administration, who shall place the same in the police fund. 
(Code 1958, 23A.11; Ord. No. 3129, 1, 12-11-79; Code 1980, 31-1) 
8-104 - DISPOSAL OF FIREARMS, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, CONTRABAND, ETC. 
    The City Manager is hereby authorized to cause to be destroyed, or to dispose of in such other lawful manner as he/she deems proper, all firearms, alcoholic beverages, contraband or such other property, the possession of which may be unlawful, prohibited or regulated by federal, state or local statutes or ordinances, which may come within the custody of the Police Department by reason of its being abandoned, recovered, confiscated, impounded or unclaimed. 
    All such property shall be held for a period of not less than ninety (90) days prior to the disposition, and it shall be the responsibility of the Chief of Police to make such effort as he/she deems reasonable to notify the lawful owner of any such property, prior to its disposal, that it will be destroyed or otherwise disposed of upon a given date. 
(Code 1958, 23A.12; Code 1980, 31-2) 
ARTICLE 2. - RETIREMENT SYSTEM 

8-201 - RETIREMENT SYSTEM; APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE 
    Sections 8-201 through 8-220 of this Article shall apply to all police officers employed by the City of Kearney. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 1, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1001 
8-202 - RETIREMENT SYSTEM; TERMS, DEFINED 
    For purposes of sections 8-201 to 8-220, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT: The equality in value of the aggregate amount of benefit expected to be received under different forms of benefit or at different times determined as of a given date as adopted by the City or the retirement committee for use by the retirement system. Actuarial equivalencies shall be specified in the funding medium established for the retirement system, except that if benefits under the retirement system are obtained through the purchase of an annuity contract, the actuarial equivalent of any such form of benefit shall be the amount of pension benefit which can be purchased or otherwise provided by the police officer's retirement value. All actuarial and mortality assumptions adopted by the City or Retirement Committee shall be on a sex-neutral basis. 
    ANNUITY CONTRACT: The contract or contracts issued by one (1) or more life insurance companies and purchased by the retirement system in order to provide any of the benefits described in section 8-201 to 8-220. Annuity conversion rates contained in any such contract shall be specified on a sex-neutral basis. 
    BENEFICIARY: The person or persons designated by a police officer, pursuant to a written instrument filed with the Retirement Committee before the police officer's death, to receive death benefits which may be payable under the retirement system. 
    FUNDING AGENT: Any bank, trust company, life insurance company, thrift institution, credit union, or investment management firm selected by the City or Retirement Committee to hold or invest the funds of the retirement system. 
    REGULAR INTEREST: The rate of interest earned each calendar year commencing January 1, 1984, equal to the rate of net earnings realized for the calendar year from investments of the Retirement Fund. Net earnings shall mean the amount by which income or gain realized from investments of the retirement fund exceeds the amount of any realized losses from such investments during the calendar year. 
    REGULAR PAY: The average salary of a police officer for the five years preceding the date such police officer elects to retire, the five years preceding his/her death, or the five years preceding the date of disability, whichever is earliest, except that for any police officer who retires, dies, or becomes disabled after July 15, 1992, regular pay shall mean the average salary of the police officer for the period of five consecutive years preceding such retirement, death, or disability which produces the highest average. 
    RETIREMENT COMMITTEE: The Retirement Committee created pursuant to section 8-214. 
    RETIREMENT SYSTEM: A retirement system established pursuant to sections 8-201 to 8-220. 
    RETIREMENT VALUE: The accumulated value of the police officer's employee account and employer account. The retirement value shall consist of the sum of the contributions made or transferred to such accounts by the police officer and by the City on the police officer's behalf and the regular interest credited to the accounts as of the date of computation, reduced by any realized losses which were not taken into account in determining regular interest in any year, and further adjusted each year to reflect the pro rata share for the accounts of the appreciation or depreciation of the fair market value of the assets of the retirement system as determined by the Retirement Committee. The retirement value shall be reduced by the amount of all distributions made to or on the behalf of the police officer from the retirement system. Such valuation shall be computed annually as of December 31. If separate investment accounts are established pursuant to subsection (3) of section 8-204, a police officer's retirement value with respect to such accounts shall be equal to the value of his/her separate investment accounts as determined under such subsection. 
    SALARY: All amounts paid to a participating police officer by the employing city for personal services as reported on the participant's federal income tax withholding statement, including the police officer's contributions picked up by the City as provided in subsection (2) of section 8-205 and any salary reduction contributions which are excludable from income for Federal income tax purposes pursuant to section 125 or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
    STRAIGHT LIFE ANNUITY: An ordinary annuity payable for the life of the primary annuitant only and terminating at his/her death without refund or death benefit of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 2, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1002 
8-203 - RETIREMENT SYSTEM; CREDIT FOR SERVICE 
    A police officer shall be credited with all years of his/her service after the year 1965, for the purpose of determining vested retirement benefits under sections 8-201 through 8-220 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 3, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1003 
8-204 - POLICE OFFICERS RETIREMENT SYSTEM FUND; ADMINISTRATION; TRANSFER OF CONTRIBUTIONS; SYSTEM FUNDING; SEPARATE INVESTMENT ACCOUNTS 
A.  Commencing on January 1, 1984, the City shall keep and maintain a Police Officers Retirement System Fund for the purpose of investing payroll deductions and City contributions to the retirement system. The fund shall be maintained separate and apart from all City money and funds. The fund shall be administered under the direction of the City and the Retirement Committee exclusively for the purposes of the retirement system and for the benefit of participating police officers and their beneficiaries. The fund shall be established as a trust under the laws of this state for all purposes of section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. All of the contributions made by a police officer prior to January 1, 1984, will be transferred to the police officer's employee account without interest. Regular interest shall begin to accrue on the contributions transferred into the fund from January 1, 1984. Such funds shall be invested in the manner prescribed in section 8-216. 
B.  The City shall establish a medium for funding of the retirement system, which may be a pension trust fund, custodial account, group annuity contract, or combination thereof, for the purpose of investing money for the retirement system in the manner prescribed by section 8-216 and to provide the retirement, death, and disability benefits for police officers pursuant to sections 8-201 to 8-220. The trustee or custodian of any trust fund may be a designated funding agent which is qualified to act as a fiduciary or custodian in this state, the Director of Finance and Administration, a city officer authorized to administer funds of the City, or a combination thereof. 
C.  Upon direction of the City, there may be established separate investment accounts for each participating police officer for the purpose of allowing each police officer to direct the investment of all or a portion of his/her employee account or employer account subject to the requirements of section 8-216 and any other rules or limitations that may be established by the City or the Retirement Committee. If separate investment accounts are established, each account shall be separately invested and reinvested, separately credited with all earnings and gains with respect to the investment of the assets of the investment account, and separately debited with the losses of the account. Each investment account shall be adjusted each year to reflect the appreciation or depreciation of the fair market value of the assets held in such account as determined by the retirement committee. The expenses incurred by the retirement system when a police officer directs the investment of all or a portion of his/her individual investment account shall be charged against the police officer's investment account and shall reduce the police officer's retirement value. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 4, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1004 
8-205 - CONTRIBUTION BY POLICE OFFICER; AMOUNT; CITY; PICK UP OFFICERS' CONTRIBUTIONS; VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS 
A.  Each police officer participating in the retirement system shall contribute to the retirement system a sum equal to six percent of his/her salary. Such payment shall be made by regular payroll deductions from his/her periodic salary and shall be credited to his/her employee account on a monthly basis. Each such account shall also be credited with regular interest. 
B.  The City shall pick up the police officers' contributions required by subsection (1) of this section for all compensation paid on or after January 1, 1984, and the contributions so picked up shall be treated as employer contributions in determining federal tax treatment under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, except that the City shall continue to withhold federal income taxes based upon these contributions until the Internal Revenue Service or the federal courts rule that, pursuant to section 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, these contributions shall not be included as gross income of the employee until such time as they are distributed from the retirement system. The City shall pay these employee contributions from the same source of funds which is used in paying earnings to the employee. The City shall pick up these contributions by a salary deduction either through a reduction in the cash salary of the employee or a combination of a reduction in salary and offset against a future salary increase. A police officer shall not be given an option to choose to receive the amount of the required contribution in lieu of having such contribution paid directly to the retirement system. 
C.  Each police officer participating in the retirement system shall be entitled to make voluntary cash contributions to the retirement system in an amount not to exceed the contribution limitations established by the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Voluntary contributions shall be credited to the police officer's employee account and shall thereafter be credited with regular interest. A police officer's voluntary contribution shall become a part of the Police Officers Retirement System Fund and shall be held, administered, invested, and distributed in the same manner as any other employee contribution to the retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 5, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1005 
8-206 - CONTRIBUTIONS BY CITY; AMOUNT; HOW CREDITED; INTEREST; WHEN 
    Beginning January 1, 1984, the City shall contribute to the retirement system a sum equal to six percent of each such participating police officer's periodic salary. Such payment shall be contributed as provided in subsection (1) of section 8-205 for employee contributions and shall be credited to his/her employer account on a monthly basis. Each such account shall also be credited with regular interest. The City shall also contribute to the employer account of any police officer employed by the City on January 1, 1984, and amount equal to the employee contributions of such police officer that were made to the City prior to January 1, 1984, without interest, with such contribution to be made at the time the police officer retires or terminates employment with the City. The City may contribute such amount before the police officer's retirement or termination of employment or credit interest on such contribution. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 6, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-21) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1006 
8-207 - RETIRING OFFICER; ANNUITY OPTIONS; HOW DETERMINED; LUMP-SUM PAYMENT OPTION 
A.  At any time before the retirement date, the retiring police officer may elect to receive at his/her retirement date a pension benefit either in the form of a straight life annuity or any optional form of annuity benefit established by the Retirement Committee and provided under a purchased annuity contract. The optional annuity benefit shall be specified in the funding medium for the retirement system and shall include a straight life annuity with a guarantee of at least sixty monthly payments or an annuity payable for the life of the retiring police officer and, after the death of the retiree, monthly payments, as elected by the retiring police officer, of either one hundred percent (100%), seventy-five percent (75%), or fifty percent (50%) of the amount of annuity payable to the retiring police officer during his/her life, to the beneficiary selected by the retiring police officer at the time of the original application for an annuity. For any police officer whose retirement date is on or after January 1, 1997, the optional benefit forms for the retirement system shall include a single lump-sum payment of the police officer's retirement value. For police officers whose retirement date is prior to January 1, 1997, a single lump-sum payment shall be available only if the City has adopted such distribution option in the funding medium established for the retirement system. The retiring police officer may further elect to defer the date of the first annuity payment or lump-sum payment to the first (1st) day of any specified month prior to age seventy (70). If the retiring police officer elects to receive his/her pension benefit in the form of an annuity, the amount of annuity benefit shall be the amount paid by the annuity contract purchased or otherwise provided by his/her retirement value as of the date of the first (1st) payment. Any such annuity contract purchased by the retirement system may be distributed to the police officer and, upon such distribution, all obligations of the retirement system to pay retirement, death, or disability benefits to the police officer and his/her beneficiaries shall terminate, without exception. 
B.  For all officers employed on January 1, 1984, and continuously employed by the City from such date through the date of their retirement, the amount of the pension benefit, when determined on the straight life annuity basis, shall not be less than the following amounts: 
1.  If retirement occurs following age sixty (60) and with twenty-five (25) years of service with the City, or twenty-one (21) years of service if hired prior to November 18, 1965, fifty percent (50%) of regular pay; or 
2.  If retirement occurs following age fifty-five (55) but before age sixty (60) and with twenty-five (25) years of service with the City, forty percent (40%) of regular pay. 
A police officer entitled to a minimum pension benefit under this subsection may elect to receive such pension benefit in any form permitted by subsection (1) of this section, including a single lump-sum payment, if the officer retires on or after January 1, 1997, or if the City has adopted a lump-sum distribution option for officers retiring before January 1, 1997, in the funding medium for the retirement system. If the minimum pension benefit is paid in a form other than a straight-life annuity, such benefit shall be the actuarial equivalent of the straight-life annuity that would otherwise be paid to the officer pursuant to this subsection. 
If the police officer chooses the single lump-sum payment option, the officer can request that the actuarial equivalent be equal to the average of the cost of three (3) annuity contracts purchased on the open market. Of the three (3) annuity contracts used for comparison, one (1) shall be chosen by the police officer, one (1) shall be chosen by the Retirement Committee, and one shall be chosen by the City. 
C.  If the retirement value of an officer entitled to a minimum pension benefit under subsection (2) of this section is not sufficient at the time of the first (1st) payment to purchase or provide the required pension benefit, the City shall transfer such funds as may be necessary to the employer account of the police officer so that the retirement value of such officer is sufficient to purchase or provide for the required pension benefit. 
D.  Any retiring police officer whose pension benefit is less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month on the straight life annuity option shall be paid a lump-sum settlement equal to the retirement value and shall not be entitled to elect to receive annuity benefits. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 7, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-22) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1007 
8-208 - RETIREMENT OPTIONS; RETIREMENT DATE 
A.  A police officer may: 
1.  Elect to retire and receive the applicable pension benefit provided in section 8-207 based on his/her full retirement value upon the attainment of age sixty (60); 
2.  Elect to take early retirement and receive the applicable pension benefit provided in section 8-207 if he/she has attained the age of fifty-five (55) and has completed twenty-five (25) years of service with the City; or 
3.  Retire as a result of disability while in the line of duty, as determined under section 8-211, at any age, and receive the applicable pension benefit provided in section 8-211. 
B.  A police officer who is eligible to retire pursuant to subsection (1) of this section but does not, shall continue to contribute to his/her employee account, and the City shall continue to contribute to his/her employee account and to his/her employer account. 
C.  The first of the month immediately following the last day of work shall be the retirement date. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 8, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-23) 
    ;rn0;3;Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1008 
8-209 - POLICE OFFICER; DEATH OTHER THAN IN THE LINE OF DUTY; PENSION BENEFIT PAYABLE 
A.  When prior to retirement any police officer participating in the retirement system dies other than in the line of duty and except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, the entire retirement value shall be payable to the beneficiary or beneficiaries specified by the deceased police officer prior to his/her death or to the deceased police officer's estate if no beneficiary was specified. The retirement value or portion thereof to be received by the beneficiary may be paid in the form of a single lump-sum payment, straight life annuity, or other optional form of benefit specified in the retirement system's funding medium. If benefits are paid in the form of an annuity, the annuity shall be the amount paid by the annuity contract purchased or otherwise provided by the amount of the beneficiary's share of the retirement value as of the date of the first payment. Upon the purchase and distribution of such annuity contract to the beneficiary, all obligations of the retirement system to the beneficiary shall terminate, without exception. 
B.  If any police officer employed by such city as a member of its paid Police Department on January 1, 1984, except those who shall have been formerly employed in such department who are now in military service, dies while employed by the City as a police officer, other than in the line of duty, after becoming fifty-five (55) years of age and before electing to retire, and after serving in the paid Police Department of such city for at least twenty-one (21) years, then a pension of at least twenty-five percent (25%) of his/her regular pay in the form of a straight life annuity shall be paid to the surviving spouse of such deceased police officer. If the deceased police officer is not survived by a spouse or if the surviving spouse dies before the children of the police officer attain the age of majority, the pension benefit shall be paid to the police officer's minor children until they attain the age of majority. Each such child shall share equally in the total pension benefit to the age of his/her majority, except that as soon as a child attains the age of majority, such pension as to such child shall cease. To the extent that the retirement value at the date of death exceeds the amount required to purchase the specified pension, the excess shall be paid in the manner provided in subsection (1) of this section. If the actuarial equivalent of the pension benefit payable under this subsection exceeds the retirement value at the time of the first payment, the City shall contribute such additional amounts as may be necessary to purchase or provide for the required pension benefit. If a deceased police officer described in this subsection is not survived by a spouse or minor children, his/her death benefits shall be provided under subsection (1) of this section as if such officer was not employed by the City on January 1, 1984. 
C.  Any payments for the benefit of a minor child shall be made on behalf of the child to the surviving parent or, if there is no surviving parent, to the legal guardian of the child. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 9, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-24) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1009 
8-210 - POLICE OFFICER; DEATH IN THE LINE OF DUTY; BENEFICIARIES; RETIREMENT BENEFITS 
    When prior to retirement any police officer participating in the retirement system dies in the line of duty or in case death is caused by or is the result of injuries received while in the line of duty and if such police officer is not survived by a spouse or by minor children, the entire retirement value shall be payable to the beneficiary specified by the deceased police officer prior to his/her death or to the deceased police officer's estate if no beneficiary was specified. The retirement value or portion thereof to be received by the beneficiary may be paid in the form of a single lump-sum payment, straight life annuity, or other optional form of benefit specified in the retirement system's funding medium. For a police officer who is survived by a spouse or minor children, a retirement pension of fifty percent (50%) of regular pay shall be paid to the surviving spouse or, upon his/her remarriage or death, to the minor children during each child's minority subject to deduction of the amounts paid as workers' compensation benefits on account of death as provided in section 8-212. Each such child shall share equally in the total pension benefit to the age of his/her majority, except that as soon as a child attains the age of majority, such pension as to such child shall cease. Any payments for the benefit of a minor child shall be made on behalf of such child to the surviving parent or, if there is no surviving parent, to the legal guardian of the child. To the extent that the retirement value at the date of death exceeds the amount required to purchase or provide the specified retirement pension, as reduced by any amounts paid as workers' compensation benefits, the excess shall be paid in the manner provided in subsection (1) of section 8-209. If the actuarial equivalent of the pension benefit payable to a surviving spouse or minor children under this section exceeds the retirement value at the time of the first payment, the City shall contribute such additional amount as may be necessary to purchase or provide for the required pension benefit. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 10, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1010 
8-211 - POLICE OFFICER; DISABILITY IN THE LINE OF DUTY; BENEFIT; REQUIREMENTS 
A.  If any police officer becomes disabled, such police officer shall be placed upon the roll of pensioned police officers at the regular retirement pension of fifty percent (50%) of regular pay for the period of such disability. For purposes of this section, disability shall mean the complete inability of the police officer, for reasons of accident or other cause while in the line of duty, to perform the duties of a police officer. 
B.  No disability benefit payment shall be made except upon adequate proof furnished to the City, such proof to consist of a medical examination conducted by a competent, disinterested physician who is duly licensed to practice medicine and surgery in this State and who certifies to the City that the police officer is unable to perform the duties of a police officer. The City, during the first three (3) years of the payment for such benefits, shall have the right, at reasonable times, to require the disabled police officer to undergo a medical examination at the City's expense to determine the continuance of the disability claimed. After such three-year period, the City may request the district court to order the police officer to submit proof of the continuance of the disability claimed if the City has reasonable grounds to believe the police officer is fraudulently receiving disability payments. The City shall have the right to demand a physical examination of the police officer by a competent, disinterested physician who is duly licensed to practice medicine and surgery in this State, and who is chosen by the City. The expense of such examination shall be borne by the City. 
C.  In case of temporary disability of a police officer received while in the line of duty, he/she shall receive his/her salary during the continuance of such disability for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months, except that if it is ascertained by the Council or other proper municipal authorities within twelve (12) months that such temporary disability has become a disability as defined in this section, then the salary shall cease and he/she shall be entitled to the benefits for pensions in case of disability as provided in this section. 
D.  All payments of pension or salary provided by this section shall be subject to deduction of amounts paid under the Nebraska Workers' Compensation Act. Such payments shall not commence until all credit for unused annual or sick leave and other similar credits have been fully utilized by the disabled police officer if there will be no impairment to his/her salary during the period of disability. Total payments to a disabled police officer, in excess of amounts paid as workers' compensation benefits, shall not be less than the retirement value at the date of disability. If the actuarial equivalent of the disability pension payable under this section exceeds the police officer's retirement value at the time of the first payment, the City shall contribute such additional amounts as may be necessary, from time to time, to provide for the required disability pension. 
E.  If a police officer who was pensioned under this section is later determined to be no longer disabled, the pension provided for under this section shall terminate and the police officer's vested retirement value, as reduced by any disability payments made from the retirement system, shall thereafter be held and administered in the same manner as for any non-disabled police officer or former police officer. 
F.  If a police officer who has pensioned under this section is later determined to be no longer disabled during the first three (3) years when disability benefit payments are being paid the police officer may return to duty with the police force under the following conditions: 
1.  If a vacancy exists on the police force for which the police officer is qualified and the police officer wishes to return to the police force, the City shall hire the police officer to fill the vacancy at a pay grade of not less than his/her previous pay grade; or 
2.  If no vacancy exists on the police force and the police officer wishes to return to the police force, the City may create a vacancy under the City's reduction in force policy adopted under the Civil Service Act and rehire the officer at a pay grade of not less than his/her previous pay grade. 
    The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a police officer whose disability benefit payments are terminated because of fraud on the part of the police officer. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 11, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-26) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1011 
8-212 - PAYMENT OF BOTH SALARY AND BENEFITS IN FULL DURING TEMPORARY DISABILITY; PROHIBITED 
    No police officer shall be entitled during any period of temporary disability to receive in full both his/her salary and his/her benefits under Chapter 48, Article 1. All Nebraska workers' compensation benefits shall be payable in full to such police officer as provided in Chapter 48, Article 1, but all amounts paid by the City or its insurer under sections 8-201 through 8-220 of this Article to any disabled police officer entitled to receive a salary during such disability shall be considered as payments on account of such salary and shall be credited thereon. The remaining balance of such salary, if any, shall be payable as otherwise provided in sections 8-201 through 8-220 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 12, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-27) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1012 
8-213 - POLICE OFFICER; TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT; BENEFITS; HOW TREATED; VESTING SCHEDULE 
    If a police officer quits or is discharged before his/her normal or early retirement date, the officer may request and receive as a lump-sum payment an amount equal to the retirement value of his/her employee account as determined at the valuation date preceding his/her termination of employment. Such police officer, if vested, shall also receive a deferred pension benefit in an amount purchased or provided by the retirement value at the date of retirement. The retirement value at such retirement date shall consist of the accumulated value of the police officer's employee account, as reduced by any lump-sum distributions received prior to retirement, together with a vested percentage of the accumulated value of the police officer's employer account at the date of retirement. 
    The vesting schedule shall be as follows: 
A.  If the terminated police officer has been a member of the system for less than four (4) years, such vesting shall be nil; 
B.  If the terminating officer has been a member of the paid department of the City of the first class for at least four (4) years, such vesting percentage shall be forty percent (40%). Such vesting percentage shall be fifty percent (50%) after five (5) years, sixty percent (60%) after six (6) years, seventy percent (70%) after seven (7) years, eighty percent (80%) after eight (8) years, ninety percent (90%) after nine (9) years, and one hundred percent (100%) after ten (10) years; and 
C.  All police officers shall be one hundred percent (100%) vested upon attainment of age sixty (60) while employed by the City as a police officer. 
    The deferred pension benefit shall be payable on the first (1st) of the month immediately following the police officer's sixtieth (60th) birthday. At the option of the terminating police officer, such pension benefit may be paid as of the first (1st) of the month after such police officer attains the age of fifty-five (55). Such election may be made by the police officer any time prior to the payment of the pension benefits. The deferred pension benefit shall be paid in the form of the benefit options specified in subsection (1) of section 8-207 as elected by the police officer. If the police officer's vested retirement value at the date of his/her termination of employment is less than three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00), the City may elect to pay such police officer his/her vested retirement value in the form of a single lump-sum payment. 
    Effective January 1, 1997, a police officer may elect upon his/her termination of employment to receive his/her vested retirement value in the form of a single lump-sum payment. For a police officer whose termination of employment is prior to January 1, 1997, this election shall be available only if the City has adopted a lump-sum distribution option for terminating police officers in the funding medium established for the retirement system. 
    Upon any lump-sum payment of a terminating police officer's retirement value under this section, such police officer will not be entitled to any deferred pension benefit and the City and the retirement system shall have no further obligation to pay such police officer or his/her beneficiaries any benefits under sections 8-201 to 8-220. 
    If the terminating police officer is not credited with one hundred percent (100%) of his/her employer account, the nonvested portion of the account shall be forfeited and first used to meet the expense charges incurred by the City in connection with administering the police officers retirement system and the remainder shall then be used to reduce the City contribution which would otherwise be required to fund pension benefits. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 13, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1013 
8-214 - RETIREMENT COMMITTEE; ESTABLISHED; GOVERNING BODY; RESPONSIBILITIES 
    A retirement committee shall be established to supervise the general operation of the retirement system established pursuant to sections 8-201 to 8-220. The Council shall continue to be responsible for the general administration of such retirement system unless specific functions or all functions with regard to the administration of the retirement system are delegated, by ordinance, to the Retirement Committee. Whenever duties or powers are vested in the City or the Retirement Committee under such sections or whenever such sections fail to specifically allocate the duties or powers of administration of the retirement system, such powers or duties shall be vested in the City unless such powers or duties have been delegated by ordinance to the Retirement Committee. The City and the Retirement Committee shall have all powers which are necessary for or appropriate to establishing, maintaining, managing, and administering the retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 14, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-29) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1014 
8-215 - RETIREMENT COMMITTEE; COMPOSITION; TERM OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION 
    Each retirement committee established pursuant to section 8-214 of this article shall consist of members from both the police force and designees of the Council. The committee shall consist of six (6) members, of which, four (4) members shall be selected by the officers from the police force of the City. Election of police officers shall be by secret ballot. Results of the election shall be verified by the City Clerk. The City Manager and Finance Director of the City shall be and are hereby appointed to the committee. The members who are not participants in such retirement system shall have a general knowledge of retirement plans. The committee members shall be appointed to four-year terms, commencing October 1, 1983. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the term by a person with the same representation as his/her predecessor. Members of the retirement committee shall receive no salary and shall not be compensated for expenses. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 15, 9-13-83; Ord. No. 3985, 1, 2-23-88; Code 1980, 31-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1015 
8-216 - RETIREMENT SYSTEM FUNDS; CONTRACTS FOR INVESTMENTS 
    The funds of the retirement system shall be invested under the general direction of the Retirement Committee. The City or the Retirement Committee if delegated such function by the City shall select and contract with a funding agent or agents to hold or invest the assets of the retirement system and to provide for benefits provided by sections 8-201 to 8-220. The City or Committee may select and contract with investment managers registered under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 to invest, reinvest, and otherwise manage such portion of the assets of the retirement system as may be assigned by the City or Committee. All funds of the retirement system shall be invested pursuant to the policies established by the Nebraska Investment Council. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 16, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1016 
8-217 - RETIREMENT SYSTEM FUNDS; DUTIES GENERALLY 
    It shall be the duty of the Retirement Committee to: 
A.  Provide each employee a summary of plan eligibility requirements and benefit provisions; 
B.  Provide, within thirty (30) days after a request is made by a participant, a statement describing the amount of benefits such participant is eligible to receive; 
C.  Make available for review an annual report of the system's operations describing both: (1) the amount of contributions to the system from both employee and employer sources; and (2) an identification of the total assets of the retirement system; and 
D.  Have an analysis made of the investment return that has been achieved on the assets of the retirement system administered by the Committee. Such analysis shall be prepared as of January 1, 1988, and each five (5) years thereafter. The analysis shall be prepared by an independent private organization which has demonstrated expertise to perform this type of analysis and which is unrelated to any organization offering investment advice or which provides investment management services to the retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 17, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1017 
8-218 - TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT; TRANSFER OF BENEFITS; WHEN 
    If a police officer terminates his/her employment for the purpose of becoming a police officer employed by another city of the first class in Nebraska and such new employment commences within one hundred twenty (120) days of such termination, such police officer shall be entitled to transfer to the Police Officers Retirement System Fund of the city by which he/she is newly employed, the full amount of his/her employee account and the vested portion of the value of his/her employer account at the time of termination. The transferred funds shall be directly transferred to the police officer's employee account in the retirement system of the city to which transferred and administered by the Retirement Committee of the City to which transferred. Upon such transfer, the City and the retirement system shall have no further obligation to such police officer or his/her beneficiary. Following the commencement of new employment, the transferring police officer shall be deemed a new employee for all purposes of the retirement system of the city to which he/she transferred. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 18, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-33) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1018 
8-219 - EXEMPTION FROM LEGAL PROCESS; ADMINISTRATION; REQUIREMENTS; RETIREMENT COMMITTEE; POWERS AND DUTIES; REVIEW OF ADJUSTMENT; TAX LEVY AUTHORIZED 
A.  The right to any benefits under the retirement system and the assets of any fund of the retirement system shall not be assignable or subject to execution, garnishment, attachment, or the operation of any bankruptcy or insolvency laws, except that the retirement system may comply with the directions set forth in a qualified domestic relations order meeting the requirements of section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The City or Retirement Committee may require appropriate releases from any person as a condition to complying with any such order. The retirement system shall not recognize any domestic relations order which alters or changes benefits, provides for a form of benefit not otherwise provided for by the retirement system, increases benefits not otherwise provided by the retirement system, or accelerates or defers the time of payment of benefits. No participant or beneficiary shall have any right to any specific portion of the assets of the retirement system. 
B.  The retirement system shall be administered in a manner necessary to comply with the tax-qualification requirements applicable to government retirement plans under section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, including section 401(a)(9) relating to the time and manner in which benefits are required to be distributed, section 401(a)(16) relating to compliance with the maximum limitation on the plan benefits or contributions under section 415, section 401(a)(17) which limits the amount of compensation which can be taken into account under a retirement plan, and section 401(a)(25) relating to the specification of actuarial assumptions. Any requirements for compliance with section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, may be set forth in any trust or funding medium for the retirement system. This subsection shall be in full force and effect only so long as conformity with section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, is required for public retirement systems in order to secure the favorable income tax treatment extended to sponsors and beneficiaries of tax-qualified retirement plans. 
C.  If the Retirement Committee determines that the retirement system has previously overpaid or underpaid a benefit payable under sections 8-201 to 8-220, it shall have the power to correct such error. In the event of an overpayment, the retirement system may, in addition to any other remedy that the retirement system may possess, offset future benefit payments by the amount of the prior overpayment, together with regular interest thereon. 
D.  A police officer whose benefit payment is adjusted by the Retirement Committee pursuant to subsection C. of this section may request a review by the Council of the adjustment made by the Retirement Committee. 
E.  In order to provide the necessary amounts to pay for or fund a pension plan established under sections 8-201 to 8-220, the Mayor/President and Council may make a levy in addition to the multiple levies or the all-purpose and exclusive levy which such City is authorized by law to make. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-1019 
8-220 - LEVY TO FUND PENSION PLAN 
    In order to provide the necessary amounts to pay for or fund a pension plan established under sections 8-201 through 8-220 of this article, the Mayor/President and Council may make a levy in addition to the multiple levies or the all purpose and exclusive levy which such city is authorized by law to make. 
(Ord. No. 3624, 19, 9-13-83; Code 1980, 31-34) 
ARTICLE 3. - GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

8-301 - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    ALLEY ENTRANCE: The extension of the alley from the lot line to the street curbline. 
    AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Such Fire Department vehicles, Police vehicles and ambulances or rescue vehicles as are publicly owned and such other publicly or privately owned vehicles so designated by the City Manager. 
    CURB: The boundaries of a street as defined by this section. 
    DRIVE: To ride, lead, drive, pull, push, propel or operate a horse or vehicle. 
    DRIVER: Any person operating, driving or controlling a vehicle or rider, driver or leader of a horse. 
    HAULING TRAILERS: Trailers customarily towed behind passenger cars or light pickup trucks for personal or commercial use. 
    HORSE: Any draft animal or beast of burden. 
    PARK: The waiting or standing of a vehicle in any street except when such vehicle is waiting in compliance with the direction of a traffic officer or to meet driving emergencies. 
    RAILWAY CROSSING: That part of any street over which the tracks of a railway company shall cross such street, including that part of the street within twenty-five (25) feet of the outside of such track. 
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any motor propelled camping vehicle or towed camping trailer designed to be pulled or carried by a truck or vehicle, which is used for traveling and recreational activities; including boats and boat trailers. In no case shall a recreational vehicle be classed as a residence for the purposes of this Chapter or other ordinances of the City. 
    RIGHT-OF-WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the street. 
    STOP SIGN: Any object placed in or near a street intersection with the word "stop" inscribed thereon. 
    STREET: That part of any public highway designed for traffic and shall include streets, avenues, alleys, drives, parkways, bridges, and public parking lots. 
    STREET INTERSECTION: That space occupied by two (2) streets at the point where they meet or cross each other, being the area within the prolongation of the lateral curblines, or lateral boundary lines of two (2) or more streets which join one another at an angle. 
    TRUCK: Any motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property and shall include semitractors, semitrailers, trucks exceeding five (5) tons gross weight, and school buses. 
    VEHICLE: Any kind of conveyance capable of being propelled or driven on the street, whether propelled by manpower, animal or mechanical power. 
(Code 1958, 19.1; Ord. No. 3393, 1, 5-26-81; Code 1980, 22-1) 
State Law reference- Definitions in rules of the road, Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-605-60-676 
8-302 - ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC LAWS 
    The provisions of sections 60-601 to 60-6,374, inclusive, Nebraska Rules of the Road, Chapter 60, Article 6, Nebraska Revised Statutes, as amended, are hereby adopted as the rules of the road for the City, including such penalties as are therein provided, with the exception that the maximum fine which may be imposed shall be a fine of five hundred ($500.00) dollars, and the maximum imprisonment which may be imposed shall be limited to thirty (30) days imprisonment, and except as may be specifically provided or modified by this Code or other City ordinance. The County Court is hereby given jurisdiction over all complaints for violation of such rules of the road and for the imposition of penalties as provided by this Code. 
(Code 1958, 19.15; Ord. No. 4034, 1, 7-26-88; Code 1980, 22-2; Ord. No. 6083, 2-27-96) 
8-303 - OPERATOR'S LICENSE OR LEARNER'S PERMIT; REQUIRED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, except a farm tractor, upon any street or highway within the City without having in full force and effect an operator's license or learner's permit to operate it as provided by the laws of the State. 
(Code 1958, 19.15-1; Code 1980, 22-3) 
State Law reference- Operator's license, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-484 
8-304 - OPERATOR'S LICENSE OR LEARNER'S PERMIT; POSSESSION 
    It shall be the duty of every person operating a vehicle within the City to have in his/her possession his/her operator's license or learner's permit. (Code 1958, 19.15-1; Code 1980, 22-4) 
State Law reference- Possession of license, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-489 
8-305 - OPERATOR LICENSE OR LEARNER PERMIT; DRIVING WITH REVOKED OR SUSPENDED LICENSE 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street or highway within the City during any period that his/her motor vehicle operator's license has been suspended or revoked pursuant to any law of this State, or after such suspension or revocation but before reinstatement of his/her license or issuance of a new State license. Upon conviction for a violation thereof, such person shall be punished as provided by section 60-430.05 Revised Statutes of Nebraska, as follows: 
A.  For a first (1st) offense, such person shall be imprisoned in jail for thirty (30) days, and the court shall, as a part of the judgment of conviction, order such person not to operate any motor vehicle for any purpose for a period of one (1) year from the date of his/her final discharge from the jail; and 
B.  For each subsequent offense, such person shall be imprisoned in jail for six (6) months, and the court shall, as a part of the judgment of conviction, order such person not to operate a motor vehicle for any purpose for a period of two (2) years from the date of his/her final discharge from jail. 
(Code 1958, 19.15-2; Code 1980, 22-5) 
8-306 - DISPLAY OF CURRENT LICENSE PLATES REQUIRED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street or highway within the City without one (1) numbered plate on the rear of the vehicle and one (1) numbered plate on the front of the vehicle, and the numbered plates shall be assigned to the motor vehicle for the current year. 
(Code 1958, 19.15-7; Code 1980, 22-6) 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle registration, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-301, et seq. 
8-307 - DRIVING IMPROPERLY REGISTERED VEHICLE AFTER DATE OF PURCHASE 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street or highway within the City without proper registration after a period of thirty (30) days from the date of purchase of the motor vehicle. 
(Code 1958, 19.15-6; Code 1980, 22-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-320.01 
8-308 - RUBBISH ON STREETS 
A.  No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway: 
1.  Any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any other substance likely to injure any person or animal or damage any vehicle upon such highway; 
2.  Materials that may make the highway unsightly, such as rubbish, sewage, garbage, paper, or any other material of such nature; or 
3.  Any burning material. 
B.  Any person who deposits, or permits to be deposited, upon any highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove such or cause it to be removed. 
C.  Any person who removes a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance deposited on the highway from such vehicle. 
(Code 1958, 19.10; Code 1980, 22-9) 
Cross reference- Littering prohibited generally, § 5-203 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 39-683 transferred to 39-311 
8-309 - SPILLING LOADS 
    No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. 
(Code 1958, 19.11; Code 1980, 22-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 39-6,137 transferred to 60-6,286 
8-310 - BOARDING, ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1958, 19.12; Code 1980, 22-11) 
8-311 - VEHICLES WITH LUGS, HEAVY LOADS, ETC., WHICH CAN DAMAGE PAVEMENT 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to move or operate any steam engine, tractor, or road roller across any curb, gutter, street, sidewalk, bridge, culvert or crossing in any unpaved street within the City without first having protected such curb, gutter, street, sidewalk or crossing with heavy plank sufficient in strength to protect such curb, gutter, street, sidewalk, bridge, culvert or crossing from damage. It shall be unlawful to drive, move or operate over any paved street in the City, any vehicle, machine or implement with sharp discs or sharp wheels that bear upon the pavement, or with wheels having cutting edges or any protruding parts or bolts that extend beyond the plain tire so as to in any way injure or damage the pavement or any vehicle or implement of such weight or proportions, or carrying any load that will injure or damage any pavement, gutter or curb within the City, without planking the same as provided in this section. Where vehicles mentioned in this section are permitted or allowed to move along paved or unpaved stretches of the City, the Chief of Police is hereby empowered to choose over which street the moving of such vehicles will be permitted. 
(Code 1958, §19.4, 19.5; Code 1980, 22-12) 
State Law reference- Cleats, projections on tires prohibited, etc., Neb. Rev. Stat. 39-6,131 transferred to 60-6,250 
8-312 - EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES 
A.  Any bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a light on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front on a clear night and with a red reflector on the rear which shall be visible on a clear night from all distances between one hundred (100) feet and six hundred (600) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlights on a motor vehicle. A light emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear may be used in addition to such red reflector. 
B.  Any bicycle used on a highway shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Code 1958, 19.3; Code 1980, 22-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 39-691 transferred to 60-6,318 
8-313 - RIDING BICYCLES ON ROADWAYS, BICYCLE PATHS 
A.  Any person who operates a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
B.  Any person who rides a bicycle upon a roadway shall not ride more than single file except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
C.  Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use such roadway. 
(Code 1958, 19.3; Code 1980, 22-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 39-690 transferred to 60-6,314, 60-6,317 
8-314 - RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS 
    It shall be lawful for any person to ride any bicycle on any sidewalk within the City unless posted otherwise. 
(Code 1958, 19.3; Code 1980, 22-15; Ord. No. 7671, 9-13-2011) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-210 
8-315 - CLINGING TO VEHICLES 
    Any person who rides upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skis, skateboard or toy vehicle shall not attach such or himself/herself to any vehicle upon a roadway; and no person shall hitch to or cling upon any vehicle which is in motion with or without the consent of the driver. (Code 1958, 19.20; Code 1980, 22-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 39-689 transferred to 60-6,316 
8-316 - TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS 
    It shall be unlawful to drive any truck, except for the purpose of making a delivery and then for one (1) block only, on any street so designated by resolution and properly sign-posted. Fire, service and maintenance vehicles operated by the City or public utility companies are specifically excluded from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3394, 1, 5-26-81; Code 1980, 22-17) 
Cross reference- Parking trucks prohibited, § 8-923, et seq. 
8-317 - RIDING SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND ROLLER BLADES ON SIDEWALKS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, use or operate any skateboard, roller skates or roller blades on any street, sidewalk or public parking lot within the boundaries of the downtown improvement and parking district as defined by section 3-1902 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3915, 1, 4-28-87; Code 1980, 22-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-680 
ARTICLE 4. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

8-401 - ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER 
    The Police Department and the City Manager are hereby authorized, empowered and ordered to exercise all powers and duties with relation to the management of street traffic and to direct and regulate and, when necessary, temporarily divert or exclude in the interest of public safety, health and convenience the movement of pedestrian, animal and vehicular traffic of every kind in the streets within the City. 
(Code 1958, 19.14; Code 1980, 22-28) 
8-402 - SPECIFIC VIOLATION AS TRAFFIC INFRACTION 
    Any violation of any of the provisions of Chapter 8 of the Code which is not otherwise specified or declared to be a misdemeanor or an infraction shall constitute a traffic infraction. 
(Ord. No. 5058, 1, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 22-28.1) 
8-403 - DESIGNATION, POWER AND DUTIES OF TRAFFIC OFFICERS 
    The City Manager or the Chief of Police may, at any time, detail or assign officers, including community service officers, to serve as traffic-control officers authorized to regulate traffic through street intersections within the City. Each traffic officer shall be vested with the authority to regulate and control traffic at any intersections to which he/she is assigned. In addition to his/her authority as a police officer or community service officer, it shall be his/her duty to direct the movement of traffic in such a manner as will facilitate the movement of traffic and prevent congestion and accidents. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any order or signal of any such officer. 
(Code 1958, 19.2; Ord. No. 5058, 2, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 22-29) 
8-404 - APPLICABILITY TO SEMIPUBLIC, PRIVATELY OWNED PREMISES 
    The provisions of this Chapter, insofar as the same may be applicable, are hereby specifically made applicable to public and privately owned parking lots, parking areas in shopping centers and similar semi-public or privately owned places located within the limits of the City of Kearney. The Police Department and City Manager shall be authorized, empowered, and ordered to exercise all of their usual powers and duties with respect of regulation and enforcement of the applicable sections of this Chapter in regard to offenses committed upon the premises as designated herein. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of the sections of this Code which are in force on the premises of all parking lots, shopping center parking lots, or a semi-privately or privately owned parking area, as specified within the provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a traffic infraction, infractions, or misdemeanors according to the punishment prescribed for the violation of each respective violated section of this Code. 
(Code 1958, 19.15-9; Ord. No. 5058, 3, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 22-30; Ord. No. 7333, 3-27-2007) 
State Law reference- Authority over semipublic places, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-254 
ARTICLE 5. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

8-501 - ABANDONED VEHICLES; ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED 
    No person shall cause any vehicle to be or become an abandoned vehicle. 
(Code 1980, 22-42) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-1907 
8-502 - DETERMINATION 
    A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be an abandoned vehicle if left unattended: 
A.  With no numbered plates, expired plates or expired intransit stickers affixed thereto for more than six (6) hours on any public property. 
B.  For more than twenty-four (24) hours on any public property except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted. 
C.  For more than forty-eight (48) hours, after the parking of such vehicle shall have become illegal, if left on a portion of a public property on which parking is legally permitted; or 
D.  For more than seven (7) days on private property if left initially without permission of the owner or after permission of the owner shall be terminated. 
E.  For more than seven (7) days after being impounded for the violation of any provision of this Chapter. 
(Code 1980, 22-43; Ord. No. 7557, 11-24-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-1901 
8-503 - TITLE OF VEHICLES WORTH ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS OR LESS 
    If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no license plates of the current year or valid In Transit stickers affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into consideration the condition of the vehicle, of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or less, title shall immediately vest in the City. Any certificate of title issued to the City shall be issued at no cost to such authority. 
(Code 1980, 22-44; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-1902 
8-504 - INQUIRY 
    Except for vehicles governed by section 8-503, the City, upon taking possession of an abandoned vehicle, shall make an inquiry concerning the last-registered owner of such vehicle as follows: 
A.  Abandoned vehicle with number plates affixed, to the jurisdiction which issued such number plates; or 
B.  Abandoned vehicle with no number plates affixed, to the State Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(Code 1980, 22-45) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-1903 
8-505 - NOTICE TO OWNER 
    The City shall notify the last-registered owner if any, that the vehicle in question has been recovered as an abandoned vehicle and that, if unclaimed, it will be sold at public auction after five (5) days from the date such notice was mailed. If the agency described in section 8-504 also notified the City that a lien or mortgage exists, such notice shall also be sent to the lienholder or mortgagee. Any person claiming such vehicle shall be required to pay the cost of removal and storage of such vehicle. 
(Code 1980, 22-46) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-1903 
8-506 - VESTING OF TITLE 
    Title to abandoned vehicles, if unclaimed, shall vest in the City five (5) days from the date such notice is mailed, or if the last-registered owner cannot be ascertained, when notice of such fact is received. 
(Code 1980, 22-47) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-1903 
8-507 - SALE OF VEHICLE 
    When it is determined by the City Manager that the impounding fee, towing charge, and storage charges on any abandoned or impounded vehicle exceeds the fair market value of that vehicle, or when the vehicle has remained in custody in the City for a period of ninety (90) days without a claim of ownership, the City Manager may sell such vehicle at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of such sale shall be printed once in the appropriate newspaper of general circulation within the City at least ten (10) days prior to sale. Published notice shall describe each vehicle offered for sale by the make, model and year if possible. There shall be no limit on the number of vehicles sold at any one sale. If upon date of sale no bid is received on the impounded vehicle, the City Manager may continue such sale until a bid shall have been received, or he/she may direct that such vehicle be junked or disposed of otherwise. 
(Code 1958, 19.15-3; Code 1980, 22-48) 
8-508 - REDEMPTION BY OWNER, LIEN HOLDER PRIOR TO SALE 
    The owner of any abandoned or impounded vehicle or the holder of any registered lien on any abandoned or impounded vehicle may obtain possession of such vehicle by paying to the City the charges assessed against such automobile for the impounding fee, towing charge and storage charges at any time prior to the sale of such impounded vehicle. 
(Code 1958, 19.15-4; Code 1980, 22-49) 
8-509 - DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE 
    All money paid for impounding fees, towing charges and storage charges on abandoned or impounded vehicles and all money paid for the purchase of abandoned or impounded vehicles sold according to the provisions of this Code shall be paid to the Chief of Police, whose duty it shall be to account for such money collected by him/her to the Director of Finance and Administration. 
    Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle less any expenses incurred by the City shall be held by the City without interest, for the benefit of the owner of such vehicle for a period of two (2) years. If not claimed within such two-year period, such proceeds shall be paid into the general fund. 
(Code 1958, 19.15-5; Code 1980, 22-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-1905 
8-510 - LIABILITY FOR REMOVAL 
    Neither the owner, lessee, nor occupant of the premises from which any abandoned vehicle shall be removed, nor the City shall be liable for any loss or damage to such vehicle which occurs during its removal or while in the possession of the City or its contractual agent, or as a result of any subsequent disposition. 
(Code 1980, 22-51) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-1906 
8-511 - LIABILITY FOR COSTS 
    The last-registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be liable to the City for the costs of removal and storage of such vehicle. 
(Code 1980, 22-52) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-1909 
ARTICLE 6. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

8-601 - APPROACH OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES 
A.  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle which makes use of proper audible or visual signals: 
1.  The driver of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway, or to either edge or curb of a one-way roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until such emergency vehicle passes, unless otherwise directed by any police or traffic officer; and 
2.  Any pedestrian using such roadway shall yield the right-of-way until such emergency vehicle passes, unless otherwise directed by any police or traffic officer. 
B.  This section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1958, §19.7, 19.17; Code 1980, 22-64) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,151 
8-602 - DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK 
    No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. 
(Code 1958, 19.18; Code 1980, 22-65) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,178 
8-603 - RESTRICTIONS ON RIDING MOTORCYCLES 
A.  Any person who operates a motorcycle shall ride only upon a permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle to the rear or side of the operator. 
B.  Any person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward. 
C.  No person shall operate a motorcycle while carrying any package, bundle, or other article which prevents him/her from keeping both hands on the handlebars. 
D.  No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride, in a position that will interfere with the operation or control of the motorcycle or the view of the operator. 
(Code 1958, 19.19; Code 1980, 22-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,307 
8-604 - REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING; RIGHT- AND LEFT-HAND TURNS; TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
A.  Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
B.  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
C.  The City Manager may cause traffic-control devices to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection; and when such devices are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such devices. 
(Code 1958, 19.21; Code 1980, 22-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,159 
8-605 - ENTERING ROADWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY 
    The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, private road or building shall stop such vehicle immediately before driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across such alley, driveway, road or building entrance, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian approaching on any sidewalk extending across such alley, driveway, road or building entrance. Before entering the highway, he/she shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such highway. 
(Code 1958, 19.22; Code 1980, 22-68) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,149 
8-606 - TURNING TO PROCEED IN OPPOSITE DIRECTION; LIMITATION 
    No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within five hundred (500) feet nor at any place where such turns are prohibited by signs. No vehicle, except authorized emergency vehicles, shall be turned at any place on a freeway so as to proceed in the opposite direction. 
(Code 1958, 19.23; Code 1980, 22-69) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,160 
8-607 - U-TURNS 
    No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction or cross from one side of the street to the other at any controlled intersections or between controlled or uncontrolled intersections within the City. 
(Code 1958, 19.23; Code 1980, 22-70) 
8-608 - FUNERAL PROCESSIONS AND PARADES 
    No vehicle shall be driven through any funeral procession or any authorized parade. 
(Code 1958, 19.24; Code 1980, 22-71) 
8-609 - DRIVING OVER FRESH PAVEMENT 
    No person shall drive any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement in any street, across or around which pavement there is a barrier or when there is a person or a sign warning against driving over or across such pavement or a sign stating that the street is closed. 
(Code 1958, 19.25; Code 1980, 22-72) 
8-610 - LEFT TURNS PROHIBITED AT DESIGNATED INTERSECTIONS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a vehicle to make a left turn at the following intersections: 
2nd Avenue and 18th Street 
2nd Avenue and 21st Street 
    Proper signs and/or signals shall be erected at such intersections to give notice of this section to motorists. 
(Code 1958, 19.26; Ord. No. 5014, 1, 5-23-89; Ord. No. 5076, 1, 12-12-89; Code 1980, 22-73; Ord. No. 5291, 8-13-91) 
8-611 - CARELESS DRIVING 
    Any person who drives any motor vehicle in the City carelessly or without due caution so as to endanger a person or property shall be guilty of careless driving. 
(Code 1958, 19.26-1; Ord. No. 5058, 4, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 22-74) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,212 
8-612 - DRIVING OVER UNPROTECTED FIRE HOSE 
    No vehicle shall be driven over unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any highway or private road or driveway, in use or to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1958, 19.6; Code 1980, 22-75) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,184 
8-613 - FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS 
    The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus or vehicle traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where any fire apparatus or vehicle has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1958, 19.8; Code 1980, 22-76) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,183 
8-614 - FOLLOWING AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE(S) 
    The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any authorized emergency vehicle while the emergency lights or siren of such vehicle are being operated, closer than five hundred (500) feet. 
8-615 - NEGLIGENT DRIVING 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle over and along the streets in a negligent manner by failing to give such attention to the nature or probable consequences of his/her acts or omissions as a prudent person would ordinarily bestow upon his/her own concerns. 
(Ord. No. 4022, 1, 5-24-88; Code 1980, 22-77) 
8-616 - UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR; ALCOHOL IN BODY FLUID; PENALTY 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or be in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle: 
1.  While under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any drug; or 
2.  When such person has a concentration of eight hundredths (.08) of one (1) gram or more by weight of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of his or her blood, or 
3.  When such person has a concentration of eight hundredths (.08) of one (1) gram or more by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten (210) liters of his or her breath. 
B.  Any person who operates or is in the actual physical control of a motor vehicle while in a condition described in Subsection A shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Section 8-617 of the Kearney City Code. 
(Ord. No. 6705, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 6835, 10-9-2001; Ord. No. 7105, 8-10-2004) 
8-617 - CHEMICAL TESTS; REFUSAL; PENALTIES 
A.  Any person who operates or has in his or her actual physical control a motor vehicle shall be deemed to have given his or her consent to submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining the concentration of alcohol or the presence of drugs in such blood, breath, or urine. 
B.  Any peace officer who has been duly authorized to make arrests for violations of traffic laws of this state or of ordinances of any city or village may require any person arrested for any offense arising out of acts alleged to have been committed while the person was driving or was in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or drugs to submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining the concentration of alcohol or the presence of drugs in such blood, breath, or urine, when the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that such person was driving or was in the actual physical control of a motor vehicle in the City of Kearney while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or drugs in violation of Section 8-616 of the Kearney City Code. 
C.  Any person arrested as provided in Subsection B of this Section may, upon the direction of a peace officer, be required to submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood, breath, or urine for a determination of the concentration of alcohol or the presence of drugs. If the chemical test discloses the presence of a concentration of alcohol in violation of Section 8-616 of the Kearney City Code, the person shall be subject to the administrative revocation procedures provided in Sections 60-498.01 to 60-498.04 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in Sections 60-6,197.02 to 60-6,197.08 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. Any person who refuses to submit to such test or tests required pursuant to this Section shall be subject to the administrative revocation procedures provided in Sections 60-498.01 to 60-498.04 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes and shall be guilty of a crime and upon conviction punished as provided in Section 60-6,197.02 to 60-6,197.08. 
D.  Any person involved in a motor vehicle accident in the City of Kearney may be required to submit to a chemical test of his or her blood, breath, or urine by any peace officer if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the person was driving or was in actual physical control of a motor vehicle on a public highway in the City of Kearney while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or drugs at the time of the accident. A person involved in a motor vehicle accident subject to the implied consent law of this state shall not be deemed to have withdrawn consent to submit to a chemical test of his or her blood, breath, or urine by reason of leaving the City. If the person refuses a test under this Section and leaves the City for any reason following an accident, he or she shall remain subject to Subsection C of this Section and Section 60-498.02, R.R.S. upon return. 
E.  Any person who is required to submit to a chemical blood, breath, or urine test or tests pursuant to this ordinance shall be advised that refusal to submit to such test or tests is a separate crime for which the person may be charged. 
F.  Refusal to submit to a chemical blood, breath, or urine test or tests pursuant to this ordinance shall be admissible evidence in any action for a violation of Section 8-616 of the Kearney City Code. 
G.  Any person convicted of violating Section 8-616 or 8-617 of the Kearney City Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows: 
1.  Except as provided in subdivision 2 of this section, if such person has not had a prior conviction, such person shall be guilty of a Class W misdemeanor, and shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not less than seven (7) nor more than sixty (60) days, and shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00), recoverable with costs, and the court shall, as part of the judgment of conviction, order that the operator's license of such person be revoked or impounded for a period of six (6) months from the date ordered by the court. Such revocation or impoundment shall be administered upon sentencing, upon final judgment of any appeal or review, or upon the date that any probation is revoked. 
If the court places such person on probation or suspends the sentence for any reason, the court shall, as one of the conditions of probation or sentence suspension, order that the operator's license of such person be revoked or impounded for a period of sixty (60) days from the date ordered by the court unless otherwise authorized by an order issued pursuant to Section 60-6,211.05 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, and such order of probation or sentence suspension shall also include, as one of its conditions, the payment of a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine. 
2.  If such person has not had a prior conviction, and as part of the current violation, had a concentration of fifteen-hundredths (.15) of one (1) gram or more by weight of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of his or her blood or fifteen-hundredths (.15) of one (1) gram or more by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten (210) liters of his or her breath, such person shall be guilty of a Class W misdemeanor, and shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not less than seven (7) nor more than sixty (60) days, and shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00), recoverable with costs, and the court shall, as part of the judgment of conviction, revoke the operator's license of such person for a period of one (1) year from the date ordered by the court. Such revocation shall be administered upon sentencing, upon final judgment of any appeal or review, or upon the date that any probation is revoked. 
If the court places such person on probation or suspends the sentence for any reason, the court shall, as one of the conditions of probation or sentence suspension, order that the operator's license of such person be revoked or impounded for a period of one (1) year from the date ordered by the court unless otherwise authorized by an order issued pursuant to Section 60-6,211.05 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, and such order of probation or sentence suspension shall also include, as conditions, the payment of a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine and either confinement in the city or county jail for two (2) days or the imposition of not less than one hundred twenty (120) hours of community service. 
3.  If such person has had one (1) prior conviction, such person shall be guilty of a Class W misdemeanor, and shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not less than thirty (30) nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days, and shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00), recoverable with costs, the court shall, as part of the judgment of conviction, order that the operator's license of such person be revoked for a period of one (1) year from the date ordered by the court and shall issue an order pursuant to Section 60-6,197.01 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. Such orders shall be administered upon sentencing, upon final judgment of any appeal or review, or upon the date that any probation is revoked. 
If the court places such person on probation or suspends the sentence for any reason, the court shall, as one of the conditions of probation or sentence suspension, order that the operator's license of such person be revoked or impounded for a period of one (1) year from the date ordered by the court unless otherwise authorized by an order issued pursuant to Section 60-6,211.05 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, and shall issue an order pursuant to Section 60-6,197.01 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, and such order of probation or sentence suspension shall also include, as conditions, the payment of a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine and either confinement in the city or county jail for ten (10) days or the imposition of not less than two hundred forty (240) hours of community service. 
4.  Any period of revocation imposed for a violation of Section 8-616 of the Kearney City Code shall be reduced by any period imposed under Section 60-648.02 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. Any period of revocation imposed for a conviction for a violation of Section 8-616 or 8-617 of the Kearney City Code, as such existed prior to July 16, 2004, shall not prohibit the operation of a motor vehicle under the terms and conditions of an employment driving permit issued pursuant to subsection (2) of Section 60-498.02 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. 
H.  For purposes of sentencing a violation of Section 8-616 or 8-617 of the Kearney City Code, prior conviction means a conviction for a violation committed within the fifteen (15) year period prior to the offense for which the sentence is being imposed as follows: 
1.  Any conviction for a violation of Section 60-6,196 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes; 
2.  Any conviction for a violation of a city or village ordinance enacted in conformance with Section 60-6,196 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes; 
3.  Any conviction under a law of another state if, at the time of the conviction under the law of such other state, the offense for which the person was convicted would have been a violation of Section 60-6,196 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes; 
4.  Any conviction for a violation of Section 60-6,198 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes; 
5.  Any conviction for a violation of Section 60-6,197 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes; 
6.  Any conviction for a violation of a city or village ordinance enacted in conformance with Section 60-6,197 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes; 
7.  Any conviction under a law of another state if, at the time of the conviction under the law of such state, the offense for which the person was convicted would have been a violation of Section 60-6,197 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. 
I.  Prior conviction includes any conviction under Sections 60-6,196, 60-6,197, or 60-6,198 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, or any city or village ordinance enacted in conformance with any of such sections, as such sections or city or village ordinances existed at the time of such conviction regardless of subsequent amendments to any of such sections or city or village ordinances. 
J.  Fifteen (15) year period means the period computed from the date of the prior offense to the date of the offense which resulted in the conviction for which the sentence is being imposed. 
K.  In any case charging a violation of Section 8-616 or 8-617 of the Kearney City Code, the prosecutor or investigating agency shall use due diligence to obtain the defendant's driving record from the Department of Motor Vehicles and the defendant's driving record from other states where he or she is known to have resided within the last fifteen (15) years. The prosecutor shall certify to the court, prior to sentencing, that such action has been taken. The prosecutor shall present as evidence for purposes of sentence enhancement under state law an authenticated copy of a prior conviction in another state. The authenticated copy shall be prima facie evidence of such prior conviction. 
L.  For each conviction under this ordinance, the court shall, as part of the judgment of conviction, make a finding on the record as to the number of the defendant's prior convictions. The defendant shall be given the opportunity to review the record of his or her prior convictions, bring mitigating facts to the attention of the court prior to sentencing, and make objections on the record regarding the validity of such prior convictions. 
M.  Any peace officer who has been duly authorized to make arrests for violation of traffic laws of this state or ordinances of any city or village may require any person who operates or has in his or her actual physical control a motor vehicle in this state to submit to a preliminary test of his or her breath for alcohol concentration if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that such person has alcohol in his or her body, has committed a moving traffic violation, or has been involved in a traffic accident. Any person who refuses to submit to such preliminary test or whose preliminary breath test results indicate an alcohol concentration in excess of Section 8-616 of the Kearney City Code shall be placed under arrest. Any person who refuses to submit to such preliminary test shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine or not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), recoverable with costs. 
N.  Any person who has been convicted of driving while intoxicated shall, during a pre-sentence evaluation, submit to and participate in an alcohol assessment. The alcohol assessment shall be paid for by the person convicted of driving while intoxicated. At the time of sentencing, the judge, having reviewed the assessment results, may then order the convicted person to follow through on the alcohol assessment results as the convicted person's expense in addition to any penalties deemed necessary. 
O.  The provisions of this section shall apply anywhere throughout the city except private property, which is not open to public access, or where the ordinances of the City have not been made applicable in accordance with the terms of Section 16-254 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 7105, 8-10-2004; Ord. No. 7222, 10-25-2005; Ord. No. 7294, 9-12-2006; Ord. No. 7698, 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 8197, 11-28-2017) 
8-618 - BODY FLUID ANALYSIS; FEE; PAYMENT UPON CONVICTION 
    Upon the conviction of any person for violation of the provisions of Section 8-616 of this Article, or of driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any drug, in violation of the City Code, there shall be assessed as part of the costs the fee charged by any physician or any agency administering tests pursuant to a permit issued by the Nebraska State Department of Health in accordance with Section 60-6,201 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, for the test or tests administered and the analysis thereof under the provisions of Section 8-617 of this Article, if such test or tests were actually made. 
(Ord. No. 6705, 8-8-2000) 
8-619 - RESERVED 
8-620 - ENGINE BRAKES; DEFINITIONS, PROHIBITED, AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE, AND PENALTY 
1.  Definition. For the purposes of this Article, the term "engine brake" is hereby defined as a specific braking mechanism which utilizes the release of compressed air as part of an engine retarder or engine brake on any motor vehicle as a means of slowing or stopping said vehicle. 
2.  Prohibition of Engine Brakes. It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a motor vehicle and use engine retarders or brakes as a means of slowing or stopping said vehicle within the city limits. 
3.  Affirmative Defense. The use of an engine retarder or brake in an emergency situation to avoid an imminent accident which would otherwise result in damage or injury to person(s) or property, or the fact that the motor vehicle is equipped with a proper muffler system which eliminates noise emitted or caused by the use of an engine retarder or brake system shall constitute affirmative defenses to the application of the provisions of this Section. 
4.  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-112. Each day any such violation shall occur or continue shall constitute and be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 6834, 10-9-2001) 
ARTICLE 7. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

8-701 - GENERAL AUTHORITY 
    The Council may, by resolution, provide for the placing of stop signs or other signs, signals, standards or other mechanical devices or markings in or on any street or alley in the City for the purpose of regulating or prohibiting traffic or stopping, standing or parking thereon. Such resolution shall describe the portion of the street or the alley wherein traffic or stopping, standing or parking is to be regulated or prohibited, shall designate the regulation or prohibition, the place where such signs, signals, standards or other mechanical devices shall be placed and the hours when such regulation or prohibition shall be effective. 
(Code 1958, §19.27, 19.41; Code 1980, 22-89) 
State Law reference- Authority of council, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-680 
8-702 - INSTALLATION 
    The City Manager shall, pursuant to a resolution providing for the placement of any traffic control sign, signal, device or marking, place the same as designated or provided by such resolution for the information of the driving public. 
(Code 1958, 19.27; Code 1980, 22-90) 
8-703 - OBEDIENCE 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Code 1958, 19.27; Code 1980, 22-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,119 
8-704 - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS; LEGEND 
    Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and such lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
A.  Red; Stop: 
1.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such line then before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no cross walk then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown except as provided in subsection (A)(2) of this section; 
2.  Except where a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn after stopping as required by subsection (A)(1) of this section. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; and 
3.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway; 
B.  Yellow; Warning: 
1.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection, and upon display of a steady yellow signal, vehicular traffic shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection; and 
2.  Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway; 
C.  Green; Go: 
1.  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn, but vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited; 
2.  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time, and such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; and 
3.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, pedestrians facing any green signals, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk; and 
D.  If a traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Code 1958, 19.31; Code 1980, 22-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,123 
8-705 - DAMAGING DEVICES 
A.  If any person shall willfully or maliciously shoot upon the public highway and injure, deface, damage or destroy any signs, monuments, road markers, traffic control or surveillance devices or other public notices lawfully placed upon said highways, he/she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  No person shall willfully or maliciously injure, deface, alter or knock down any sign, traffic-control device, or traffic-surveillance device. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person other than a duly authorized representative of the City to remove any sign, traffic control or traffic surveillance device placed along a public street, road or highway for traffic control, warning or informational purposes by official action of the City. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess such a sign or device which has been removed in violation of this subsection. 
D.  Any person violating subsection B. or C. of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be assessed liquidated damages in the amount of the value of the sign, traffic control or traffic surveillance device and the cost of replacing it. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,130 
8-706 - PREFERENTIAL RIGHT-OF-WAY; STOP AND YIELD SIGNS 
A.  The City may provide for preferential right-of-way at an intersection and indicate such by stop signs or yield signs. 
B.  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection where a stop is indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if no crosswalk is indicated, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on such highway as to constitute an immediate hazard if such driver moved across or into such intersection. 
C.  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a speed reasonable under the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if no crosswalk is indicated, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard if such driver moved across or into such intersection. 
(Code 1958, 19.28; Code 1980, 22-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,148 
ARTICLE 8. - SPEED LIMITATIONS 

8-801 - SPEED LIMITATIONS; GENERALLY 
    No person shall drive any vehicle on any street within the City at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper having regard for the traffic and conditions of the street, and in no event at speeds in excess of the legal limits. 
(Code 1958, 19.16; Code 1980, 22-106) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-680 
8-802 - BASIC LIMITS 
    Except on those streets or portions of streets duly designated and posted, no person shall drive any vehicle at a rate of speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour in any residential district in this City or twenty (20) miles per hour in any business district in this City. 
(Code 1958, 19.16; Code 1980, 22-107) 
8-803 - ALTERATION FOR SPECIFIC STREETS 
    The Council, in conformance with the laws of the State, is hereby authorized to alter the maximum rate of speed on any street within the City, and to so post any such street with appropriate signs indicating the maximum allowable rate of speed. No person shall drive any vehicle on any street within the City at a rate of speed in excess of the posted rate. 
(Code 1958, 19.16; Code 1980, 22-108) 
8-804 - SPECIFIC LIMITS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any of the following streets or portions of streets in excess of the indicated speed limit: 
STREET EXTENT SPEED (mph) U.S. Highway 30 
24th/25th Street From a point 1600 feet west of 30th Avenue to a point 850 feet west of 30th Avenue 55 U.S. Highway 30 
24th/25th Street From a point 850 feet west of 30th Avenue to Conner Avenue (19th Avenue) 40 U.S. Highway 30 
24th/25th Street From Conner Avenue (19th Avenue) to Avenue N 35 U.S. Highway 30 
24th/25th Street From Avenue N to a point 900 feet east of Avenue Q 40 U.S. Highway 30 
24th/25th Street From a point 900 feet east of Avenue Q to Antelope Avenue 45 U.S. Highway 30 
24th/25th Street From Antelope Avenue east to the City limits 55 U.S. Highway N-44 
(2nd Avenue) From a point 1200 feet south of Platte Road to Platte Road 60 U.S. Highway N-44 
(2nd Avenue) From Platte Road to a point 300 feet south of 11th Street 45 U.S. Highway N-44 
(2nd Avenue) From a point 300 feet south of 11th Street to 25th Street 35 U.S. Highway N-10 
(2nd Avenue) From 25th Street to a point 600 feet north of 39th Street 35 U.S. Highway N-10 
(2nd Avenue) From a point 600 feet north of 39th Street to a point 300 feet north of 56th Street 40 U.S. Highway N-10 
(2nd Avenue) From a point 300 feet north of 56th Street to 65th Street 50 4th Avenue From 42nd Street to 48th Street 30 17th Avenue From 39th Street north to 56th Street 40 17th Avenue From 56th Street north to the City limits 45 30th Avenue From the City limits north to LaCrosse Drive 45 30th Avenue From LaCrosse Drive north to a point 800 feet north of 24th Street 35 30th Avenue From a point 800 feet north of 24th Street north to a point 500 feet north of 44th Street 45 30th Avenue From 500 feet north of 44th Street north to the City limits 50 Avenue H From the north end of overpass to 11th Street 30 Avenue M From 1st Street north to the Platte River bridge 35 Avenue M From 11th Street to 27th Street 40 Avenue N From 25th Street north to 39th Street 35 Avenue N From 39th Street to 56th Street 40 Avenue N From 56th Street north to the City limits 45 Central Avenue From 1st Street to 14th Street 35 Grand Avenue From U.S. Highway 30 north to the City limits 35 Kea West Avenue From 11th Street south to the City limits 35 1st Street East 
(Archway Parkway) From Antelope Avenue west to Central Avenue (except that segment lying between 600 feet east and 600 feet west of Avenue M which is 25 mph) 45 11th Street From a point 150 feet east of Avenue M east to the City limits 45 11th Street From a point 150 feet east of Avenue M west to a point 500 feet east of Kea West Avenue 35 11th Street From a point 500 feet east of Kea West Avenue to the west City limits 45 31st Street From 2nd Avenue to Avenue E 30 39th Street From Avenue N to the east City limits 40 39th Street From Avenue N west to a point 500 feet east of Country Club Lane 35 39th Street From a point 500 feet east of Country Club Lane west to 30th Avenue 45 48th Street From 2nd Avenue to a point 610 feet west of 6th Avenue 35 56th Street From 4th Avenue to Avenue N 40 56th Street From 4th Avenue west to the City limits 45 56th Street From Avenue N east to the City limits 45 Railroad Street From 17th Avenue west to the City limits 45 Railroad Street From Avenue N west to Avenue B 35 Railroad Street From Avenue B to 10th Avenue 25 Railroad Street From 10th Avenue to 17th Avenue 35 University Drive From Lakeview Drive west to U.S. Highway 30 30  
(Code 1958, 19.16; Ord. No. 3218, 1, 4-22-80; Ord. No. 3607, 1, 7-12-83; Ord. No. 3723, 1, 10-23-84; Ord. No. 3926, 1, 6-23-87; Ord. No. 3961, 1, 1-10-87; Ord. No. 5159, 1, 9-11-90; Code 1980, 22-109; Ord.No. 5246, 4-23-91; Ord. No. 5289 8-13-91; Ord. No. 5296, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 6048, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 6106, 4-23-96; Ord. No. 6270, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 7229, 12-27-2005; Ord. No. 7255, 5-9-2006; Ord. No. 7290, 8-22-2006; Ord. No. 7304, 10-24-2006; Ord. No. 7657, 6-28-2011; Ord. No. 7766, 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 8204, 12-12-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-680 
8-805 - SCHOOL ZONES 
    No person shall drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour upon, over or through any street or highway designated herein and posted as a school zone during the hours from 7:30 a.m. through 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. through 4:00 p.m. during the week Monday through Friday, inclusive, through the school year, including year round school. 
Bryant Elementary School Zone 16th Street From 150 feet west of Avenue C to Avenue E 17th Street From Avenue C to 150 feet West of Avenue E Avenue C From 16th Street to 17th Street Buffalo Hills Elementary School Zone 11th Avenue From 61st Street to Spruce Hollow Boulevard Spruce Hollow Boulevard From 11th Avenue west 500 feet 61st Street From 11th Avenue west 650 feet Central Elementary School Zone 24th Street From 2nd Avenue to 4th Avenue 22nd Street From 2nd Avenue to 4th Avenue 4th Avenue From 22nd Street to 24th Street Emerson Elementary School Zone 27th Street From Avenue E to Avenue F 28th Street From Avenue E to Avenue F Avenue E From 27th Street to 28th Street Avenue F From 27th Street to 28th Street Kearney Catholic School Zone Avenue A From 35th Street to 36th Street Avenue C From 35th Street to 36th Street 35th Street From Avenue A to Avenue C Kearney Education Center School Zone 15th Street From 4th Avenue to 5th Avenue 16th Street From 4th Avenue to 5th Avenue 4th Avenue From 15th Street to 16th Street 5th Avenue From 15th Street to 16th Street Kearney High/Horizon Middle School Zone 6th Avenue From 35th Street to 39th Street 11th Avenue From 35th Street to 39th Street 35th Street From 6th Avenue to 11th Avenue Kenwood Elementary School Zone 15th Avenue From 8th Street to 11th Street 16th Avenue From 8th Street to 11th Street 8th Street From 15th Avenue to 16th Avenue Meadowlark Elementary School Zone Avenue K From 53rd Street to 56th Street 52nd Street From Avenue L to Avenue M 53rd Street From 52nd Street to Avenue K Northeast Elementary School Zone Avenue I From 34th Street to 35th Street Avenue L From 34th Street to 35th Street 34th Street From Avenue I to Avenue L 35th Street From Avenue I to Avenue L Park Elementary School Zone 6th Avenue From 29th Street north to its terminus in a cul-de-sac 7th Avenue From 29th Street to 31st Street Sunrise Middle School Zone 45th Street From Avenue N to Avenue R Windy Hills Elementary School Zone 20th Avenue From 41st Street to 44th Street 41st Street From 20th Avenue east 175 feet Zion Lutheran School Zone 24th Street From Avenue C to Avenue D Avenue C From 24th Street north 200 feet Avenue D From 24th Street north 200 feet  
(Code 1958, 19.16; Code 1980, 22-110; Ord. No. 5452, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 5992, 7-25-95; Ord. No. 6334, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 6428, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 7689, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 7839, 9-10-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-682.01 
8-806 - SPEED LIMITS IN ALLEYS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on or upon or over any of the alleys located within the City at a rate of speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 3922, 1, 5-26-87; Ord. No. 5056, 1, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 22-111) 
8-807 - SCHOOL CROSSINGS WITH YELLOW FLASHING LIGHTS 
    No person shall drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour upon, over or through any street or highway designated herein and posted as a School Crossing when flashing. 
School Crossings 11th Street At Avenue C 56th Street At Avenue N Avenue N At 56th Street  
(Ord. No. 5992, 7-25-95; Ord. No. 6107, 4-23-96; Ord. No. 7689, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 7766, 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 8107, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 8266 , § 1, 8-14-2018) 
ARTICLE 9. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

8-901 - OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except in case of accident or emergency, to park or stand a motor vehicle on any public street within the City in such a location or position as to obstruct the normal flow of traffic on said street. 
(Ord. No. 5058, 5, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 22-122; Ord. No. 6039, 11-28-95) 
8-902 - OBSTRUCTION OF INTERSECTIONS 
    No person shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he/she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 5058, 6, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 22-123; Ord. No. 6040, 11-28-95) 
8-903 - MOVING A STOPPED, STANDING OR PARKED VEHICLE 
    No person shall move a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked without yielding the right-of-way to all other vehicles and pedestrians affected by such movement and in no event until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Code 1958, 19.42; Code 1980, 22-124) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,150 
8-904 - PROXIMITY TO CURB 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this Article, any vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb or edge of such roadway. 
B.  Except when otherwise provided, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of such roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, or its left-hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the left-hand curb or edge of such roadway. 
(Code 1958, 19.46; Code 1980, 22-125) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 60-6,167 
8-905 - PARKING WITHIN MARKED SPACES 
    When parking spaces are marked off on the pavement or curb, vehicles shall be parked within such marked spaces. 
(Code 1958, 19.45; Code 1980, 22-126) 
8-906 - OWNER OF VEHICLE PRESUMED GUILTY 
    If any vehicle is found stopped, standing or parking in any manner violative of the provisions of this Chapter, and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner or person or corporation in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2841, 2, 6-13-78; Code 1980, 22-127) 
8-907 - TAMPERING WITH MARKS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, in any manner, any chalk marks placed on a tire of a vehicle by any police officer or community service officer in order to enforce the provisions of this Article until and unless such vehicle shall first be operated and moved on the streets of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2841, 4, 6-13-78; Code 1980, 22-128) 
8-908 - BUSINESS WITH DRIVE-IN ACCESS 
    In all businesses conducted upon property abutting streets and avenues in the City where the nature of the business is such that it is necessary for such business to have ingress over the sidewalk, such drive-in access shall be limited to the actual space necessary; and curb parking shall be so arranged that the necessary space for the drive-in access shall be available to the operator of the business. (Code 1958, 19.40; Code 1980, 22-132) 
8-909 - NEAR BUILDING ENTRANCES 
    No vehicle shall be permitted to park or stand at the curb within thirty (30) feet of the main entrance of any hotel, theater, church, schoolhouse, hospital or other public building, which shall be determined by measuring fifteen (15) feet on each side of a point on the curb opposite the middle of the main entrance of the building. 
(Code 1958, 19.40; Code 1980, 22-133) 
8-910 - PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
A.  Displaying such vehicle for sale; or 
B.  Repair such vehicle except repair necessitated by an emergency; or 
C.  Washing or greasing such vehicle. 
(Code 1958, §19.44, 19.49; Code 1980, 22-134) 
8-911 - PARKING IN ALLEYS 
    No vehicle shall be parked in any alley except for the purpose of loading or unloading and then only during the time it is being loaded or unloaded and for the time necessary. Every vehicle, while loading or unloading in any alley, shall be parked in such manner as will cause the least obstruction possible to traffic. 
(Code 1958, 19.48; Code 1980, 22-135) 
8-912 - PARKING RULES 
    It shall be unlawful to park or to permit any vehicle to stand at any time in any of the following places except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device: 
A.  In any intersection. 
B.  In a crosswalk. 
C.  Upon any bridge or viaduct or the approach thereto. 
D.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of a point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone. 
E.  Within twenty (20) feet or six and ten hundredths (6.10) meters of any intersection or crosswalk. 
F.  Within fifteen (15) feet or four and fifty-seven hundredths (4.57) meters of a fire hydrant. 
G.  At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway. 
H.  On any sidewalk. 
I.  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
J.  At any time on the following streets: 
1.  University Drive Circle, all of the streets and ways platted as such, except that portion bounded by 25th Street designated for parking. 
2.  Second Avenue, from the south City limits to the north City limits. 
3.  16th Street, from the west right-of-way line of 4th Avenue west to the east right-of-way line of 6th Avenue. 
4.  24th Street, from the west boundary of 9th Avenue west to the west boundary of Lot 7, Lincoln Way Villa Plots, if extended north across such street. 
5.  25th Street, between the east boundary of Central Avenue and the east boundary of Avenue "N." 
K.  Adjacent to or beside any curb painted yellow. 
L.  No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a cab stand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone. 
M.  It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the consent of the owner of the property. 
N.  Parking prohibited in spaces designated for disabled or handicapped persons. 
1.  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle in a stall or space designated for physically handicapped persons, if, immediately adjacent to and visible from such stall or space, there is posted a sign known as the international wheelchair symbol consisting of a profile view of a stylized wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background, unless the driver of the car is disabled. 
2.  The provisions of subdivision (1) herein shall apply to all off-street parking facilities. 
O.  It is unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in front yards or side yards, other than approved driveways, in residential districts. 
(Code 1958, 19.32; Ord. No. 3307, 1, 12-9-80; Ord. No. 3795, 1, 11-26-85; Code 1980, 22-136; Ord. No. 5564, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 7575, 3-9-2010) 
8-913 - TWO-HOUR PARKING; GENERALLY 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any of the following streets or portions of streets and public parking areas for a period of time in excess of two (2) consecutive hours between the hours of eight (8:00) a.m. and six (6:00) p.m. on Monday through Friday, inclusive: 
STREET EXTENT Central Avenue From South Railroad Street to 19th Street Central Avenue West side, between 30th Street and 31st Street  
    Each period of two-hour consecutive hours during which any motor vehicle is parked in the prohibited areas during any day shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this section. All areas designated for two-hour parking shall be properly posted with appropriate signs by the City Manager. 
(Code 1958, 19.51; Ord. No. 2841, 1, 6-13-78; Ord. No. 3620, 1, 8-9-83; Ord. No. 3743, 1, 5-28-85; Ord. No. 3732, 1, 3-12-85; Ord. No. 3877, 1, 11-25-86; Ord. No. 3963, 1, 1-10-87; Ord. No. 5109, 1, 4-10-90; Code 1980, 22-137; Ord. No. 5284, 7-23-91; Ord. No. 6315, 9-9-97; Ord. No. 6530, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 7370, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 7676, 9-27-2011; Ord. No. 7688, 11-8-2011) 
8-913.1 - THREE-HOUR PARKING; GENERALLY 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any of the following streets or portions of streets and public parking areas for a period of time in excess of three (3) consecutive hours between the hours of eight (8:00) a.m. and six (6:00) p.m. on Monday through Friday, inclusive: 
STREET EXTENT Avenue A West side from 25th Street to 23rd Street Avenue A West side from 22nd Street to Railroad Street Avenue A East side from 25th Street to 23rd Street Avenue A East side from 22nd Street to Railroad Street Central Avenue Both sides from 25th Street to North Railroad Street 1st Avenue West side from 24th Street to 23rd Street 1st Avenue East side from 23rd Street to Railroad Street 1st Avenue West side 22nd Street to Railroad Street 24th Street Both sides from the alley east of 2nd Avenue to 1st Avenue 24th Street North side from Avenue A to the alley east of Avenue A 23rd Street Both sides from 1st Avenue to Central Avenue 23rd Street North side from Central Avenue to Avenue A 22nd Street Both sides from 2nd Avenue to Avenue A 21st Street Both sides from 1st Avenue to Avenue A 21st Street South side, from Avenue B to the alley west of Avenue B Railroad Street North side from 1st Avenue to Avenue A Parking Lot Directly south of the Public Library west of 1st Avenue  
    Each period of three-hour consecutive hours during which any motor vehicle is parked in the prohibited areas during any day shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this section. All areas designated for three-hour parking shall be properly posted with appropriate signs by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 7688, 11-8-2011) 
8-914 - THREE-HOUR PARKING; COURTESY PARKING TICKETS 
    During each calendar year, commencing January 1 and terminating December 31, all registered owners of vehicles found in violation of the three-hour parking limits established by Section 8-913 will receive a courtesy ticket for their first violation of the three-hour parking restrictions for that year. A copy of the courtesy citation ticket shall be placed on the violator's vehicle at the time of violation. Every person who violates the three-hour parking provisions of Section 8-913 two (2) or more times during the calendar year shall be issued an official parking citation for the second and each subsequent violation and shall be subject to the penalties as provided by Section 8-1206 of this Code. Violations for which official parking citations are issued shall be cumulative from year to year. 
(Ord. No. 3977, 1, 12-22-87; Code 1980, 22-137.1; Ord. No. 6914, 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 7688, 11-8-2011) 
8-915 - PROHIBITED BETWEEN 2:00 A.M. AND 6:00 A.M. DURING SNOW EMERGENCY 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any of the following streets or portions of streets or parking lots during a snow emergency period when the City Manager has, by declaration, prohibited parking on said streets in accordance with Section 8-915.1 of this Code. 
STREET EXTENT Central Avenue From 15th Street to 26th Street Railroad Street From 2nd Avenue to Avenue B Avenue A From Railroad Street to 26th Street 1st Avenue From Railroad Street to 26th Street 1st Avenue From 15th Street to 17th Street 16th Street From Central Avenue to 1st Avenue 19th Street From 1st Avenue to Avenue A 21st Street From 2nd Avenue to Avenue B 22nd Street From 2nd Avenue to Avenue B 23rd Street From the alley west of 2nd Avenue to Avenue B 24th Street From 2nd Avenue to Avenue B  
(Code 1958, 19.50; Code 1980, 22-138; Ord. No. 5326, 11-12-91; Ord. No. 7782, 1-22-2013) 
8-915.1 - DECLARATION OF SNOW EMERGENCY 
    Whenever there is sufficient snow fall to constitute a public hazard, impairing transportation and jeopardizing the welfare and safety of the citizens of the City, the City Manager or his/her designated representative may declare a snow emergency to exist and may prohibit the parking and stopping of vehicles in such streets or districts as he/she may designate, and he/she may put into effect a parking prohibition on parts of or on all streets by declaring that parking be prohibited on one side of the street, designating either the odd or even address numbered side, at his/her discretion. The City Manager or his/her designated representative may use either alternative, or a combination of both, which shall be for the purpose of enabling the City Transportation Department to expeditiously remove the snow from the streets. The parking, stopping or allowing to remain standing of any vehicle in any streets or districts in which parking is prohibited during the period of time set forth in such declaration shall constitute a violation of this section, punishable as a traffic infraction in accordance with Section 1-112 of the City Code, subject to a minimum fine of Fifty Dollars ($50.00). In addition to any penalty assessed for the violation of this section, any vehicle parked or left standing in violation of this section, or the provisions of any declaration adopted pursuant thereto, may be impounded as provided in Article 11, Chapter 8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 6724, 11-28-2000) 
8-915.2 - SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any of the following streets or portions of streets during a snow emergency period when the City Manager or his/her designated representative, has, by declaration, prohibited parking on said streets. 
STREET EXTENT 11th Street From 30th Avenue to Avenue M 16th Street From 17th Avenue to Avenue M 25th Street From East City limits to West City limits 29th Street From 2nd Avenue to Lakeview Drive 31st Street From 2nd Avenue to Avenue N 33rd Street From 2nd Avenue to 6th Avenue 35th Street From 6th Avenue to 30th Avenue 39th Street From 30th Avenue to Antelope Avenue 45th Street From Avenue N to Avenue R 48th Street From 6th Avenue to Avenue N 56th Street From West City limits to East City limits 2nd Avenue From North City limits to South City limits 5th Avenue From 11th Street to 33rd Street 6th Avenue From 33rd Street to 48th Street 17th Avenue From 35th Street to North City limits 30th Avenue From 11th Street to North City limits Avenue A From 31st Street to 39th Street Avenue E From 22nd Street to 56th Street Avenue H From 11th Street to 22nd Street Avenue I From 25th Street to 39th Street Avenue M From 11th Street to 27th Street and Avenue N Avenue N From 25th Street to North City limits Avenue R From 39th Street to 45th Street Antelope Avenue From Highway 30 to 39th Street Country Club Lane From 24th Street to 35th Street Country Club Lane From 39th Street to North City limits Grand Avenue From 25th Street to Antelope Avenue Lakeview Drive From 29th Street to 35th Street North Railroad Street From Avenue N to 30th Avenue South Railroad Street From Central Avenue to Avenue M Plaza Boulevard From Railroad Street to 24th Street University Drive From Lakeview Drive to 24th Street  
    The City Engineer shall place appropriate signs, marks, lines, signals or other traffic control devices indicating the existence of such snow emergency routes. The designation of any street, highway or portion thereof as a snow emergency route shall in no way affect any previous designation of that street or highway as an arterial or other road designation. A map of the City showing which streets or roads are currently designated as snow emergency routes shall be kept and maintained in the Office of the City Engineer available for public inspection. 
    The parking, stopping or allowing to remain standing of any vehicle in any street or district in which parking is prohibited during the period of time set forth in such declaration shall constitute a violation of this section, punishable as a traffic infraction in accordance with Section 1-113 of the City Code. In addition to any penalty assessed for the violation of this section, any vehicle parked or left standing in violation of this section, or the provisions of any declaration adopted pursuant thereto, may be impounded as provided in Article 11, Chapter 8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 6724, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 6755, 12-26-2000; Ord. No. 6838, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 7230, 12-27-2005; Ord. No. 7290, 8-22-2006) 
8-915.3 - PARKING PROHIBITED BETWEEN 12:00 A.M. AND 6:00 A.M. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any of the following streets or portions of streets or public parking areas: 
STREET EXTENT Parking lot South of 25th Street between Central Avenue and Avenue A (north of MONA)  
(Ord. No. 6555, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 6724, 11-28-2000) 
8-916 - ANGLE PARKING 
    On the following streets or portions of streets, vehicles shall be parked at the curb on an angle of forty-five (45) degrees with the curbline, and entered in the direction in which the traffic is permitted to travel: 
STREET EXTENT Central Avenue From 26th Street to 15th Street West Side of Central Avenue From 15th Street to 14th Street Avenue A From 26th Street to Railroad Street 1st Avenue From 26th Street to Railroad Street South Side of 26th Street From 7th Avenue to 9th Avenue  
(Code 1958, 19.40; Code 1980, 22-139; Ord. No. 7363, 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 7558, 11-24-2009) 
8-917 - PROHIBITED IN EXCESS OF EIGHT HOURS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any of the following streets or portions of streets and public parking areas for a period of time in excess of eight (8) consecutive hours: 
STREET EXTENT 1st Avenue From 25th Street to 24th Street 1st Avenue East side, between 23rd Street and 24th Street 1st Avenue West side, from two (2) hour parking lot south to Railroad Street 1st Avenue West side, from 23rd Street to 22nd Street 1st Avenue West side, from 21st Street to 22nd Street except for the north 150 feet Avenue A West side, from the entrance of the parking lot located between 22nd Street and 23rd Street, south to a point 100 feet south of the intersection of 22nd Street and Avenue A Avenue A East side, from 23rd Street to 22nd Street Avenue A West side, from 23rd Street to 22nd Street Avenue B From 25th Street to Railroad Street 24th Street From 2nd Avenue to the alley east of 2nd Avenue 24th Street From 1st Avenue to Avenue A 24th Street South side, from Avenue A to Avenue B 24th Street North side, from Avenue B to the alley west of Avenue B 23rd Street South side, from Central Avenue A to Avenue B 23rd Street From 2nd Avenue to 1st Avenue 23rd Street North side, from Avenue A to Avenue B 22nd Street From Avenue A to Avenue B 21st Street From 2nd Avenue to 1st Avenue Railroad Street From Avenue A to Avenue B Parking lot Directly east of 2nd Avenue and west of the alley between 21st Street and Railroad Street Parking lot Located on Avenue A between 22nd Street and 23rd Street north of City Hall Parking lot Located on the southeast corner of 22nd Street and Avenue A intersection Parking lot Located on the northeast corner of 21st Street and Avenue A intersection Parking lot Located west of Avenue B and east of the alley between 21st Street and 22nd Street Parking lot Located south of Railroad Street between Central Avenue and 1st Avenue Parking lot Located south of Railroad Street between Central Avenue and Avenue A Parking lot Located south of 25th Street between Central Avenue and Avenue A Parking lot Located between 23rd Street and 24th Street abutting 1st Avenue  
    Each period of eight (8) consecutive hours during which any motor vehicle is parked in the prohibited areas during any day shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this section. All areas designated for eight-hour parking shall be properly posted with appropriate signs by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 3964, 1, 11-10-87; Code 1980, 22-139.1; Ord. No. 5283, 7-23-91; Ord. No. 6315, 9-9-97; Ord. No. 6481, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 6530, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 7370, 8-28-2007) 
8-918 - FORTY-EIGHT HOUR PARKING PROHIBITED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to permit any vehicle to stand on one (1) side of the street within a block for a period longer then forty-eight (48) hours in the City. 
(Ord. No. 5058, 8, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 22-139.2) 
8-919 - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park recreational vehicles, such as boats, boat trailers, camping trailers, hauling trailers, etc., on the public street for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours or for any other period of time in excess of permitted or authorized parking as specified by a posted sign and only for the purposes of loading and unloading. 
(Ord. No. 5058, 7, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 22-144; Ord. No. 7438, 6-10-2008) 
8-920 - VEHICLES BACKED TO CURB 
    No vehicle shall remain backed to the curb except when it is actually loading or unloading and in no case longer than the actual time required. If the vehicle is horse-drawn, the horses shall be turned at right angles to the vehicles and in the direction in which traffic on that side of the street is moving. 
(Code 1958, 19.47; Code 1980, 22-140) 
8-921 - PARKING FOR PURPOSES OF LOADING AND UNLOADING GENERALLY 
A.  No person shall operate a motor truck upon that part of Central Avenue which lies between the north side of Railroad Street and the south side of Twenty-Fifth (25th) Street in the City, for more than one (1) block consecutively and then only for the purpose of loading or unloading in the block traversed; provided, that this section shall not be construed as preventing the crossing of Central Avenue at any street intersection; provided, further, that this section shall not be construed to interfere with any duly authorized parade. 
B.  No person shall park any oil truck within the limits of any street for a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to load or unload the same and in no event for a space of time longer than one (1) hour at any one time. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer the contents of one (1) truck to another while such trucks are parked in any street, except in case of breakdown or other emergency. 
D.  No vehicle made or used for the transportation of freight, produce or other bulk shall be parked upon that part of Central Avenue lying between the north boundary of Sixteenth (16th) Street and the south boundary of Twenty-Sixth (26th) Street excepting it is for the purpose of loading or unloading. Such vehicle may park at the curb for the actual length of time required to load or unload, and the person in charge of the work shall proceed with the work diligently and without delay and so far as practicable freight or other commodities shall be unloaded from the right side and not from the end of such vehicle, and such vehicle shall be drawn in close to and parallel with the curb for such purpose. 
(Code 1958, 19.39; Code 1980, 22-141) 
8-922 - SPECIFIC PARKING FOR LOADING PURPOSES ON 22ND STREET 
    Trucks or vehicles may park next to the curb on that portion of the North side of 22nd Street between Central Avenue and 1st Avenue from the East line of the alley East for a distance of thirty-six (36) feet for the purpose of loading or unloading freight or other commodities, subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Signs shall be placed at each end of the zone to identify the area between the signs as a loading zone; 
B.  Yellow paint shall be removed from the curb area adjacent; 
C.  The zone shall be open and accessible to use by the entire public for purposes of loading and unloading freight or other commodities; and 
D.  No operator shall park a truck or vehicle in said loading zone for a period in excess of twenty (20) continuous minutes. 
(Ord. No. 5691, 2-8-94) 
8-923 - TRUCKS PROHIBITED 
    No motor truck or commercial vehicle shall be permitted to park upon Twenty-Fifth (25th) Street between Central Avenue and "A" Avenue. 
(Code 1958, 19.40; Code 1980, 22-142) 
Cross reference- Driving trucks on certain streets prohibited, § 8-316 
8-924 - TRUCKS IN RESIDENTIAL USES 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck, trailer or semitrailer, except a truck, trailer or semitrailer being used for the purpose of delivering or collecting goods, wares, merchandise or materials, on any street adjacent to property classified by the ordinances of the City for residence purposes or on any street adjacent to a residential use for a period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious delivery or collection of goods, wares, merchandise or materials, and in no event for a period of time exceeding two (2) hours; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to trucks or trailers being used in connection with building repair, service or moving operations. 
(Code 1958, 19.39-1; Code 1980, 22-143; Ord. No. 8106, 9-13-2016) 
Cross reference- Driving trucks on certain streets prohibited, § 8-316 
8-925 - LOADING ZONES; PERMIT REQUIRED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, corporation or association to use any space on the surface of any street, within the corporate limits of the City of Kearney, for a truck loading zone, a passenger loading zone, a freight loading zone, or taxicab stand, as defined in this title, thereby rendering the street or sidewalk space so used unavailable for the parking of vehicles or the movement of vehicles or pedestrians, without first obtaining a permit in accordance with the terms and conditions hereinafter stated. 
(Ord. No. 3322, 1, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 22-157) 
8-926 - LOADING ZONES; APPLICATION 
    Applications for permits provided for in this division shall be made to the City Manager or officers designated by him/her. No permit shall be issued except to public conveyance concerns which wish to use such space for loading and unloading passengers, or to the leaseholders, tenants or record owners of the land adjacent to the space sought to be used for the purposes herein stated. Once a permit has been issued it may be renewed upon proof of the payment of the annual permit fee as provided for herein, unless such permit has been revoked, canceled, or suspended. 
(Ord. No. 3322, 2, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 22-157.1) 
8-927 - LOADING ZONES; FEE 
    For the purpose of defraying the cost to the City for regulating, marking and maintaining the use or privilege of a truck loading zone, passenger loading zone, freight loading zone or a taxicab stand along, or upon the surface of any street or sidewalk, there is hereby imposed an annual fee per space as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. Prior to the issuance of any permit provided for herein, such permit fee must be paid to the City of Kearney. 
(Ord. No. 3322, 3, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 22-157.2; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
8-928 - LOADING ZONES; COLOR CODE FOR MARKING ZONES 
    Each truck loading zone, passenger loading zone, freight loading zone or taxicab stand shall be marked by appropriate sign and/or painted curb in compliance with the following color code: 
A.  For truck loading zone and freight loading zone, the curb color shall be green; 
B.  For passenger loading zone and taxicab stand, the curb color shall be white. 
(Ord. No. 3322, 4, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 22-158) 
8-929 - LOADING ZONES; CITY'S RIGHT TO REFUSE PERMIT APPLICATION 
    The application for the issuance of a permit under this division shall not be construed to vest any rights thereto in the applicant, or limit the right of the City of Kearney, by and through its City Manager, to refuse said applicant. The City of Kearney by and through its City Manager or designated representative reserves the right to refuse an application when the issuance of such permit would create a traffic hazard or not be beneficial to the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 3322, 5, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 22-158.1) 
8-930 - LOADING ZONES; CANCELLATION OF PERMIT 
    The City of Kearney reserves the right, by and through its City Manager or designated representative, to cancel any permit at any time. When any permit has been canceled, surrendered, or terminated, the permit holder shall be responsible for the costs necessary to replace the street, including curbing or sidewalk, in the same condition it was prior to the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 3322, 6, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 22-159) 
8-931 - LOADING ZONES; PERMITTED ZONES USED ONLY FOR STATED PURPOSE 
    Compliance with the provisions of this division shall not give the person complying therewith any greater, different, or additional rights or privileges than are provided by the ordinances of the City of Kearney, or rules and regulations thereunder relating to truck loading zones, passenger loading zones, freight loading zones, parking limit zones, or taxicab stands. Such zones, as defined and enumerated herein, shall not be used by the permit holder for parking unattended motor vehicles. Such zones are available only for the purposes stated herein and only for the reasonable time required to accomplish such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 3322, 7, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 22-159.1) 
8-932 - LOADING ZONES; TIME LIMIT FOR USE OF PASSENGER ZONE 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed five (5) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 3322, 8, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 22-160) 
8-933 - LOADING ZONES; LIMITATIONS ON USE OF FREIGHT ZONE 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 3322, 9, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 22-160.1) 
8-934 - LOADING ZONES; TRUCK ZONE LIMITATIONS 
    No person shall stand, stop or park any vehicle except a truck or a trailer in a place marked as a truck loading zone. No person shall stop, stand or park a trailer or a truck for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as truck loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 3322, 10, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 22-160.2) 
8-935 - LOADING ZONES; TAXICABS TO BE PARKED ONLY IN STANDS 
    The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 3322, 11, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 22-161) 
8-936 - LOADING ZONES; USE OF TAXI STAND BY OTHER THAN CAB DRIVER 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. (Ord. No. 3322, 12, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 22-161.1) 
8-937 - LOADING ZONES; MARKING OF ZONES BY OTHER THAN CITY PROHIBITED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to paint the curb of any street or in any manner set aside or attempt to prevent or regulate the parking of vehicles in any street or part thereof. The marking or designating of portions of streets or alleys where parking of vehicles is prohibited or limited shall be done only by the City through its proper officers. 
(Ord. No. 3322, 13, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 22-162) 
8-938 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6049, 12-12-95) 
8-939 - VIOLATIONS BUREAU; DESIGNATION 
    The Police Department is hereby designated as the Violations Bureau for the City. 
(Code 1958, 19.52; Code 1980, 22-151; Ord. No. 6050, 12-12-95; transferred from Code 1994, 8-1202) 
8-940 - VIOLATIONS BUREAU; DUTY OF OFFICERS GENERALLY 
    It shall be the duty of the police officers of the City to accept penalties and fees herein designated and to represent such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty in accordance with the proceedings set forth. 
(Code 1958, 19.52; Code 1980, 22-152; Ord. No. 6050, 12-12-95; transferred from Code 1994, 8-1203) 
8-941 - VIOLATIONS BUREAU; NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATORS 
    Violators of this Article shall be given notice in the form of an official police tag attached to the offending motor vehicle, which notice shall require such violators to appear forthwith at the Police Department. Such official police tag shall contain a statement that a complaint and warrant of arrest shall be issued to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the notice was affixed if such notice of violation is disregarded for a period of fifteen (15) days. 
(Code 1958, 19.53; Code 1980, 22-153; Ord. No. 6050, 12-12-95; transferred from Code 1994, 8-1204) 
8-942 - VIOLATIONS BUREAU; PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION 
    If any vehicle is found upon any street or alley in violation of any of the provisions of this Article, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation. (Code 1980, 22-154; Ord. No. 6050, 12-12-95; transferred from Code 1994, 8-1205) 
8-943 - VIOLATIONS BUREAU; PENALTIES AND FEES 
    Any violator of the provisions of Sections 8-901 through 8-937 of Article 9, Chapter 8, appearing at the Police Department and desiring to waive court appearance shall present the official police tag and pay the Police Department according to the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
    The first three dollars ($3.00) of the initial fine paid shall be assessed as a fee covering costs of administration. In the event that such violators fail to appear in response to such notice and pay the prescribed fine within fifteen (15) days, such violators or the owners of vehicles used to commit the offense shall be deemed guilty of a failure to appear, punishable as an infraction and shall be prosecuted and punished in accordance with the provisions of this Code. The Police Department may issue a citation or may cause a complaint and warrant to be filed against such persons who fail to comply with the procedures set forth in this division. 
(Code 1958, 19.54; Ord. No. 2841, 3, 6-13-78; Ord. No. 3976, 1, 12-22-87; Ord. No. 5058, 9, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 22-155; Ord. No. 6050, 12-12-95; transferred from Code 1994, 8-1206; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
8-944 - VIOLATIONS BUREAU; RECORD OF VIOLATIONS; DISPOSITION OF PENALTIES 
    Violations Bureau; Record of Violations; Disposition of Penalties and Fees Collected. 
    The Police Department shall make a record of all violators of this Article showing name of each violator, the time and date of each violation, the disposition of the case and the penalty and fees assessed. Such record shall be kept for a period of at least two (2) years. All money collected by the Police Department under this division shall be paid to the Director of Finance and Administration. 
(Code 1958, 19.55; Code 1980, 22-156; Ord. No. 6050, 12-12-95; transferred from Code 1994, 8-1207) 
ARTICLE 10. - STORAGE OF UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PREMISES 

8-1001 - DEEMED NUISANCE; EXCEPTION 
    It is hereby expressly found and determined that the practice of permitting unlicensed motor vehicles, motor vehicle bodies and motor vehicle chassis or parts therefrom to be stored or accumulated on private premises is unsightly and unhealthy and constitutes a nuisance to the citizens and residents of this City; provided, the storage or accumulation of such motor vehicles, motor vehicle bodies and motor vehicle chassis or parts therefrom in completely enclosed buildings shall not be considered a nuisance. 
(Code 1958, 19.64; Code 1980, 22-164) 
8-1002 - PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property within the City, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, to allow, cause or permit any non-operating, wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicle, including motor vehicle bodies, motor vehicle chassis or parts therefrom, to be stored, placed, kept, retained or accumulated on such property longer than fifteen (15) days; provided that this section shall not apply to any such motor vehicle, motor vehicle body or chassis or parts therefrom that are kept or stored in a completely enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the lawful operation of such business enterprise or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place or manner. 
(Code 1958, 19.65; Ord. No. 5058, 11, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 22-165) 
8-1003 - INAPPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE TO CERTAIN PREMISES 
    This Article shall not apply to the premises for which permit has been granted to a junk dealer under the provisions of Chapter 3, Article 17, nor shall it apply to the premises where a licensed motor vehicle or a farm implement dealer conducts his/her business. 
(Code 1958, 19.66; Code 1980, 22-166) 
8-1004 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS OF THIS ARTICLE 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Each day any such violation shall occur or continue shall constitute and be deemed a separate offense. Any person charged with the commission of an infraction which was committed more than two (2) years after such person's last conviction for the same infraction shall be charged as though the most recent infraction were a first offense. 
(Code 1958, 19.67; Ord. No. 5058, 12, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 22-167) 
ARTICLE 11. - TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES 

8-1101 - DEFINITIONS 
A.  Impoundment. For purposes of this Article, the term "impoundment" shall mean removal of a vehicle to a storage facility, either by an officer or authorized agent or agents of the City Police Department, or by a contractor for towing and storage, in response to a request from an officer or authorized agent of the Kearney Police Department. 
B.  Vehicle. For the purposes of this Article, the term "vehicle" shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 3991, §1(1), (2), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-172) 
8-1102 - DUTY OF POLICE 
    It shall be the duty of the Police Department to remove and impound all vehicles found upon the streets, alleys, and public areas and ways in the City in those circumstances and situations defined hereinafter in accordance with the procedures and notice requirements provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(3), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-173) 
8-1103 - IMPOUNDMENT; WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE. 
    A vehicle may be impounded with or without citation and without giving prior notice to its owner or the person entitled to possession as required by section 8-1108 only under the following circumstances: 
A.  When the vehicle is impeding or is likely to impede the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or 
B.  When the vehicle is illegally parked in a zone designated "truck," "bus," "loading," "hooded-meter," "taxi," or other similar zones where, by order of the Council, parking is limited to certain classes of vehicles or is prohibited during certain hours, on designated days or at all times, and where such vehicle is interfering with the proper and intended use of such zones; or 
C.  When the vehicle poses an immediate danger to the public safety; or 
D.  When a police officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle is stolen; or 
E.  When a police officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle constitutes evidence of a crime or contains evidence of a crime if impoundment is reasonably necessary in such instance to obtain or preserve such evidence; or 
F.  There is a public emergency requiring removal of the vehicle; or 
G.  The motor vehicle has accumulated five (5) unpaid parking citations, and the Police Department has sent the registered owner of the vehicle notice of the fifth (5th) unpaid ticket by registered or certified mail; or 
H.  Whenever any police officer shall find a vehicle standing unattended upon a street or highway in violation of any of the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-601 to 60-6,374 or any City ordinance. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize seizure of a vehicle without a warrant where a warrant would otherwise be required. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(4), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-174; Ord. No. 6084, 2-27-96; Ord. No. 6223, 1-28-97) 
8-1104 - IMPOUNDMENT; WITH NOTICE 
    A vehicle not subject to impoundment without prior notice under the terms of section 8-1103 may be impounded after a notice of such proposed impoundment has been securely attached to and conspicuously displayed on the vehicle for a period of ninety-six (96) hours prior to such impoundment, and notice of the proposed impoundment, the form of which shall be promulgated by the City Manager, including procedure for redemption, and opportunity for hearing to contest the propriety of the proposed impoundment as provided in section 8-1109 hereinafter, has been mailed by certified or registered mail to the last-known address of the registered owner of the vehicle as may be disclosed by the vehicle license number if such is obtainable, and to any other person who claims the right to possession of the vehicle if such a claim is known to the Police Department, for the following reasons: 
A.  When such vehicle is parked and/or used in violation of any law, ordinance or regulation; or 
B.  When such vehicle is abandoned, as that term is defined by this Code, subsections 8-502(A) through (D) inclusive; or 
C.  When such vehicle is so mechanically defective as to be unsafe for operation; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to prevent the operation of any such defective vehicle to a place for correction of equipment defect in the manner directed by any police officer. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(5), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-175) 
8-1105 - REMOVAL OF NOTICE 
    Removal of the warning notice provided for by section 8-1104 herein from a vehicle without first having moved the vehicle to a legally permitted location shall constitute an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(6), 3-8-88; Ord. No. 5058, 13, 9-26-89; Code 1980, 22-176) 
8-1106 - HOW IMPOUNDMENT TO BE EFFECTED 
    When impoundment is authorized by this Chapter, a vehicle may be impounded either by an officer or authorized agent of the Police Department or by a contractor for towing and storage acting at the request of an office or authorized agent of the Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(7), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-177) 
8-1107 - TOWING 
A.  The City may contract the services of one (1) or more competent towing service firms for the removal of motor vehicles taken into the custody of the City for impoundment under any provision of this Code. Said contract shall provide for a schedule of maximum charges for towing of such motor vehicles, which charges shall be assessed to the City. 
B.  A towing service company who, at the request of the City, takes a vehicle into custody shall submit their charges for the service for the just and reasonable costs of towing to the City. The Police Department may retain possession of the vehicle until all charges, including towing fees, storage fees, administrative fees, and any additional costs are paid, and may cause the vehicle to be sold at public auction pursuant to section 8-1114 herein. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(8), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-178) 
8-1108 - NOTICE TO OWNER THAT VEHICLE HAS BEEN IMPOUNDED 
A.  If any motor vehicle is impounded by the City, the Chief of Police shall make reasonable efforts to ascertain the names and addresses of the registered owner and legal owner if any, and/or the person(s) entitled to possession. 
B.  If the names and addresses of such owners or persons entitled to possession can be ascertained, except as to vehicles mentioned in subsection (D) of this section, the Chief of Police shall, except for those given notice prior to towing in accordance with section 8-1105 hereof, cause notice to be mailed within twenty-four (24) hours, holidays and Sundays excluded, of the date of recovery forthwith, by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the registered owner of the vehicle, or person legally entitled to possession. Such notice shall include the following information: the location where the vehicle may be redeemed by the owner or person entitled to possession, upon satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession; the amount of any fines, towing fees, storage fees, and costs or administrative fees which must be paid or posted pursuant to this Code; the date after which the vehicle will be subject to public sale; and, that a hearing on the validity of the tow and on the amount of costs and fees may be had if requested within five (5) days of receipt of the notice. 
C.  Actual notice of a tow may be given personally to the owner or person entitled to possession. Such actual notice must include all information required under subsection (B) of this section. Actual notice may be used in lieu of the mailed notice required by subsection (B). 
D.  With respect to vehicles which have been taken as evidence, or are recovered after having been stolen, the notice set forth in subsection (B) of this section shall be given within twenty-four (24) hours of the date of recovery, or of release by the prosecuting attorney if the vehicle is held for evidence. 
E.  The form of the notice provided for by this section shall be promulgated by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(9), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-179) 
8-1109 - HEARING 
A.  Upon written request of the legal owner or the person entitled to possession of the vehicle being delivered to the Kearney Police Department, a hearing shall be held before the Buffalo County Court or an independent hearing officer to be appointed by the City Manager. 
B.  The hearing shall be set and conducted within two (2) regular court days of receipt of the request, holidays, Saturdays, and Sundays not included. The hearing can be set for a later date if the owner or person entitled to possession so requests. At the hearing, the owner may contest: 
1.  The validity of the action of the Police Department in taking the vehicle into custody; and, 
2.  The amount of the towing and storage fees and administrative costs charged for the impoundment. 
C.  At any time prior to the requested hearing, the owner or the person entitled to possession of the vehicle may regain possession of the impounded vehicle by posting with the City security in the form of cash in an amount sufficient to cover costs of towing, storage and any fines or administrative costs owed. 
D.  If the judge or hearing officer finds that: 
1.  The action of the City in impounding the vehicle was proper, the judge or hearing officer shall enter an order supporting the removal and impoundment. 
2.  The action of the City in impounding the vehicle was invalid, the judge or hearing officer shall: 
(a)  Order the vehicle released to the owner; 
(b)  Find that the owner is not liable for any towing, storage, or other charges occasioned by the taking; and 
(c)  If the person requesting the hearing does not appear at the scheduled hearing, the judge or hearing officer may enter an order supporting the impoundment and assessment of towing, storage, and administrative costs, and apply any security posted against such costs. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(10), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-180) 
8-1110 - REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE; IN GENERAL 
    The legal owner, registered owner or person entitled to possession of an impounded vehicle my reclaim such vehicle any time after it is taken into custody, and before it is sold, upon presentation of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession to the Chief of Police, and payment of towing and storage charges, including administrative fees and costs, or posting of security required under this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(11), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-181) 
8-1111 - REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE; FEES 
    Any person entitled to redeem an impounded vehicle shall pay to the Police Department the actual cost of towing the vehicle, the cost of storage, and an administrative fee thereof, before the vehicle is released, as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(14), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-182; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
8-1112 - REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE; EXEMPTION FROM FEES 
A.  No impoundment fee, storage fee, and/or towing or other costs shall be assessed against the owner of the vehicle when the vehicle is impounded by order of the Police Department, and not by direction of the vehicle owner, and verified as stolen by the Police Department, when: 
1.  Substantial evidence of theft exists, as determined by the recovering officer; or, 
2.  The vehicle was reported as stolen before it was impounded, and there is no tangible evidence of negligence by an authorized user which contributed to the theft, including but not limited to, keys left on or in the vehicle; provided, that the owner or the person authorized to redeem the vehicle shall pay any applicable storage charges or costs commencing on the seventh day after impoundment for such purpose. 
B.  No impoundment fee, storage fee, towing charge, or other costs shall be assessed against the owner of the vehicle which is being held for investigatory purposes and which is redeemed within ninety-six (96) hours after the Police Department shall have notified the owner of the release of such vehicle; provided, such owner or person authorized to obtain possession of such impounded vehicle shall pay any charges assessed for storage or costs after said ninety-six hour period; provided further, that if the registered owner or driver authorized by the registered owner is arrested or charged with a crime in connection with the incident leading to impoundment, the owner is not exempted from towing, administrative costs or fees. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(15), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-183) 
8-1113 - APPRAISAL OF VEHICLES 
    Within ten (10) days of any motor vehicle coming into the custody of the City for any reason, the Chief of Police shall cause such vehicle to be appraised. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(12), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-184) 
8-1114 - VEHICLES NOT REDEEMED 
    Any impounded vehicle not redeemed within thirty (30) days of mailing of the notice required by section 8-1108 of this Article or ordered released by a judge or hearing officer after appeal by the owner or person entitled to possession, shall be deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(13), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-185) 
8-1115 - CERTAIN VEHICLES DEEMED NUISANCE 
    Automobiles illegally parked or falling within the definitions of vehicles which may be impounded without prior notice, or falling within the definitions of vehicles which may be impounded only after notice, and vehicles which are abandoned are hereby determined to constitute a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and are hereby declared to constitute and to be nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 3991, 1(16), 3-8-88; Code 1980, 22-186) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 5, Art. 4 
ARTICLE 12. - (REPEALED AND TRANSFERRED) 

8-1201 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6041, 11-28-95) 
8-1202 - TRANSFERRED TO 8-939. 
(Ord. No. 6050, 12-12-95) 
8-1203 - TRANSFERRED TO 8-940. 
(Ord. No. 6050, 12-12-95) 
8-1204 - TRANSFERRED TO 8-941. 
(Ord. No. 6050, 12-12-95) 
8-1205 - TRANSFERRED TO 8-942. 
(Ord. No. 6050, 12-12-95) 
8-1206 - TRANSFERRED TO 8-943. 
(Ord. No. 6050, 12-12-95) 
8-1207 - TRANSFERRED TO 8-944. 
(Ord. No. 6050, 12-12-95) 
ARTICLE 13. - ANIMALS GENERALLY 

8-1301 - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    ABANDON: To leave any animal for any length of time without making effective provision for its food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal's health. 
    ANIMAL: Any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, including dogs. 
    ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY: The animal control authority shall consist of three (3) members: The City Manager, the Chief of Police and the Animal Warden. 
    ANIMAL SHELTER: Any premises designated by action of the City for the purposes of impounding and caring for all animals found running at large in violation of this Chapter. 
    ANIMAL WARDEN: The person employed by the City Manager as the animal enforcement officer. 
    AT LARGE: Any animal shall be deemed to be at large when it is off the property of its owner and not under control of a competent person. 
    CRUELLY MISTREAT: To knowingly and intentionally kill, maim, disfigure, torture, beat, mutilate, burn, scald, or otherwise set upon any animal. 
    CRUELLY NEGLECT: To fail to provide any animal in one's care, whether as owner or custodian, with food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal's health. 
    DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS: Any wild mammal, reptile, or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition and which, because of its size, vicious nature, or other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters; and any domestic mammal, reptile, or fowl which, because of its size, vicious propensity, or other characteristics would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters. 
    DOMESTIC ANIMALS: Animal species other than "wild animals" as defined herein that have been domesticated by humans and are typically kept as pets, livestock, or fowl for companionship, food sources or working purposes. 
    EXPOSED TO RABIES: An animal has been exposed to rabies within the meaning of this Chapter if it has been bitten by, or been exposed to, any animal known to have been infected with rabies. 
    FOWL: Domesticated bird species kept by humans for future consumption as food sources, or kept for the breeding of offspring for the same purpose. Fowl are generally kept in pens and consist of chicken and turkey species; pheasants, quail and similar upland game birds, waterfowl including ducks and geese. 
    HOUSEHOLD PETS: Domesticated animal species kept by humans for companionship, entertainment or as a hobby typically within the confines of a residence, oftentimes in an enclosure of some type, but some types of household pets routinely leave the confines of the residence and are brought into the public realm. Typical pets include dogs; cats; potbelly pigs; specialty rabbits; laboratory rats and mice; guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils and similar rodents; chinchillas and ferrets; parrot and parakeet type birds; finches; doves; non-venomous reptiles and amphibians; arachnids; and fresh and saltwater fish. 
    HUMANE KILLING: The destruction of an animal by a method which causes the animal a minimum of pain and suffering. 
    KENNEL OPERATOR: Any person engaged in the commercial business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding cats or dogs. 
    LARGE ANIMAL PETS: Domesticated hooved animal species kept by humans that are typically housed in pens or enclosures outside of a residence such as a corral, barn, stable, or fenced pasture. Large animals typically kept as pets include horses, mules, ponies, cows, calves, sheep, goats, llamas, alpacas and pigs. 
    LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Any member of the Animal Control Authority, any member of the Police Department, or any other public official authorized to enforce animal control laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances. 
    LIVESTOCK: Domesticated hooved animal species that are kept by humans for future consumption as food sources, or kept for the breeding of offspring for the same purpose. Livestock are generally kept in pastures and pens. 
    OWNER: Any person owning, keeping or harboring one (1) or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three (3) consecutive days or more. 
    PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any animal or animals which: 
A.  Molests or attacks passersby or passing vehicles. 
B.  Attacks other animals. 
C.  Trespasses on school grounds. 
D.  Is repeatedly at large. 
E.  Damages private or public property. 
F.  Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or frequent manner disturbing the comfort or repose of the residents of any residential neighborhood. 
    RESTRAINT: Any animal secured by a leash or lead, or under the control of a responsible person and obedient to that person's commands, or within the real property limits of its owner. 
    SERVICE ANIMALS: Service Animals are defined as dogs that are individually trained to do work or perform tasks for people with disabilities. Service animals must be harnessed, leased, or tethered, unless these devices interfere with the service animal's work or the individual's disability prevents using these devices. In that case, the individual must maintain control of the animal through voice, signal, or other effective controls. Dogs whose sole function is to provide comfort or emotional support do not qualify as services animals. 
    SPAYED FEMALE: Any female which has been operated upon to prevent conception. 
    WILD ANIMALS: Any live monkey (nonhuman, primate), raccoon, skunk, fox, poisonous snake, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other warm blooded animal which can normally be found in the wild state. 
(Ord. No. 2711, 1(6.1), 9-27-77; Code 1980, 7-1; Ord. No. 6314, 8-26-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1008 
8-1302 - ENFORCEMENT 
A.  Regulations for the keeping of animals in residential zones are listed herein and in Section 46-102 of the Kearney City Code. 
B.  The provisions of this Chapter shall be enforced by the Animal Control Authority of the City and are hereby specifically made applicable to certain designated manufactured home courts and parks located in the limits of the City of Kearney as specified by resolution of the Council. 
    Upon the written request of the owners or operators of semi-public, but privately owned manufactured home courts within the City limits of the City of Kearney, the Council may by resolution specify the name and description of the area to which the provisions of Chapter 8 shall be applied. Such resolution shall be kept available for the public by the City Clerk and the City's animal wardens and police officers shall be authorized and empowered to exercise all their usual powers and duties with respect to regulation and enforcement of the provisions of Chapter 8 with regard to violations committed upon the premises of the specified courts. 
    The owners or operators of the said manufactured home courts shall furnish to the Police Department a current and accurate copy of the rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of the mobile home courts. 
(Code 1958, 6.7; Ord. No. 3348, 1, 2-24-81; Code 1980, 7-2; Ord. No. 7793, 3-12-2013) 
8-1303 - RIGHT OF ENTRY AND SEIZURE 
    For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this Chapter and to enforce its provisions, any agent of the Animal Control Authority or any police officer, is empowered to enter upon any premises upon which an animal is kept or harbored. Any agent of the Animal Control Authority may enter the premises where any animal is kept in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner and demand to examine such animal and to take possession of such animal, when in his/her opinion, it requires humane treatment. 
(Code 1958, 6.8; Code 1980, 7-3) 
8-1304 - INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT 
    No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any agent of the Animal Control Authority in the performance of any duty of such agent, or seek to release any animal in the custody of the Animal Control Authority, or its agents, except as provided in this Chapter. 
(Code 1958, 6.9; Code 1980, 7-4) 
8-1305 - RECORDS TO BE KEPT 
A.  Records of Impoundment, Etc. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Authority to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the licensing, impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into its custody. 
B.  Records of Bite Cases. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Authority to keep or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to it and its investigations of same. 
C.  Monetary Records and Audits. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Authority in conjunction with the City Clerk to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all moneys belonging to the City, which records shall be open to inspection at reasonable times by such persons responsible for similar records of the City and shall be audited by the City annually in the same manner as other City records are audited. 
(Code 1958, 6.10; Code 1980, 7-5) 
8-1306 - EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER 
A.  Hospitals, Etc. Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter, except where such duties are expressly stated. 
B.  Nonresident Dogs. The licensing requirements of this Chapter shall not apply to any dog belonging to a nonresident of the City and kept within the City for not longer than thirty (30) days; provided, that all such dogs shall at all times while in the City be kept within a building, enclosure or vehicle or be under restraint by the owner. 
(Code 1958, 6.16; Code 1980, 7-6) 
8-1307 - NUISANCES 
    No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his/her animals or allow them to become a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2711, 2(b)(6.2), 9-27-77; Code 1980, 7-7) 
8-1308 - CONFINEMENT OF VICIOUS, ETC., ANIMALS 
    Every dangerous or vicious animal shall be confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure and shall be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of its owner. 
(Ord. No. 2711, 3(6.3), 9-27-77; Code 1980, 7-8) 
8-1309 - WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS 
    Wild animals as defined in this Chapter are prohibited within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Code 1958, 6.11; Code 1980, 7-9; Ord. No. 7793, 3-12-2013) 
8-1310 - LARGE ANIMAL PETS, LIVESTOCK, AND FOWL PROHIBITED WITHIN CITY LIMITS 
    Large animal pets, livestock and fowl shall not be permitted inside the corporate limits of the City of Kearney. 
A.  Exemptions. The property on which the animals are located is zoned AG, Agricultural District, RR-1, Rural Residential District (Rural Standards) or RR-2, Rural Residential District (Intermediate Standards) as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City and as described in the Kearney City Code. The keeping of animals within these zoning districts is only allowed in accordance with the specific regulations enumerated in Section 46-102 of the Kearney City Code pertaining to the type, quantity and area requirements for animals. 
1.  The animals are considered a legal non-conforming use of the property in accordance with Chapter 58 of the Kearney City Code. 
2.  The animals are associated with a Therapeutic Riding Facility approved by the City Council in allowable commercial or industrial zones in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1958, 6.12; Code 1980, 7-10; Ord. No. 7793, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 7807, 5-14-2013) 
8-1311 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 6.14; Code 1980, 7-12; Ord. No. 7793, 3-12-2013) 
8-1312 - ANIMAL WASTES 
    The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the immediate removal and proper disposal of any excreta deposited by his/her animal(s) on public walks, recreation areas or private property. 
(Ord. No. 2711, 6(6.17), 9-27-77; Code 1980, 7-13) 
8-1313 - ABANDONMENT, NEGLECT AND CRUELTY; LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; POWERS; IMMUNITY 
A.  Any law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an animal has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly mistreated may seek a warrant authorizing entry upon private property to inspect, care for, or impound the animal. 
B.  Any law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an animal has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly mistreated may issue a citation to the owner as prescribed by law. 
C.  Any law enforcement officer acting under this section shall not be liable for damage to property if such damage is not the result of the officer's negligence. 
(Code 1958, 6.13; Code 1980, 7-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1012 
8-1314 - ANIMALS; ABANDONMENT, NEGLECT, AND CRUELTY; PENALTY 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, cruelly mistreat, or cruelly neglect an animal. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1009 
ARTICLE 14. - HOUSEHOLD PETS 

8-1401 - RESTRAINT OF DOGS 
    All dogs shall be kept under restraint at all times by their owner or owners and shall not be permitted to be at large off the premises or property of the owner unless under the control of a competent person. 
(Ord. No. 2711, 2(a)(6.2), 9-27-77; Code 1980, 7-25) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit running at large, Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-206, 16-235 
8-1402 - CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE PETS IN HEAT 
    Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for controlled or commercial breeding purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2711, 4(6.4), 9-27-77; Code 1980, 7-26) 
8-1403 - RABIES TAG; REQUIRED 
    No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog within the City unless such dog has a current rabies immunization tag as provided by this division. 
(Code 1958, 6.17; Code 1980, 7-34) 
8-1404 - APPLICATION; RABIES VACCINATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED 
    Every owner is responsible to obtain and maintain a current rabies certificate, issued by a competent licensed veterinarian, and to present same upon demand of the animal control authority or any police officer. 
(Code 1958, 6.18; Code 1980, 7-35; Ord. No. 5423, 5-26-92) 
8-1405 - TAGS, RABIES IMMUNIZATION 
    Upon complying with the provisions of this division relating to tags, there shall be issued to the owner a numbered metallic tag, stamped with the number and the year for which issued indicating rabies immunization, veterinary clinic who immunized, and the date the next immunization is due. The shape or design for such tag shall be changed from year to year. 
    Every owner is required to see that the tag is securely fastened to the dog's choke chain, collar or harness which must be worn by the dog at all times. 
(Code 1958, 6.24; Code 1980, 7-41) 
8-1406 - PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION 
    Any dog found within the City which does not have the tag required by the provisions of this division is hereby deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Code 1980, 7-42) 
8-1407 - IMPOUNDMENT; AUTHORITY 
    It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Authority or the Police Department to seize and impound, subject to the provisions of this Article, all animals found in violation of the provisions of this Chapter within this City, whether such animal shall be in the immediate presence of its owner or custodian or otherwise. 
(Code 1958, 6.25; Code 1980, 7-54) 
8-1408 - IMPOUNDMENT; ANIMALS OTHER THAN PETS 
    Animals other than dogs and cats shall be impounded when found in violation of the provisions of this Article within the City limits and disposed of in accordance with Section 54-415 of the Revised Statutes of this State. 
(Code 1958, 6.29; Code 1980, 7-55) 
8-1409 - IMPOUNDMENT; UNNECESSARY IF OWNER IS KNOWN 
    When dogs are found running at large, and their ownership is known to the agents of the Animal Control Authority, such dogs need not be impounded, but the agent may, at his/her discretion, cite the owners of such dogs to appear in court to answer charges of violation of this Article. 
(Code 1958, 6.27; Code 1980, 7-56) 
8-1410 - IMPOUNDMENT; NOTIFICATION OF OWNERS 
    Immediately upon impounding dogs, or other animals, the agents of the Animal Control Authority shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owners of such dogs, or other animals so impounded, and inform such owners of the conditions whereby they may regain custody of such animals. 
(Code 1958, 6.28; Code 1980, 7-57) 
8-1411 - IMPOUNDMENT; RIGHT TO REDEEM 
    The owner of any animal which has been impounded under the provisions of this Article, with the exception of those animals impounded under Sections 8-1420 through 8-1423 of this Code, shall have the right to redeem the same upon the payment of any and all fees which may be due and payable for the impoundment of such animal; provided, however, the payment of such impoundment fees shall not bar the imposition of any fine which may be imposed for the violation of this Chapter. 
(Code 1958, §6.31, 6.32; Ord. No. 3967, 1, 11-24-87; Code 1980, 7-58) 
8-1412 - IMPOUNDMENT; TIME FOR REDEMPTION 
    All impounded animals shall be redeemed within three (3) days after the same was impounded. Any such animal not redeemed within such time may be sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
(Code 1958, 6.25; Code 1980, 7-59) 
8-1413 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 6.33; Ord. No. 4083, 2, 2-28-89; Code 1980, 7-60; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
8-1414 - REPEALED 
(Code 1980, 7-61; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
8-1415 - IMPOUNDMENT; ADOPTING UNSPAYED FEMALE DOGS 
    No unspayed female dog which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray shall be allowed to be adopted from the animal shelter unless the prospective owner shall agree to have such female spayed. 
(Code 1958, 6.30; Code 1980, 7-62) 
8-1416 - IMPOUNDMENT; TRANSFER OF TITLE BY ANIMAL AUTHORITY 
    The Animal Control Authority may transfer the title of all animals held by it at its animal shelter to interested purchasers after the legal detention period has expired and the animal has not been claimed by its owner. In the event of such transfer of title it is expressly understood that the purchaser shall pay for each animal's food until it shall be removed from the animal shelter. 
(Code 1958, 6.26; Code 1980, 7-63) 
8-1417 - IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION OF CERTAIN ANIMALS; RESTRICTED 
    Any animal described in sections 8-1308, 8-1401 or 8-1439 found at large shall be impounded by the Animal Control Authority and may not be redeemed by owners, unless such redemption be authorized by any court having jurisdiction. 
    Any dog or other animal running at large which has bitten a person shall be impounded immediately by the Animal Control Authority and, at the termination of the required observation period, shall be destroyed unless redemption is previously authorized by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2711, 5(6.6), 9-27-77; Code 1980, 7-64) 
8-1418 - IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION OF CERTAIN ANIMALS; ANIMALS DEEMED NUISANCE 
    Any dog, cat or other animal impounded for being a public nuisance as defined by 8-1301 (A), (B), and (D) may not be redeemed unless such redemption is authorized by any court having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1958, 6.35; Code 1980, 7-65) 
8-1419 - IMPOUNDMENT; DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS 
    Any animal impounded under the provisions of this Article and not reclaimed by its owner may be humanely destroyed by the Animal Control Authority, or placed in the custody of some person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the provisions of this Chapter and such other regulations as shall be fixed by the Animal Control Authority; provided, that if the animal is one as to which the respective rights of the owner and the person in the possession or custody are determined by State law, such law shall be complied with. 
(Code 1958, 6.34; Code 1980, 7-66) 
8-1420 - IMPOUNDMENT; DESTRUCTION OF UNREDEEMABLE ANIMALS 
    When in the judgment of the Animal Control Authority or its agents, an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be redeemed. 
(Code 1958, 6.36; Code 1980, 7-67) 
8-1421 - VETERINARIANS TO SUBMIT RECORDS TO ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY 
    All veterinary clinics and veterinarians, resident within the city limits or who are vaccinating an animal that is kept or maintained within the city limits, shall maintain records on the issuance of rabies vaccinations, certificates of vaccination, rabies vaccination "tags," and duplicates thereof, and shall forward to the Animal Control Authority on a monthly basis, copies of the records on a continuing basis. Records shall include: owner information - name, address, telephone number; dog breed, description by color and markings, gender, pet name; tag number issued, date of issuance and expiration of vaccination. 
8-1422 - RABIES CONTROL; QUARANTINE OF ANIMALS BITING A PERSON 
    Every animal which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the Animal Control Authority, and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the Animal Control Authority for a period of ten (10) days, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the Animal Control Authority. At the discretion of the Animal Control Authority, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at the shelter designated as the City Animal Shelter, or at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his/her or her choice. In the case of stray animals, or in the cases of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated as the City Animal Shelter. 
(Code 1958, 6.37; Code 1980, 7-79) 
8-1423 - RABIES CONTROL; SURRENDER OF BITING ANIMALS; RELEASE OF UNINFECTED ANIMALS 
    The owner upon demand made by the Animal Control Authority shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine which expense shall be borne by the owner, and may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of fees provided for in section 8-1416 of this Code, and upon compliance of licensing provisions set forth in sections 8-1403 through 8-1410 of this Code, if the animal is a dog. 
(Code 1958, 6.38; Code 1980, 7-80) 
8-1424 - RABIES CONTROL; PROCEDURE WHEN SUSPECTED ANIMAL DIES 
    When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid, and dies while under such observation, the Animal Control Authority shall immediately send the head of such animal to the State Health Department for pathological examination. The Authority shall notify the proper public health officer of reports of human contacts and the diagnosis made of the suspected animal. 
(Code 1958, 6.39; Code 1980, 7-81) 
8-1425 - RABIES CONTROL; CITY-WIDE QUARANTINE; DECLARATION; CONFINEMENT, ETC. OF ANIMALS 
    When one (1) or both reports as provided by section 8-1428 give a positive diagnosis of rabies, the Animal Control Authority shall recommend a City-wide quarantine for a period of thirty (30) days and upon the invoking of such quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets, or permitted to be in the streets, during such period of quarantine. During such quarantine no animal may be taken or shipped from the City without written permission of the Animal Control Authority. 
(Code 1958, 6.40; Code 1980, 7-82) 
8-1426 - RABIES CONTROL; CITY-WIDE QUARANTINE; TREATMENT OF BITTEN ANIMALS 
    Rabies Control; City-Wide Quarantine; Destruction or Treatment of Bitten Animals. 
    During the period of rabies quarantine as provided by the preceding section, every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid, shall be forthwith destroyed, or at the owner's option and expense, shall be treated for rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian, or held under thirty (30) days' quarantine by the owner in the same manner as other animals are quarantined. 
(Code 1958, 6.41; Code 1980, 7-83) 
8-1427 - RABIES CONTROL; CITY-WIDE QUARANTINE; EXTENSION OF QUARANTINE 
    In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of City-wide quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional six (6) months. 
(Code 1958, 6.42; Code 1980, 7-84) 
8-1428 - RABIES CONTROL; UNAUTHORIZED DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL OF ANIMALS 
    Rabies Control; Unauthorized Destruction or Removal of Suspected Animals. 
    No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal biting a human, except as provided by this Article, nor remove same from the City limits without written permission from the Animal Control Authority. 
(Code 1958, 6.43; Code 1980, 7-85) 
8-1429 - RABIES CONTROL; SURRENDER OF EXPOSED DEAD ANIMALS 
    The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon demand be surrendered to the Animal Control Authority. (Code 1958, 6.44; Code 1980, 7-86) 
8-1430 - RABIES CONTROL; DISPOSITION OF INFECTED ANIMALS 
    The Animal Control Authority shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies. 
(Code 1958, 6.45; Code 1980, 7-87) 
8-1431 - RABIES CONTROL; REFUSAL TO SURRENDER ANIMALS 
    No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required in this Article when demand is made therefor by the Animal Control Authority. 
(Code 1958, 6.46; Code 1980, 7-88) 
8-1432 - RABIES CONTROL; REPORT OF PERSONS BITTEN BY ANIMALS 
    It shall be the duty of every physician, or other practitioner, to report to the Animal Control Authority the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. 
(Code 1958, 6.47; Code 1980, 7-89) 
8-1433 - RABIES CONTROL; VETERINARIAN'S REPORT OF SUSPECTED ANIMALS 
    It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Animal Control Authority his/her diagnosis of any animal observed by him/her as a rabies suspect. 
(Code 1958, 6.48; Code 1980, 7-90) 
8-1434 - EXEMPTIONS FROM ARTICLE 
    The provisions of this Article shall not cover existing livestock by sale barn commercial operators or persons in the business of buying and selling livestock or of commercial and licensed meat packers or commercial pet shops located within the commercial zoned districts. 
(Code 1958, 6.56; Ord. No. 3398, 1, 6-9-81; Code 1980, 7-101) 
8-1435 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 6.5; Code 1980, 7-102; Ord. No. 7793, 3-12-2013) 
8-1436 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 6.50; Code 1980, 7-103; Ord. No. 7793, 3-12-2013) 
8-1437 - REPEALED 
(Code 1958, 6.51; Code 1980, 7-104; Ord. No. 7793, 3-12-2013) 
8-1438 - SANITARY REGULATIONS 
    All pens, enclosures, and shelter structures wherein household pets are kept, under this Article, shall be kept in a sanitary condition, and the bedding, offal, manure and waste material accumulating from such household pets shall be removed or disposed of in a sanitary manner at least once within every seven (7) days, and all such pens, enclosures and shelter structures shall, at all times be kept clean or disinfected so as to prevent the breeding of flies and other bacteria carrying insects, and the emission of deleterious and offensive odors there from. 
(Code 1958, 6.54; Code 1980, 7-105; Ord. No. 7793, 3-12-2013) 
8-1439 - DOGS AND CATS; LIMIT ON NUMBER 
    No owner or keeper of any dogs or cats shall keep, harbor, or maintain in, about, or upon the premises occupied by such owner as his or her residence, more than four (4) dogs and/or cats at any one time. The offspring of any dog or cat shall not count toward the maximum number of dogs or cats allowed, for a period of four (4) months after the birth of said offspring. However, only one exempt litter of cats or dogs may be kept in a household at any one time. For the purposes of this Article, the term "owner or keeper" shall include the head of any family and all family members and guests, it being the intention of this ordinance to limit the total number of dogs and/or cats to four (4) per household. 
(Ord. No. 6314, 8-26-97) 
8-1440 - DOGS AND CATS; EXCEPTIONS TO LIMITS 
    No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain any dog(s) or cat(s) in, about or upon premises not occupied by such owner as a residence, unless such premises is a clinic operated by a licensed veterinarian, a pet shop or a kennel licensed by the City or an animal shelter operated or authorized by the City; provided, however, no person may have more than two (2) dogs upon his or her business premises for protection purposes during nighttime hours, so long as said animals are secured for the safety of the public, subject to approval of the Animal Control Authority. 
(Ord. No. 6314, 8-26-97) 
ARTICLE 15. - GENERAL OFFENSES 

8-1501 - CURFEW; ESTABLISHED; EXCEPTIONS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to remain in or upon the public streets, parks, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, or to ride in or upon, drive or otherwise operate any automobile, bicycle or other vehicle in, upon, over or through the streets or other public places between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person having the legal care and custody of such minor person or unless such minor person is upon an errand or business directed by his/her parents, guardian or legal custodian, or in en route between his/her place of employment and home. 
(Code 1958, 21.5; Code 1980, 25-1) 
8-1502 - CURFEW; APPLICABILITY TO CERTAIN PREMISES 
    Curfew; Applicability to Certain Semipublic, Privately Owned Premises. 
A.  The provisions of section 8-1501 are hereby specifically made applicable to certain designated parking lots, shopping centers and similar semipublic but privately owned places located within the limits of the City, as specified by resolution of the Council. 
B.  Upon the written request of the owners or operators of semipublic but privately owned places within the City limits, such as parking lots, shopping centers and other semipublic places, the Council may, by resolution, specify the name and the description of the area to which the provisions of section 8-1501 shall be applied. Such resolutions shall be kept available by the City Clerk for inspection by the public and, upon the passage of the resolutions specifying the parking lot, shopping center or other semipublic place, the Police Department and City Manager shall thereupon be immediately authorized, empowered and ordered to exercise all their usual powers and duties with respect to the regulations and enforcement of section 8-1501 with regard to offenses committed upon the premises of the specified areas. 
C.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of section 8-1501 while on the premises of a parking lot, shopping center or semipublic but privately owned place, as specified within the provisions of this section by resolution of the Council, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-111 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, 21.5-1; Code 1980, 25-2) 
8-1503 - CURFEW; RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS, ETC. 
    It shall be unlawful for the parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to allow or permit such minor to do any of the things or acts prohibited by section 8-1501 between the hours of twelve (12:00) a.m. and five (5:00) a.m. of the following day, unless the minor is accompanied by his/her parents, guardian or other adult person having the legal care and custody of the minor or unless the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his/her parents, guardian or legal custodian. 
(Code 1958, 21.6; Code 1980, 25-3) 
8-1504 - CURFEW; ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS 
    No minor arrested for a violation of curfew shall be placed in confinement until he/she has been taken home or the parents, guardian or legal custodian notified and until the arresting officer has ascertained whether or not the minor is within the control of his/her parents, guardian or legal custodian. If the parents, guardian or legal custodian shall state that the minor cannot be controlled by them, then such minor shall be proceeded against; otherwise the parents, guardian or custodian shall be proceeded against. 
(Code 1958, 21.7; Code 1980, 25-4) 
8-1505 - GAMBLING 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any form of gambling as provided by State law. 
(Code 1958, §21.15-21.18; Code 1980, 25-5) 
State Law reference- Gambling, Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1101-28-1117 
8-1506 - PROSTITUTION 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any form of prostitution as provided by State law. 
(Code 1958, §21.24-21.29; Code 1980, 25-6) 
State Law reference- Prostitution, Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-801-28-804.01 
8-1507 - HORROR AND CRIME COMIC, ETC., PUBLICATIONS 
A.  Crime Publications. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, attempt to sell, exhibit, give away, keep in his/her possession with intent to sell or give away or in any way furnish or attempt to furnish to any child under the age of eighteen (18) years any comic book, magazine or other publication which, read as a whole, is concerned with an account of crime and which depicts by the use of drawings, the following crimes as defined in the several chapters and articles of the Criminal Code of the State: 
1.  Administering poisonous and injurious potions. 
2.  Aggravated assault. 
3.  Arson and other willful burning. 
4.  Assault in attempt of burglary. 
5.  Assault to maim or disfigure. 
6.  Assault with intent to commit rape. 
7.  Assault with intent to commit robbery. 
8.  Assault with intent to murder. 
9.  Burglary. 
10.  False imprisonment. 
11.  Kidnapping and abduction. 
12.  Maiming and disfiguring. 
13.  Malicious mischief. 
14.  Murder. 
15.  Rape. 
16.  Robbery. 
17.  Theft. 
18.  Conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing offenses. 
B.  Intent of Section. It is the intent of this section to include publications where the text is not prominently featured, but rather is incidental to the picture, being usually in the balloons that indicate the words spoken by the characters. 
C.  News Accounts Not Included. This section shall not be construed to apply to those accounts of crime which are part of the ordinary and general dissemination of news, nor to such drawings and photographs as are used to illustrate such accounts. 
D.  Historical or Literary Publications Not Included. This section shall not be construed to apply to legitimate, illustrated, historical accounts of crime. 
E.  Presumption from Displaying. If any publication prohibited hereunder shall be displayed in any newsstand, bookstore, drugstore, market or other mercantile establishment, where the prohibited publication may be seen by any child under the age of eighteen (18) years visiting such establishment, such display shall be prima facie evidence that the person in charge of such establishment was then exhibiting the crime comic book or other prohibited publication and intended to sell, offer for sale, furnish or attempt to furnish such prohibited publication to a child under the age of eighteen (18) years in violation of this section, but it shall be competent for the defendant in any such case to show that no such intention existed. 
(Code 1958, 21.22; Code 1980, 25-7) 
8-1508 - RESCUING PERSONS UNDER ARREST 
    No person shall rescue by force, ruse or otherwise, any person in the custody of any police officer of the City. 
(Code 1958, 21.31; Code 1980, 25-8) 
8-1509 - SPITTING ON SIDEWALKS, PUBLIC BUILDINGS, ETC. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate on any sidewalk, crosswalk or in any cellarway, window, door grating or entrance to any basement, excavation or area in or under or leading from any sidewalk space in the City, or to spit or expectorate on the floor, wall or stairway in any hall or any public building in the City. 
(Code 1958, 21.34; Code 1980, 25-9) 
8-1510 - REFUSING TO AID A POLICE OR PEACE OFFICER 
    A person commits the offense of refusing to aid a police or peace officer if, upon request by a person known to him/her to be a police or peace officer, he/she unreasonably refuses or fails to aid such police or peace officer in: 
A.  Apprehending any person charged with or convicted of any offense against any of the ordinances of the City or the laws of this State; 
B.  Securing such offender when apprehended; or 
C.  Conveying such offender to the jail of the county. 
(Ord. No. 3229, 1, 5-13-80; Code 1980, 25-11) 
8-1511 - RESISTING ARREST; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE 
A.  A person commits the offense of resisting arrest if, while intentionally preventing or attempting to prevent a police or peace officer acting under color of his/her official authority from affecting an arrest of the actor or another, he/she: 
1.  Uses or threatens to use physical force or violence against the police or peace officer or another; 
2.  Uses any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing physical injury to the police or peace officer or another; or 
3.  Employs means requiring substantial force to overcome resistance to effecting the arrest. 
B.  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if the police or peace officer involved was out of uniform and did not identify himself/herself as a police or peace officer by showing his/her credentials to the person whose arrest is attempted. 
(Ord. No. 3229, 2, 5-13-80; Code 1980, 25-11) 
8-1512 - OBSTRUCTING A POLICE OR PEACE OFFICER 
    A person commits the offense of obstructing a police or peace officer when, by using or threatening to use violence, force, physical interference or obstacle, he/she intentionally obstructs, impairs or hinders the enforcement of the penal law of the preservation of the peace by a police or peace officer or when he/she fails or refuses to obey a lawful order directed to him/her by a police or peace officer. 
(Ord. No. 3229, 3, 5-13-80; Code 1980, 25-13) 
8-1513 - INTERFERING WITH POLICE DOGS PROHIBITED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or recklessly interfere with, disturb or meddle with any dog owned or used by the Police Department of the City of Kearney while such dog is being used by said Department or any member thereof in the performance of any duties or functions of said Department or of such member. 
(Ord. No. 6002, 8-8-95) 
8-1514 - INJURING POLICE DOGS PROHIBITED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly, willfully or maliciously tease, torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog owned or used by the Police Department of the City of Kearney. 
(Ord. No. 6002, 8-8-95) 
8-1515 - TOBACCO; POSSESSION BY MINORS; UNLAWFUL 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess or use cigarettes or cigars, vapor products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine projects, or use tobacco in any form whatever; provided that the possession by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years under the supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home, or when required in the performance of a person's duty an as employee, shall not be prohibited. Tobacco products shall be defined to mean any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, vapor products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products. 
(Ord. No. 6321A, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 8337 , § 1, 4-23-2019) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1418 
8-1516 - TOBACCO; POSSESSION BY MINORS; PENALTY 
    Any person or persons violating the provisions of Section 8-1515 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-112 of this Code, except that the minimum fine for a first offense shall be thirty five dollars ($35.00). Each distinct act or violation of the terms of Section 8-1515 shall constitute a separate offense. The City Prosecutor shall have discretion to dismiss charges against any minor charged with violation of Section 8-1515 when the said minor has furnished evidence for the conviction of the person or persons selling or giving him/her the tobacco in any form whatever, or any cigarettes, cigarette paper, vapor products, or alternative nicotine products. 
(Ord. No. 6321A, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 8337 , § 2, 4-23-2019) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1419 
8-1517 - RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX OFFENDERS 
A.  Purpose. It is the intent of this ordinance to serve the City's compelling interest to protect the health, safety and welfare of the children of the City of Kearney, Nebraska from the risk that sex offenders may reoffend where children congregate on a regular concentrated basis by prohibiting certain sex offenders from establishing a residence around schools and/or licensed day cares. 
B.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings prescribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  SEX OFFENDER shall mean a person who has been convicted of a crime listed in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§29-4003 and subject to registration for 25 years or more under the Sex Offender Registration Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. §§29-4001 to 29-4014, (2004 Cum. Supp. and 2005 Supp.). 
2.  RESIDE or RESIDENCE shall mean a place where the sex offender abides, lodges, lives or sleeps for five (5) or more aggregate working days. 
3.  SCHOOL shall mean any public or non-public school accredited or approved by the State of Nebraska which has or includes any or all grade kindergarten through 12th grade. 
C.  Residency Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for a sex offender to reside within five hundred (500) feet of the real property comprising a school or licensed day care. 
D.  Measurement of Distance. For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the residence to the nearest outer property line of the school or licensed day care. 
E.  Penalty for Violation. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months or by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or both such fine and imprisonment. 
F.  Exceptions. A sex offender residing within five hundred (500) feet of the real property comprising a school or licensed day care does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
1.  The sex offender is committed to, being evaluated at, or required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or other correctional institution or facility. 
2.  The sex offender has established a residence prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
3.  The sex offender has established a residence prior to the dedication of location or start of construction, whichever is earlier, of the school or licensed day care. 
4.  The sex offender is, or was at the time of conviction, a minor not subject to the Sex Offender Registration Act because they were not convicted as an adult. 
5.  The sex offender is a ward under guardianship. 
6.  The sex offender is residing at an in-patient or residential treatment center for sex offenders. 
G.  This section does not preclude a sex offender deemed to be handicapped or disabled under the Fair Housing Act, Rehabilitation Act, or Americans with Disabilities Act from pursuing requests for reasonable accommodations. 
(Ord. No. 7925, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 7933, 9-9-2014, Ord No. 8170, 8-8-2017) 
State Law reference- Sex Offender Registration Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. §§29-4001 to 29-4019 
ARTICLE 16. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
[DIVISION I. - GENERALLY] 

8-1601 - CRIMINAL MISCHIEF; PENALTY 
A.  A person commits criminal mischief if he/she intentionally or recklessly causes pecuniary loss in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less, or if his/her action results in no pecuniary loss and if he/she: 
1.  Damages property of another intentionally or recklessly; or 
2.  Intentionally or recklessly tampers with property of another so as to endanger person or property; or 
3.  Intentionally or maliciously causes another to suffer pecuniary loss by deception or threat. 
B.  On being convicted or found guilty of the offense of criminal mischief, the person shall be subject to a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or three (3) months' imprisonment in the county jail, or both. 
(Code 1980, 25-24) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-519 
8-1602 - LARCENY 
    If any person shall steal any money, goods or chattels of any kind whatsoever of less value than one hundred ($100.00) dollars, the property of another, within the City, such person, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-111 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, 21.20-1; Code 1980, 25-25) 
State Law reference- Theft, Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-509-28-518 
8-1603 - LOOTING AT FIRES 
    Any person who shall take, remove or carry away anything of value from the premises of a fire, other than to remove it to a safe distance from the fire to prevent its burning, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1958, 12.4; Code 1980, 25-26) 
8-1604 - REFUSAL TO PAY FARE 
    Any person who engages, makes use of or rides in any vehicle for hire who shall refuse, upon demand, to pay for such use or ride, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1958, 30.14; Code 1980, 25-27) 
8-1605 - CRIMINAL TRESPASS 
    A person commits criminal trespass if, knowing that he/she is not licensed or privileged to do so, he/she enters or remains in any place as to which notice against trespass is given by: 
A.  Actual communication to the actor; 
B.  Posting in a manner prescribed by law or reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders; or 
C.  Fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to exclude intruders. 
(Ord. No. 3230, 1, 5-13-80; Code 1980, 25-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-520 
8-1606 - CRIMINAL TRESPASS; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES 
    It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 8-1605 that: 
A.  The premises were at the time open to members of the public and the actor complied with all lawful conditions imposed on access to or remaining on the premises; 
B.  The actor reasonably believed that the owner of the premises or other person empowered to license access thereto would have licensed him/her to enter or remain; or 
C.  The actor was in the process of navigating or attempting to navigate with a nonpowered vessel any stream or river within the City limits and found it necessary to portage or otherwise transport the vessel around any fence or obstruction in such stream or river. 
(Ord. No. 3231, 1, 5-13-80; Code 1980, 25-29) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-522 
8-1607 - LITTERING OF PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY 
A.  Any person who deposits, throws, discards or otherwise disposes of any litter on any public or private property or in any waters commits the offense of littering unless: 
1.  Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such material and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use such property; or 
2.  The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such property for such purposes. 
B.  The word "litter" as used in this section shall mean all waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, debris or other foreign substances, solid or liquid, of every form, size, kind and description, susceptible to being dropped, deposited, discarded or otherwise disposed of by any person upon any property in the City, but does not include the depositing or disposing of waste or primary processes of farming or manufacturing on the premises of origin. Waste material as used in this section shall mean any material appearing in a place or any context not associated with that material's function or origin. 
C.  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle or watercraft in violation of this section, the operator of such motor vehicle or watercraft commits the offense of littering. 
(Ord. No. 3232, 1, 5-13-80; Code 1980, 25-30; Ord. No. 3224, 1-28-97) 
Cross reference- Distribution of handbills, § 3-301, et seq.; littering prohibited generally, § 5-203, et seq.; rubbish on streets, § 8-308 
8-1608 - WINDOW-PEEPING; UNLAWFUL 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon, loiter or trespass upon the property of another without the consent of the owner, tenant or occupant thereof to look into or through a window, door or other aperture or opening of any building, residence, apartment, structure or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended for occupancy as a dwelling, whether or not such building, residence, structure, apartment or enclosure is permanently situated or transportable, and whether or not such occupancy is permanent or temporary. This section shall not apply to police, fire, public safety or emergency medical personnel who are engaged in the course of their lawful duties. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-111. 
(Ord. No. 6019, 10-10-95) 
8-1609 - UNLAWFUL SCAVENGING 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of a refuse container or his employee or agent, or the employees or agents of the City refuse collection services, to tamper with, rummage in, disturb, interfere with, scavenge, move or remove any refuse container or any refuse or recyclable material from such container. Such person, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-111 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 7672, 9-13-2011) 
DIVISION II. - GRAFFITI 

8-1625 - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
    The City Council of Kearney, Nebraska is enacting this Ordinance to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the removal of graffiti from public and private property. The Council is authorized to enact this Ordinance pursuant to its police powers. 
    The Council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and a blighting factor, which is destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community. Unless the City acts to remove graffiti from public and private property, the graffiti tends to remain and multiply. Other properties then become the target of graffiti, and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the City. 
    The City Council intends, through enacting this Ordinance, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement. 
(Ord. No. 6837, 10-9-2001) 
8-1626 - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of enacting this Ordinance, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A.  AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing property. 
B.  BROAD-TIPPED MARKER means any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth (1/4th) of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble. 
C.  ETCHING EQUIPMENT means any tool, device, or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on any natural or man-made surface. 
D.  GRAFFITI means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, applied, attached, adhered, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by person or persons using any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed to be a public nuisance by the City Council. 
E.  GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of making, scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or man-made surface. 
F.  PAINT STICK or GRAFFITI STICK means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-eighth (1/8th) of an inch in width. 
G.  PERSON means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 6837, 10-9-2001) 
8-1627 - PROHIBITED CONDUCT 
    Defacement. It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint, draw or apply, in any manner, any inscription, figure, or mark of any type (commonly known and referred to as "graffiti") on any public or private building or other real or personal property including, but not limited to, natural objects such as rocks and trees, owned, operated, or maintained by a governmental entity or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or owned by any person, firm, or corporation, unless permission of the owner or operator of the property has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 6837, 10-9-2001) 
8-1628 - PENALTIES 
A.  Fines: Any person violating the provisions of this division shall be punished in accordance with section 1-111 of the Code with a minimum fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the first offense; two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second offense; and three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each subsequent offense. 
B.  Restitution: In addition to any punishment specified in this Section, the court shall order any violator to make restitution to the victim for damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense in the amount or manner determined by the court. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly and individually liable with the minor to make the restitution. 
    Community Service: In lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified in this Section, a minor or adult may be required to perform community service as described by the court: 
1.  The minor or adult shall perform at least 30 hours of community service. 
2.  At least one parent or guardian of the minor shall be in attendance a minimum of 50 percent of the period of assigned community service. 
3.  The entire period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider approved by the court. 
4.  Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the minor or adult to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult, including community service that involves graffiti removal. 
(Ord. No. 6837, 10-9-2001) 
8-1629 - GRAFFITI DECLARED A NUISANCE 
A.  The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this Ordinance is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and, therefore, is subject to the removal and abatement provisions specified in this Code. 
B.  It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has been applied and any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such property to at all times keep the property clear of graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 6837, 10-9-2001) 
8-1630 - REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI BY PERPETRATOR 
    Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the City or private owner of the property involved. Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the Chief of Police, the Director of the Department of Public Works, or as directed by the City Manager. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the removal or for the payment of the removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this Ordinance. Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian shall also be responsible for such removal or for the payment for the removal. 
(Ord. No. 6837, 10-9-2001) 
8-1631 - NOTICE OF REMOVAL 
    If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator according to the preceding Section, the graffiti shall be removed pursuant to the following provisions: 
A.  Whenever the City Manager or his/her designee determines that graffiti exists on any public and private buildings, structures or places which are visible to any person utilizing any public right-of-way in this city, whether this is a road, parkway, alley, or otherwise, and that seasonal temperatures permit the painting of exterior surfaces, the City Manager or his/her designee shall cause a notice to be issued to the property owner or person(s) in possession or charge of the property to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have seven (7) days after the date of the notice to remove or paint over the graffiti, or the conditions will be subject to abatement by the city. If the property owner elects to paint over the graffiti, the paint used to obliterate the graffiti shall be as close as practicable to background color(s). 
B.  The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to this section shall consist of a written notice to be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises, as such owner's name and address appears on the last property tax assessment rolls of the county. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent in care of the property address to persons in possession or in charge of the property. The notice required by this Section may be served in any one of the following manners: 
1.  By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property. 
2.  By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the owner's last known address. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address. 
The notice shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI 
Date: 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required by law at your expense to remove or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as: _______, Kearney, Nebraska, which is visible to the public view, within seven (7) days after the date of this notice. If you fail to do so, City employees or private contractors employed by the City will enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by removal or painting over the graffiti. The cost of the abatement by the City employees or its private contractors will be assessed upon your property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid. 
All persons having any objections, comments interest in said matters or requests for a hearing are hereby notified to submit a request for a hearing to the City Manager of the City of Kearney, Nebraska, or his/her designee within five (5) days from the date of this notice. At the conclusion of the seven (7) day period, if no hearing has been requested, the City may proceed with the abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property, at your expense, without further notice. 
City of Kearney, Nebraska 
A Municipal Corporation 
By: _____ 
Title: _____ 
(Ord. No. 6837, 10-9-2001) 
8-1632 - REMOVAL BY CITY 
    Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice by the designated date, or such continued date thereafter as the City Manager or his/her designee approves, then the City Manager, or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by city forces or private contract, and the city or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the city, and any paint used to obliterate graffiti shall be as close as practicable to background color(s). If the City Administrator provides for the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, he shall not authorize nor undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti or other inscribed material is located. 
(Ord. No. 6837, 10-9-2001) 
8-1633 - CITY'S COSTS DECLARED LIEN 
    Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of the graffiti nuisance under the provisions of this division shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed. 
(Ord. No. 6837, 10-9-2001) 
8-1634 - PRIVATE PROPERTY CONSENT FORMS 
    Property owners in the city may consent in advance to city entry onto private property for graffiti removal purposes. The city will make forms for such consent available. 
(Ord. No. 6837, 10-9-2001) 
ARTICLE 17. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE 

8-1701 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT 
A.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
1.  PUBLIC PLACE shall mean any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purposes, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
2.  RIOT shall mean a public disturbance involving: an act or acts of violence by one (1) or more persons part of an assemblage of three (3) or more persons, which act or acts shall constitute a clear and present danger of or shall result in damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other individual; or a threat or threats of the commission of an act or acts of violence by one (1) or more persons part of an assemblage of three (3) or more persons having, individually or collectively, the ability of immediate execution of such threat or threats, where the performance of the threatened act or acts of violence would constitute a clear and present danger of or would result in damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other individual. 
3.  INCITE A RIOT shall mean, but is not limited to, urging or instigating other persons to riot, but shall not be deemed to mean the mere oral or written advocacy of ideas or the expression of beliefs, not involving advocacy of any act or acts of violence or assertion of the rightness of or the right to commit any such act or acts. 
B.  Disorderly Conduct Prohibited. A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if his/her conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, he/she willfully does any of the following acts in a public place: 
1.  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby that other is placed in danger of his/her life, limb or health; 
2.  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
3.  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
4.  Interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of violence; 
5.  Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by the City Police or other lawful authority known to be such; 
6.  Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by Police officer(s) or any other authorized official of the City, when known to be such an official; 
7.  Incites, attempts to incite or is involved in attempting to incite a riot; 
8.  Addresses abusive language or threats to any member of the Police Department, any other authorized official of the City who is engaged in the lawful performance of his/her duties, or any other person when such words have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence. Words merely causing displeasure, annoyance or resentment are not prohibited; 
9.  Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition; 
10.  Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or common, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public is annoyed; 
11.  Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer, when known to be such an official, where one (1) or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity and the public health and safety is imminently threatened; 
12.  Uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture. 
13.  Urinates and/or defecates in public and/or in the view of the public. 
C.  Exemptions. This section shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking or other lawful means of expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws. 
D.  Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to fines and/or imprisonment as provided in section 1-111 of this Code. Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each successive day continued. 
(Code 1958, 21.9; Ord. No. 3152, 1, 7-8-80; Code 1980, 25-40; Ord. No. 7014 12-23-2003) 
8-1702 - DISTURBING ASSEMBLIES 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to disturb the peace and quiet of any public assembly of persons for religious worship or for any other purpose by any loud or unusual noise, boisterous laughing or talking or by any other manner whatsoever. 
(Code 1958, 21.10; Code 1980, 25-41) 
8-1703 - DISTURBING THE PEACE 
    Any person who shall intentionally disturb the peace and quiet of any person, family or neighborhood commits the offense of disturbing the peace. 
    Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in a sum of not more than three hundred ($300.00) dollars for each offense. Each separate act of violation of the terms of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1958, 21.11; Ord. No. 3839, 1, 4-22-86; Code 1980, 25-42) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1322 
8-1703.1 - LOUD NOISE 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any radio, tape player, compact disc player, stereophonic sound system, or similar device which reproduces or amplifies radio broadcasts, or musical recordings, in or upon any street, alley, or other public place in such a manner as to be audible to other persons in such public place or places more than fifty (50) feet from the source. Persons operating such devices while participating in licensed or permitted activities such as parades shall not be deemed to be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 6709, 9-12-2000) 
8-1704 - UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY 
    It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more persons to assemble together within the City upon any sidewalk or street thereof, in front of or adjacent to any store, shop or other place of business so as to obstruct the public right-of-way along the street or sidewalk, or entrance of the place of business, or so as to obstruct or injure the carrying on of any lawful business in any of the places aforesaid. 
(Code 1958, 21.39; Code 1980, 25-43) 
8-1705 - DISORDERLY HOUSE; MAINTAINING 
    The term "disorderly house" as used in this section shall be deemed to be any room, house, building, structure or premises where unlawful or illegal acts are being committed. It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee or proprietor of any room, house, building, structure or premises to knowingly collect or permit to be collected therein persons who are engaging in any unlawful act, or to knowingly make, cause, permit or suffer to be made therein any loud or improper noise to the annoyance or disturbance of any person or neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 5468, 9-22-92) 
8-1706 - INMATE OF DISORDERLY HOUSE 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be an inmate of or visit or frequent any disorderly house as declared in the above section with knowledge of, and participating in the illegal activities occurring therein. (Ord. No. 5468, 9-22-92) 
8-1707 - FAILURE TO DISPERSE 
A.  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a person or persons are creating a disturbance of the peace and quiet of any person or neighborhood, such police officer may order said person or persons not residing on the premises to disperse for the purpose of abating said disturbance. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to comply with a lawful order to disperse given by a police officer in the performance of the officer's duties under this section. 
(Ord. No. 5469, 9-22-92) 
8-1708 - PENALTY 
    Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of section 8-1701, 8-1703, 8-1705, 8-1706 or 8-1707 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-111 of this Code. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of Sections 8-1702, 8-1703.1, or 8-1704 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-112 of this Code. Each distinct act or violation of the terms of any section of this ordinance shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 5468, 9-22-92; Ord. No. 5469, 9-22-92; Ord. No. 6709, 9-12-2000) 
ARTICLE 18. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

8-1801 - ASSAULT; PROHIBITED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to assault or threaten another in a menacing manner or strike or injure another. 
(Code 1958, 21.3; Code 1980, 25-55) 
State Law reference- Assault, Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-308-28-310 
8-1802 - ASSAULT; PROVOCATION 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the City intentionally to provoke or attempt to provoke an assault upon himself or herself or another by the utterance of grossly vile or insulting epithets applied to the assailed party or one so attempting to commit an assault, or to curse or swear at a person or use grossly vile names, or slander or abuse the character of another person with the intention of provoking an assault by the person. 
(Code 1958, 21.2; Code 1980, 25-56) 
ARTICLE 19. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY 

8-1901 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7502, 1-27-2009) 
State Law reference- Concealed weapons, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1202 
8-1902 - DISCHARGE OF AIR GUNS, ETC. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged, any toy pistol, toy gun, air gun, or any other firearm, or any slingshot loaded with rock or leaden or other dangerous missiles within the City except as provided in Section 8-1903. 
    It shall be permissible for persons to use and operate devices known as "paint ball markers", "paintball marker guns", or "paintball guns", or devices commercially produced which propel a plasticized hollow projectile containing colored liquid, using air or carbon dioxide propellant, at a City approved facility. The use of these devices will be limited to the area of the facility established specifically for such purpose, which shall be designed to protect and limit the path or range of the projectiles to that area. 
(Code 1958, 21.1; Code 1980, 25-69; Ord. No. 6976, 7-22-2003; Ord. No. 8253 , § 1, 6-12-2018) 
State Law reference- Discharging weapon from highway, etc., Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1335 
8-1903 - FIREARMS; DISCHARGE IN CITY 
    No person, except an officer of the law acting in the discharge of his/her duty or persons authorized by the Chief of Police in order to control animal nuisances, shall fire or discharge any gun, including pistols, shotguns, rifles, black-powder weapons or any other firearm within the City except in an approved indoor shooting range designed to U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Health, Safety, and Security Standards, such installation shall be certified by a design professional. 
(Code 1958, 21.12; Ord. No. 5080, 1, 1-9-90; Code 1980, 25-70; Ord. No. 8253 , § 2, 6-12-2018) 
State Law reference- Discharging firearms from highway, etc., Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1335 
8-1904 - FIREARMS; SALE TO AND POSSESSION BY MINORS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to sell or give way to any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, or for any such minor to have in his/her possession, any revolver, pistol, gun or firearm of any description or caliber or any cartridges or ammunition loaded with power, or powder and ball of any size or dimension without first procuring the consent of such minor's parent or guardian. 
(Code 1958, 21.13; Code 1980, 25-71) 
State Law reference- Unlawful possession of a revolver, Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1204 
8-1905 - ABANDONMENT OF AIRTIGHT ICEBOXES, REFRIGERATORS, CONTAINERS, ETC. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave or permit to remain outside any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, or any dwelling or other structure under its control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snaplock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing said door or lid, snaplock or other locking device from said icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Ord. No. 3525, 1, 5-25-82; Code 1980, 25-72) 
ARTICLE 20. - AGGRAVATED PUBLIC NUISANCES 

8-2001 - DEFINITIONS 
    The following words or phrases shall, when used in this Article, have the following meanings: 
1.  " CANNABIS " means any substance as defined in Section 28-401 (13) & (27) of the Nebraska State Statues. 
2.  " COMMIT " or " COMMISSION " means knowingly causing, allowing, aiding or concealing the fact of such act or activities. 
3.  " CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE " means any substance listed in the schedules set forth in Section 28-405 of the Nebraska State Statutes. 
4.  " DELIVER " or " DELIVERY " means the actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession of a controlled substance, or cannabis, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship. 
5.  " DWELLING " means a house, duplex, condominium unit, apartment building, mobile home, manufactured home, trailer or any other structure(s) or place(s) used or intended for use for human habitation, including common areas within the structure when buildings or structures are used for more than one (1) dwelling, and accessory buildings such as garages located on the same premises. 
6.  " IN OR ON THE PREMISES OF ANY DWELLING " means a dwelling or the area within the boundary lines of any real property of the same ownership on which such dwelling is located. 
7.  " KNOWLEDGE " means a person knows, or acts knowingly or with knowledge of: 
a.  The nature or attendant circumstances of his/her conduct, described by the section defining the offense, when he/she is consciously aware that his/her conduct is of such nature or that such circumstances exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the substantial probability that such fact exists. 
b.  The result of his/her conduct, described by the section defining the offense, when he/she is consciously aware that such result is practically certain to be caused by his/her conduct. 
Conduct performed knowingly or with knowledge is performed willfully, within the meaning of a section using the latter term, unless the section clearly requires another meaning. 
8.  " MANUFACTURE " shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 28-401 of the Nebraska State Statutes, 
9.  " NEGLIGENCE " means a person is negligent, or acts negligently, when he/she fails to be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a result will follow, described by the section defining the offense; and such failure constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. 
10.  " OCCUPANT " means any person who lives or has possessions or holds an occupancy interest in a dwelling unit, or any person residing in or frequenting the premises of the dwelling with the actual or implied permission of the owner or lessee. 
11.  " OWNER " means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having a control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession or real property by a court. 
12.  " RECKLESSNESS " means a person is reckless or acts recklessly when he/she consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or that a result will follow, described by the section defining the offense; and such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in that situation. An act performed recklessly is performed wantonly, within the meaning of the section using the latter term, unless the section clearly requires another meaning. 
(Ord. No. 8332 , § 1, 3-12-2019) 
8-2002 - AGGRAVATED NUISANCE DEFINED 
    An "aggravated public nuisance" is: 
1.  A dwelling, 
2.  Where the owners or occupants, including invitee(s), of a dwelling conduct, permit, allow, authorize or commit the following offenses or violations within the dwelling unit, or the premises of the dwelling within a three hundred sixty five day period: 
a.  Two (2) or more felonies (as defined by the Nebraska State Statutes); or 
b.  Two (2) or more State or Federal criminal offenses related to the illegal sale, possession or manufacture of controlled substances, cannabis or drug paraphernalia; or, 
c.  Two (2) or more violations of Section 8-1505 of Chapter 8 of the Municipal Code, entitled "Gambling"; or 
d.  Two (2) or more violations of Section 8-1506 of Chapter 8 or the Municipal Code, entitled "Prostitution"; or 
e.  Two (2) or more violations of Section 8-1701 of Chapter 8 of the Municipal Code, entitled, "Disorderly Conduct"; or 
f.  Two (2) or more violations of Section 8-1703 of Chapter 8 of the Municipal Code, entitled "Disturbing the Peace"; or 
g.  Three (3) or more of any combination of the following: 
1)  Any of the offenses described in paragraphs a, b, c, d, e and f above. 
2)  Any of the following offenses as defined in the Nebraska Criminal Code or City Code: disorderly conduct; assault; criminal mischief; domestic violence; minor in possession (MIP), unlawful use of weapons; or 
h.  Three (3) or more of any combination of violations of Sections 8-1705, 8-1706 and/or 8-1707 of Chapter 8 of the Municipal Code regulating conduct within or on the premises of a dwelling unit entitled "Disorderly House, Maintaining", "Inmate of a Disorderly House", and "Failure to Disperse" respectively. 
8-2003 - VIOLATION 
    No owner of real property shall negligently, knowingly, or recklessly allow or permit an aggravated public nuisance to exist upon real property or any part thereof, including individual dwelling units, owned by the person. 
8-2004 - WRITTEN NOTICE OF AGGRAVATED PUBLIC NUISANCE 
    Before the filing of a complaint alleging a violation of the aforesaid section, the City, shall by certified mail, provide to the owner of the place at which the aggravated public nuisance is located, or the agent of the owner, written notice of the following: 
A.  That an aggravated public nuisance, as defined by the Section, exists at the place specified in the notice; 
B.  That the owner of the place at which the aggravated public nuisance is located, or the owner's agent has ten (10) days from the mailing of the notice to schedule and appear at the City Office at the address provided in the notice for a nuisance abatement conference with a representative of the City staff to discuss the possibility of entering into a written agreement to take action to abate the nuisance; and 
C.  That failure to appear at the City Office for said conference within the time indicated may result in the City Attorney or Prosecuting Attorney filing a complaint alleging a violation as an Aggravate Public Nuisance under this section. 
8-2005 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT CONFERENCE 
    At the nuisance abatement conference, appropriate City Staff members, and the property owner or owner's agent, shall discuss the facts constituting the aggravated public nuisance and shall attempt to agree on specific actions that the property owner or the owner's agent can take to abate said aggravated public nuisance. 
8-2006 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT AGREEMENT 
A.  At the conclusion of the nuisance abatement conference, the City representative shall submit to conclusion of the conference, the City representative needs more time to draft said proposed agreement, then a follow up meeting shall be scheduled with the property owner or property owner's agent, within ten (10) days of the initial conference for submittal and review of the completed proposed nuisance abatement agreement. 
B.  Any agreement under this article shall include a list of specific actions and specific schedule of deadlines for said actions to abate the aggravated public nuisance. It may also include provisions for a periodic reassessment of the agreement effectiveness, the procedures for a modification of the agreement. A nuisance abatement agreement or any written modification to said agreement may impose conditions or requirements on the property owner for a period of up to twenty four (24) months from the date of the original agreement is entered into by the property owner or owner's agent and the City. A nuisance abatement agreement may impose one or more of the following conditions or requirements on the property owner. 
1.  Eviction of identified individuals from the dwelling in question, 
2.  Written notification from the property owner to an identified individual or individuals that they are prohibited from entering onto the property that is the location of the aggravated public nuisance, 
3.  Utilization of written leases containing a provision or provisions requiring eviction for criminal activity, 
4.  The completion of improvements upon the property which have the impact of mitigating crime, including but not limited to the erection of fences, installation of security devices upon the entrances or increased lighting, 
5.  Any other reasonable condition or requirement designed to abate the aggravated public nuisance. 
C.  Once a proposed written nuisance abatement plan or written modification to nuisance abatement plan has been submitted to the property owner of the owner's agent, said property owner or owner's agent shall have forty-eight (48) hours to review it and enter into said agreement by signing it and returning it to the City or Prosecuting Attorney. 
8-2007 - FILING A COMPLAINT 
    The City or Prosecuting Attorney may file a complaint alleging a violation of this ordinance under the following circumstances: 
A.  The owner of his or her agent does not schedule and attend a conference with the City within the time period described previously. 
B.  The owner or his or her agent fails or refuses to sign a proposed written nuisance abatement agreement or proposed written modification to said agreement within the prescribed time period set forth in this section. 
C.  The owner or the owner's agent subsequently fails or refuses to comply with any conditions or requirements set forth in a nuisance abatement agreement, including any prescribed deadlines for taking particular actions. 
8-2008 - ACTION TO ABATE; PENALTIES 
    In addition to prosecution of the offense defined in this ordinance or pursuing any other remedies available under this Code, the City or Prosecuting Attorney, upon receipt of reliable information that any real property within the corporate limits of the City is being maintained as an aggravated public nuisance, may prosecute an action for equitable relief, in the name of the City, to abate the nuisance and to enjoin any person who shall own, rent, or occupy the real property or dwelling in question from using or permitting its use in violation of the provisions of this ordinance. 
8-2009 - JUDGMENT 
    No judgment finding a violation of this ordinance shall be entered against an owner if an owner or his or her agent has, in good faith, endeavored to prevent the nuisance. An owner or agent who has complied with all conditions or said requirements of a nuisance abatement agreement and any modifications to said agreement, as defined by the ordinance, shall be deemed to have endeavored in good faith to prevent the nuisance. 
8-2010 - REMEDIES 
    Upon a finding of guilt under this section, the Court may, in addition to other remedies permitted by the Code, impose a term of court supervision or conditional discharge for a term of up to three (3) years, conditioned on any or all of the following: 
1.  The completion of improvements upon the property which have the impact of mitigating crime and criminal activity, including but not limited to the erection of fences, installation of security devices or increased lighting; 
2.  Requirement of a written lease for occupants which includes provisions requiring eviction for criminal activity; 
3.  Submitting tenancy lists on a periodic basis to the Police Department; 
4.  Posting a cash bond of no less that the minimum fine and up to the amount of the maximum fine for the period of court supervision or conditional discharge imposed by the Court, such bond to be retained by the Court in an interest bearing account and conditioned on successful completion of the period of court supervision on conditional discharge; 
5.  Any other condition reasonably related to the objective of abating the aggravated public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 6462, 9-22-98) 
Chapter 9 - PUBLIC WORKS 
ARTICLE 1. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

9-101 - PLANNING COMMISSION; CREATED 
    There is hereby created a City Planning Commission, as provided for and authorized by Chapter 19, Article 9, Sections 19-924 to 19-929, both inclusive, Revised Statutes of the State for 1943, as amended. 
(Code 1958, 2.45; Code 1980, 29-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-924, et seq. 
9-102 - COMPOSITION 
    The City Planning Commission shall consist of nine (9) members who shall represent insofar as possible, different professions or occupations in the City and shall hold no other municipal office, except when appointed to serve on the Board of Adjustment. Two (2) of such members may be residents of the area over which the City is authorized to exercise extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation. When there are one thousand (1,000) residents in the area over which the City exercises territorial zoning and subdivision regulations, one (1) member of the Commission shall be a resident from such area. 
(Code 1958, 2.46; Code 1980, 29-17) 
9-103 - APPOINTMENT 
    The members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of a majority vote of the members elected to the Council. 
(Code 1958, 2.46; Code 1980, 29-18; Ord. No. 8280 , § 1, 8-28-2018) 
9-104 - COMPENSATION 
    All members of the Planning Commission shall serve as such without compensation. 
(Code 1958, 2.46; Code 1980, 29-19) 
9-105 - TERMS OF OFFICE 
    The term of each appointed member of the Planning Commission shall be three (3) years; except that three (3) members of the first (1st) commission appointed shall serve for the term of one (1) year, three (3) for the term of two (2) years and three (3) for the term of three (3) years. All members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. 
(Code 1958, 2.47; Code 1980, 29-20) 
9-106 - REMOVAL OF MEMBERS 
    Any members of the Planning Commission may, after a public hearing before the Council, be removed by the Mayor with the consent of a majority vote of the members elected to the Council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance in office or other good and sufficient cause. 
(Code 1958, 2.47; Code 1980, 29-21; Ord. No. 8280 , § 2, 8-28-2018) 
9-107 - FILLING VACANCIES 
    Vacancies occurring in the membership of the Planning Commission, otherwise than through the expiration of the term, shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor by and with the approval of a majority vote of the members elected to the Council. 
(Code 1958, 2.47; Code 1980, 29-22; Ord. No. 8280 , § 3, 8-28-2018) 
9-108 - CHAIRPERSON; OFFICERS 
    The City Planning Commission shall elect its Chairperson from its members and shall create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the Chairperson shall be one (1) year (and until his/her successor shall have been elected and qualified). The Chairperson shall be eligible for reelection. The term of other offices and their eligibility or non-eligibility for reelection shall be determined and fixed by the Commission. 
(Code 1958, 2.48; Code 1980, 29-23) 
9-109 - MEETINGS 
    The Planning Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and place as may be fixed by the Commission. Special meetings of the Commission may be called by the Chairperson, or in his/her absence, by such other officer as may be designated by the Commission, or by any three (3) members of the Commission. 
(Code 1958, 2.48; Code 1980, 29-24) 
9-110 - QUORUM 
    A majority of the members appointed to the Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1958, 2.48; Code 1980, 29-25) 
9-111 - MINIMUM VOTE REQUIRED 
    A majority vote of all the members present at the Planning Commission shall be required to pass any measure or elect to any office of the Commission. 
(Code 1958, 2.48; Ord. No. 3435, 1, 9-22-81; Code 1980, 29-26) 
9-112 - RULES AND RECORDS 
    The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which records shall be a public record. 
(Code 1958, 2.49; Code 1980, 29-27) 
9-113 - POWERS; DUTIES GENERALLY 
    It shall be the function and duty of the City Planning Commission: 
A.  To make and adopt plans for the physical development of the City, including any areas outside its boundaries which, in the Commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the City, and including a comprehensive development plan; 
B.  To prepare and adopt such implemental means as a capital improvement program, subdivision regulations, building codes and zoning ordinance in cooperation with other interested City departments. 
C.  Consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utilities, civic organizations, educational institutions, and citizens with relation to the promulgation and implementation of the comprehensive development plan and its implemental programs; 
D.  Have the power to delegate authority to any such group to conduct studies and make surveys for the Commission; make preliminary reports on its findings; 
E.  Hold public hearings before submitting its final reports; 
F.  May make arrangements consistent with its program; conduct or sponsor special studies or planning work for any public body or appropriate agency; receive grants, remuneration, or reimbursements for such studies or work; and at its public hearings, summon witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the giving of testimony. 
(Code 1958, 2.50; Code 1980, 29-28; Ord. No. 5970, 6-27-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-929 
9-114 - ACTION BY COUNCIL 
    The Council shall not hold its public meetings or take action on matters relating to the comprehensive development plan, capital improvements, building codes, subdivision development, or zoning until it has received the recommendation of the Planning Commission; provided, however, the failure of the Commission to act within ninety (90) days after the date of submission of such matters to the Commission shall be deemed an approval by the Commission unless a longer period be granted by the Council. No recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be required for subdivision of existing lots and blocks whenever all required public improvements have been installed, no new dedication of public rights-of-way or easements is involved, and such subdivision complies with the ordinance requirements concerning minimum areas and dimensions of such lots and blocks, if the Council has designated, by ordinance, an agent pursuant to Section 19-916, R.R.S. 
(Code 1958, 2.52; Ord. No. 5175, 1, 10-9-90; Code 1980, 29-30) 
9-115 - SUBMISSION OF PLATS, ETC., TO COMMISSION FOR CONSIDERATION 
    All plans, plats or replats of lands laid out in building lots, and the streets, alleys and other portions thereof intended to be dedicated to the public use or for the use of the purchaser or owner of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto and located within the City limits, or additions adjoining or in connection with or under the jurisdiction of the City shall be submitted to the City Planning Commission for its consideration, and its recommendation shall be submitted to the Council for its official consideration and action. No such plat or replat shall be filed with the Register of Deeds as provided by law until such plat or replat shall have endorsed thereon the fact that it has been first submitted to the City Planning Commission for its approval or disapproval. 
(Code 1958, 2.53; Code 1980, 29-31) 
9-116 - OPERATING FUNDS; EXPENDITURES 
    The Council may provide funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the work of the City Planning Commission, but the expenditures of the Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the Council, and no expenditures nor agreements for expenditures shall be valid in excess of such amounts. 
(Code 1958, 2.54; Code 1980, 29-32) 
ARTICLE 2. - BUILDING CODE GENERALLY 

9-201 - PURPOSE 
    The purpose of this Code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, limb, health, property and the public health, safety and welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the City and within two (2) miles thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 3.2, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-132 and 19-922 
9-202 - BUILDING CODE; DEFINITIONS 
    Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the building code adopted by this Article, it shall be construed to mean the City of Kearney, Nebraska. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 14, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-35) 
9-203 - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of the International Building Code or International Property Maintenance Code adopted by the provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided by section 1-111 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 15, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-36; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-204 - ADVISORY NOTE 
    Architects, builders and owners are herewith alerted to the fact that compliance with the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition and the International Building Code, 2015 Edition and the amendments contained therein does not guarantee or imply compliance with regulations and codes enforced by the State or other units of government. It is suggested that agencies such as the office of the State Fire Marshal be contacted to assure compliance with all laws which may be in effect. 
    These persons are also alerted to the fact that the issuance of a building permit does not authorize the building of a structure over a registered easement. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 4, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3569, 1, 1-11-83; Ord. No. 4079, 1, 3-28-89; Code 1980, 9-2; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007; Ord. No. 7574, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 7794, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 8083, 6-28-2016 effective date October 16, 2016) 
9-205 - CERTIFICATION OF LICENSED ARCHITECT OR ENGINEER REQUIRED 
    Subject to exceptions listed herein, the building official shall not issue any permit authorizing construction or remodeling of any building within the City or the City's zoning jurisdiction unless and until the applicant for the permit has provided plans and specifications certified by a state licensed architect or engineer as required by State Law, that the building has been designed and plans prepared in compliance with building code, the electrical code, and the plumbing code, including current revisions thereto, as adopted. The certification shall be on a form provided by the City and shall require the official stamp or seal of the architect or engineer and his/her signature. 
    The requirements of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The construction, remodeling, alteration, or renovation of a detached single-family through four-family dwelling of less than ten thousand square feet of above grade finished space. Any detached or attached sheds, storage buildings, and garages incidental to the dwelling are not included in the tabulation of finished space; 
(2)  The construction, remodeling, alteration, or renovation of farm buildings, including barns, silos, sheds, or housing for farm equipment and machinery, livestock, poultry, or storage, if the structures are designed to be occupied by no more than twenty persons; 
(3)  Any public works project with contemplated expenditures for a completed project that do not exceed forty thousand dollars. 
(4)  Any alteration, renovation, or remodeling of a building if the alteration, renovation, or remodeling does not, as determined by the building official, affect architectural or engineering safety features of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 7, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3569, 2, 1-11-83; Code 1980, 9-4; Ord. No. 6463, 9-22-98, Ord. No. 8185, 10-10-17) 
9-206 - CONTRACTORS; REGISTRATION REQUIRED 
    To guarantee faithful performance and compliance with the building code and all other provisions of this Code and City ordinances pertaining to construction in the City of Kearney's jurisdiction, anyone applying for a building permit shall be considered a building contractor and shall be registered with the City. Homeowners working on their primary residence shall not be considered a building contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 5.1, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-16; Ord. No. 6298, 7-8-97; Ord. No. 8218, 2-13-2018) 
9-207 - CONTRACTORS; REGISTRATION SUSPENSION 
    Continued violation of the provisions of the City building code or zoning ordinance may result in the suspension of a contractor's registration until such time as the violations shall have been corrected to the satisfaction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 5.1, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-17) 
9-208 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7156, 3-22-2005) 
9-209 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8217, 2-13-2018) 
9-210 - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE; ADOPTION 
    The regulations contained in the building code known as the "International Residential Code, 2015 Edition and the International Building Code, 2015 Edition" recommended by the International Code Council, and the whole thereof except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, the provisions of which shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the City and within two (2) miles thereof, are hereby adopted, incorporated and made a part of this Code the same as though spread at large herein. One (1) printed copy of this publication described above shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and copies of said publication shall be kept in the office of the Building Official for use and examination of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 11, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3569, 3, 1-11-83; Ord. No. 4079, 3, 3-28-89; Ord. No. 5938, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 6381, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 7327 effective May 15, 2007; Ord. No. 7574, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 7794, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 8083, 6-28-2016 effective date October 16, 2016) 
State Law reference- Adoption of standard codes, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-132; Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-922 
9-211 - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE; ADOPTED 
    The regulations contained in the code known as the "International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition" recommended by the International Code Council, are hereby adopted, incorporated and made a part of this Code of Ordinances the same as though spread at large herein. One (1) printed copy of such code shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 3569, 4, 1-11-83; Ord. No. 4079, 4, 3-28-89; Code 1980, 9-32; Ord. No. 5939, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 6381, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 7327 effective May 15, 2007; Ord. No. 7574, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 7794, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 8083, 6-28-2016 effective date October 16, 2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-132 and 19-922 
9-212 - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE AND INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE; SUBSEQUENT EDITIONS 
    Subsequent editions or revisions of the International Building Code and the International Property Maintenance Code adopted by the provisions of this Article shall be considered adopted and of full force and effect within the City upon the approval thereof by the Council and the filing of one (1) copy thereof in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 13, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-33; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
State Law reference- Adoption of standard codes, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-132 and 19-922 
9-213 - INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
    The regulations contained in the code known as the "International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition" recommended by the International Code Council, are hereby adopted, incorporated and made a part of this Code of Ordinances the same as though spread at large herein. One (1) printed copy of such code shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 7183, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 8083, 6-28-2016 effective date October 16, 2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-132 and 19-922 
9-214 - INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE; SUBSEQUENT EDITIONS 
    Subsequent editions or revisions of the International Building Code and the International Energy Conservation Code adopted by the provisions of this Article shall be considered adopted and of full force and effect within the City upon the approval thereof by the Council and the filing of one (1) copy thereof in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 7183, 6-14-2005) 
State Law reference- Adoption of standard codes, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-132 and 19-922 
ARTICLE 3. - AMENDMENTS 

9-301 - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE; AMENDMENTS 
    The International Building Code, hereinafter referred to as the "Code", and adopted by the provisions of this Article is hereby amended, altered, changed and modified as follows: 
(1)  Section 101 General, Paragraph 101.2 Scope of the Code is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph thereto reading as follows: 
Where, in any specific case, different sections of the Kearney City Code including the Unified Land Development Ordinance specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive, as determined by City of Kearney officials, shall govern. 
(2)  Section 103, Department of Building Safety of the Code is hereby amended by adding new paragraphs reading as follows: 
Any building or portion thereof, including buildings and structures in progress of erection, if found to be dangerous to persons or property or unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used or intended to be used or in danger from fire due to defects in construction or dangerous for use because of insufficient means of egress in case of fire or which violates the provisions of this Code due to the removal, decay, deterioration or falling off of any appliance or device originally required in this Code, or which has become damaged by the elements or by fire to an extent of fifty one percent (51%) of its value, may be condemned by the Building Official. All such condemned buildings, structures or appendages are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in the International Property Maintenance Code or such alternate procedures, as may be adopted by this jurisdiction. The person receiving such notice shall within forty-eight (48) hours apply to the Building and Zoning Office for a demolition permit and shall proceed diligently to demolish the building. Any person having legal interest in the property may appeal this decision to the Board of Adjustment within thirty (30) days of this notice. The appeal must be made in writing in accordance with Section 111 of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
No such building shall be occupied for any purpose after the Building Official serves written notice of its unsafe, dangerous or condemned condition until the instructions of the Building Official have been accomplished. If, at the expiration of the time set forth, the instructions have not been complied with, the Building Official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building as set forth in the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(3)  Section 104, Duties and Powers of the Building Official, Paragraph 104.1, General of the Code is hereby amended by adding a new a paragraph reading as follows: 
There is hereby established in the City of Kearney the "Building and Zoning Division" of the "Public Works Department" which shall be under the jurisdiction of the "City Manager". Any further reference in this Code to "Building Official" shall mean "the duly appointed representative of the City Manager. 
Whenever the Code provides that anything must be done to the approval of or subject to the direction of the enforcing officer, this shall be construed to give such officer only the power to determine whether the rules and regulations established by the ordinance have been complied with and shall not be construed as giving such officer discretionary powers. 
(4)  Section 105, Permits of the Code is hereby amended by adding thereto a new paragraph reading as follows: 
Any person engaged in the erection, construction, reconstruction, wrecking or repairing of any building, or the construction or repair of any sidewalk along any street, may occupy the public space, whether street, sidewalk space, or alley, in the manner hereinafter provided. Such person shall make an application to the Building Official who may grant a permit for such period of time as is in the best interest of the City to occupy such portion of the public space as may be approved by the Building Official; provided that the public space must be adjacent to the real estate on which the building is to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, wrecked or repaired, or along which a sidewalk is to be constructed or repaired. A suitable walkway, not less than four (4) feet in width, may be required within the public space included in the permit. 
(5)  Section 105, Paragraph 105.2, Work Exempt from Permit of the Code is hereby deleted and repealed. 
(6)  Section 108, Paragraph 108.2, Schedule of Permit Fees of the Code is hereby amended by adding new paragraphs reading as follows: 
A.  Permit Fees: A fee for each permit shall be as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
1.  Application for building permits shall be filed in the office of the Building Official, which shall be the office of record for related matters referred to in this Code. Fees to be paid to the City for building permits shall be charged as follows: 
(a)  Building permit fees. For each building permit issued, there shall be charged and collected a fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule for each building to be constructed, erected or altered under such permit in accordance with the following schedule: 
Residential and accessory buildings. 
All other buildings or structures. 
Minimum permit fee. Antennas, radio towers, or other use of land of a type not providing floor space to which the above schedule is applicable. 
Foundation permits only, where complete plans have not been submitted and approved. 
There shall be a separate permit for each building or structure to be constructed, erected or altered, except accessory buildings and appurtenances which may be included in the permit for the main building when construction is simultaneous. 
(b)  Fee for use of public space for storage during private construction. A fee shall be charged for the use of public space for storage during private construction. 
(c)  Demolition permit fees. A fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule for each demolition permit shall be paid as follows: 
Business or commercial building. 
Residential or accessory building. 
The applicant shall apply and pay for any street use permit and any permit for parking spaces or public ways, which shall be out of use during demolition. 
(d)  Federal and State buildings. If a building is designed and constructed by the federal or state government, no fee will be charged, but the building must comply with all requirements of this Code and the Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
(e)  Remodeling fees. 
(f)  Fence permits fees. 
2.  Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is started prior to obtaining the prescribed permit, the fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be doubled. The payment of such double fees shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work or from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(7)  Section 108. Paragraph 108.5, Related Fees of the Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Plan Review Fees. When a plan or other data are required to be submitted by subsection R106 of the International Residential Code, a plan-checking fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule may be required by the Building Official at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. 
Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan-checking, an additional plan-check fee shall be charged at a rate established by the Building Official. 
(8)  Section 109, Inspections, Paragraph 109.1, General of the Code is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph thereto reading as follows: 
Identification Signs. All constructions, additions, alterations or repairs for which a permit is required by this Code shall provide a construction address identification sign, unless the facility has a permanently displayed address. Said identification sign shall be a sign of metal, wood, plastic, or other approved rigid material with permanent identification numbers and letters thereon indicating the legally assigned street or other type address assigned by the Building Official. Said identification sign shall have numbers and letters such size and shall be so placed upon the construction site that said sign is readily visible and identifiable from the public street. Said identification sign shall be properly maintained during the entire period of time that the construction or work is being accomplished or maintained. 
(9)  Section 109 Inspections, Paragraph 109.3.7, Other Inspections of the Code is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph thereto reading as follows: 
Re-Inspections. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. 
This subsection is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection. 
Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the permit card is not properly posted on the worksite, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested or from deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. 
To obtain a re-inspection, the applicant shall file an application therefore in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose and pay a re-inspection fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
The inspector at his/her option may require that re-inspections be made within a reasonable, specified time, the purpose here being prevention of missed re-inspections and long delays. 
(10)  Section 110 Certificate of Occupancy, Paragraph 110.1, Use and Occupancy of the Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Use and Occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing use or occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein. 
Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. 
It shall be the responsibility of a permit holder or his/her agent to call for all required inspections, including the final inspection, of all constructions, additions, alterations or repairs performed under a building permit. Final inspection shall be called for by the permit holder or his/her agent prior to occupancy of the building or structure or portion thereof. In the event any permit holder or his/her agent shall fail to call for final inspection as herein provided, or in the event any permit holder or his/her agent shall have a backlog of permits with no final inspections completed, in either such event, the Building Official is authorized to withhold further issuance of any permits under this Code to said permit holder or his/her agent until final inspections have been completed as provided by this Code. 
(11)  Section 112, Board of Appeals of the Code is hereby amended by adding the following language thereto reading as follows: 
The Board of Appeals shall be the Board of Adjustments as referred to in Chapter 59 of the Unified Land Development Ordinance, being a part of the Code of the City of Kearney. 
Any person who is aggrieved by any decision of the Building Official relating to the suitability of alternate materials, methods of construction or interpretation of any provision of this Code, except the Administrative provisions, may obtain review of such decision by the Board of Appeals upon filing a written request for review with the office of the Building Official and payment of a filing fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(12)  Section J109.4 Drainage Across Property Lines, of Section J109 Drainage and Terracing of Appendix J Grading of the International Building Code is hereby amended by adding the following paragraphs: 
Erosion control shall be provided on all individual construction sites including all single-family development sites. Control shall consist of silt fencing or other approved means at the perimeter of any site where excavated material, fill material or topsoil would otherwise migrate to any adjacent property. 
Erosion control shall be provided to prevent the transmission of soils from all construction sites, including single-family sites, onto an improved City roadway surface. Temporary rock parking and/or staging areas shall be provided for trucks or equipment that periodically enter and exit construction sites onto an improved roadway. 
Failure to incorporate erosion control mitigation may cause the Building and Zoning Division to cease further inspections or issue citations or both until erosion control methods are implemented. Any costs incurred by the City, associated with cleaning or managing soil migration unto an improved roadway surface, shall be assessed to the property. 
(Ord. No. 2730, §12.1-12.23, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3411, 1, 8-11-81; Ord. No. 3569, 5, 1-11-83; Ord. No. 3622, 1, 8-23-83; Ord. No. 4004, 1, 4-12-88; Ord. No. 4079, 5, 3-28-89; Ord. No. 5013, 1, 5-23-89; Ord. No. 5095, 1, 2-27-90; Ord. No. 5167, 1, 9-25-90; Code 1980, 9-34; Ord. No. 5346, 1-14-92; Ord. No. 5349, 1-28-92; Ord. No. 5823, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 5940, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 6381, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 6866, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 6912, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 8083, 6-28-2016 effective date October 16, 2016) 
9-302 - INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE; AMENDMENTS 
    The International Residential Code, hereinafter referred to as the "Code", and adopted by the provision of this Article is hereby amended, altered, changed and modified as follows: 
(1)  Section R301 Design Criteria, Table R301.5, Minimum Uniformly Distributed Live Loads of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read: Habitable attics and attics served with fixed stairs forty (40); Sleeping rooms forty (40). 
(2)  Table R302.1 (1) Exterior walls, Footnote b. of the International Residential Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(3)  Table R302.1 (2) Exterior walls, Footnote c. of the International Residential Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(4)  Section R305 Ceiling Height, Paragraph R305.1.1, Basements of the International Residential Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(5)  Section R307 Toilet, Bath and Shower Spaces, Paragraph R307.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(6)  Section R309.5 Fire Sprinklers is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(7)  Section R310.2.1 Minimum Opening Area "Exception": Grade floor or below grade openings shall have a net clear opening of not less than 5 square feet (0.465 m2) is deleted in its entirety. 
(8)  Section R311.3.1 Floor Elevations at Required Egress Doors, Exception of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
The landing or floor on the exterior side shall not be more than eight (8) inches (203 mm) below the top of the threshold provided the door does not swing over the landing or floor. 
(9)  Section R311.3.2 Floor Elevations for other Exterior Doors of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Doors other than the required egress door shall be provided with landings or floors not more than eight (8) inches (203 mm) below the top of the threshold. 
(10)  Section R311.7.5.1 Risers the first sentence of the section of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read: 
The maximum riser height shall be eight (8) inches (203 mm). 
(11)  Section R311.5.7.2 Treads of the International Residential Code, the first sentence of this section is hereby amended to read: 
The minimum tread depth shall be nine (9) inches (229 mm). 
(12)  Section R311.7.5.2.1 Winder Treads of the International Residential Code, the first sentence of this section is hereby amended to read: 
Winder treads shall have a minimum tread depth of nine (9) inches (229 mm) measured between the vertical planes of the foremost projection of adjacent treads at the intersection of the walkline. 
(13)  Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems of the International Residential Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(14)  Section R317 Protection of Wood and Wood Based Products Against Decay, Paragraph R317.1 Location Required, Item 2 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read: 
All wood framing members, sills or plates that rest on concrete or masonry exterior foundation walls. 
(15)  Section R317 Protection of Wood and Wood Based Products Against Decay, Paragraph R317.1, Location Required, Item 7 of the International Residential Code is hereby deleted. 
(16)  Section R317.1.4 Wood Columns, Exceptions of the International Residential Code are hereby deleted in there in entirety and replaced with the following: 
Interior columns, either exposed or enclosed within the framing cavity, provided such columns are separated from any concrete or masonry by approved wood of natural decay resistance, or approved pressure-preservative treated wood. 
(17)  Section R403 Footings, Table 403.1 Minimum Width of Concrete, Precast or Masonry Footings (inches) a of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read: Minimum Footing and Foundation Dimensions in (inches)/Rebar and Anchor Requirements. 
Number of Stories Concrete Masonry Unit Footing Width (inches) Footing Thickness (inches) Foundation Depth Below Finish Grade (inches) 1 8 8 16 8 36 2 8 8 18 8 36  
* Brick veneers require ten (10) inch masonry units. 
  #4 Rebar shall be placed every four (4) foot, at corners and opening with cores filled with masonry concrete. 
  One-half (1/2) inch anchor bolts shall be placed every six (6) foot and twelve (12) inches from corners and openings with cores filed; anchor straps shall be placed every four (4) foot and twelve (12) inches from corners and openings. 
Notes: Footings and foundations for residential and commercial projects may vary from these requirements when designed by an architect or structural engineer registered and licensed in the State of Nebraska. Approved plans and specifications must include footings and foundation designed in accordance with a soil condition report, soil compaction and soil bearing report. Design must include the compressive strength of concrete and location of reinforcing steel and be subject to approval by the Building Official. Detached garages and accessory buildings may vary from these requirements upon approval of plans and specifications by the Building Official for lesser requirements. Accessory buildings may be placed on a floating slab when the structure is 600 square feet or less. 
(18)  Section R502 Wood Floor Framing, Paragraph R502.3 Allowable Joist Spans of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read: 
Spans for floor joist shall be in accordance with Table R502.3.1(2). For other grades and species and for other loading conditions, refer to the AE&PA Span Tables and Joists and Rafters. 
(19)  Section R502 Wood Floor Framing, Paragraph R502.3.1, Sleeping Areas and Attic Joist of the International Residential Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(20)  Section R502 Wood Floor Framing, Paragraph R502.3.2, Other Floor Joists of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Table R502.3.1(2) shall be utilized to determine the maximum allowable span of floor joist that support all areas of the building, provided that the design live load does not exceed forty (40) psf (1.92 kN/m2) and the design dead does not exceed ten (10) psf (0.48kN/m2). 
(21)  Part IV - Energy Conservation, Chapter 11, Energy Efficiency of the International Residential Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(22)  Part VI - Fuel Gas, Chapter 24, Fuel Gas of the International Residential Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(23)  Part VII - Plumbing of the International Residential Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(24)  Part VIII - Electrical of the International Residential Code is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
The following appendix chapters of the International Residential Code are hereby deleted in their entirety: 
  Appendix A, Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping. 
  Appendix B, Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances, and Appliances listed use with Type B Vents. 
  Appendix C, Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent Venting Systems. 
  Appendix D, Recommended Procedure for Safety Inspection of an Existing Appliance Installation. 
  Appendix E, Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings. 
  Appendix F, Radon Control Methods. 
  Appendix I, Private Sewage Disposal. 
  Appendix K, Sound Transmission. 
  Appendix L, Permit Fees. 
  Appendix M, Home Day Care R-3 Occupancy. 
  Appendix N, Venting Methods. 
  Appendix P, Sizing of Water Piping System. 
  Appendix Q, ICC International Residential Code Electrical Provisions/National Electrical Code Cross Reference. 
(Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007; Ord. No. 7794, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 8083, 6-28-2016 effective date October 16, 2016, Ord. No. 8185, 10-10-2017) 
ARTICLE 4. - FENCES AND SCREEN WALLS 

9-401 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2730, 8.1, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-44; Ord. No. 6866, 3-12-2002) 
9-402 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2730, 8.2, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3700, 1, 6-23-81; Ord. No. 3430, 1, 9-8-81; Ord. No. 3458, 1, 10-13-81; Code 1980, 9-45; Ord. No. 6866, 3-12-2002) 
9-403 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
    No fence or screen wall shall be erected, constructed or moved until a building permit shall have been procured from the Building Official. Application for a building permit for a fence shall include a sketch of the lot, the location of any buildings on the lot, the proposed fence, and sufficient dimensions to accurately locate these features. 
    A fee shall be paid by the applicant as provided elsewhere in this Chapter for such permit. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 8.3, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3430, 2, 9-8-81; Code 1980, 9-46) 
9-404 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6536, 5-11-99) 
9-405 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6763, 2-13-2001; Ord. No. 6866, 3-12-2002) 
9-406 - ELECTRICALLY CHARGED FENCES 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any property in the city to erect, construct, maintain or permit to remain on the property any fence charged with electricity. 
    In any prosecution, testimony that any fence was under the control of the defendant or situated on his premises, and that any person received an electric shock by coming in contact with the fence, shall be prima facie evidence that the defendant caused the fence to be charged with a current of electricity and caused or permitted the fence to be connected with a source of electricity. (Ord. No. 6536, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 6866, 3-12-2002) 
ARTICLE 5. - MOVING BUILDINGS 

9-501 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; PERMITS REQUIRED 
    Before any building may be moved from one (1) site to another or moved from outside the City to a site within the City's zone of jurisdiction, the owner must meet the following requirements: 
A.  Arrange for inspection of building to determine feasibility of moving and compliance with building code and to provide bond as required by section 9-502. 
B.  Apply for a moving permit which shall include: 
1.  Plot plan showing proper setbacks; 
2.  Ownership of building and legal description of the lot onto which the building is to be moved; 
3.  Statement that taxes have been paid at the old location; 
4.  Route to be taken, date on which the building will be moved, time required for moving; 
5.  How and by whom the building is to be moved; 
6.  Agreement to connect with available city water and sewer at the new location; 
7.  Approval from the electric power, telephone, cable TV, railroad and telegraph companies that have lines crossing the proposed route; 
8.  Signatures of officials verifying that all utilities have been properly disconnected; 
9.  Must comply with state laws for the removal of asbestos; 
10.  Pre-inspection by City Official. Pre-inspection to include but not limited to: 
a.  Life Safety Issues (i.e. egress windows) 
b.  Electrical GFCI 
c.  Smoke Detectors 
d.  DVW Piping and Vents 
e.  Stairway Standards 
f.  Exterior siding shall be brought up to standards of surrounding structures; 
g.  The maximum height of a foundation for a moved structure shall be four (4) feet above grade, with a maximum concrete block exposure of no more than twenty-four (24) inches above the adjacent grade on all street-facing facades. 
11.  Arrange for police escort; 
12.  Obtain approval of permits by building official before moving. 
C.  Apply for building permit. 
D.  Pay moving permit fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
E.  Any building with a floor area measured from the outside walls of two hundred sixty-four (264) square feet or less shall be exempt from the requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 9.1, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3522, 1, 5-11-82; Ord. No. 3940, 1, 8-11-87; Ord. No. 5012, 1, 5-23-89; Ord. No. 5096, 1, 2-27-90; Code 1980, 9-55; Ord. No. 6912, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 6942, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
9-502 - COMPLETION BOND REQUIRED 
    The owner or contractor must post a completion bond in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of the cost of improvement as determined by the Building Official, but, in any event, not less than a minimum bond of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), conditioned to complete the building according to plans and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 9.2, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3941, 1, 8-11-87; Code 1980, 9-56) 
9-503 - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING MOVERS REQUIRED 
    All building movers operating in the jurisdiction of the City shall be registered with the City and shall furnish to the City a policy or policies of insurance, approved by the City Attorney, providing minimum public liability coverage in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), combined single limits or its equivalent, naming the City as an additional named insured. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 9.3, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3830, 1, 3-11-86; Code 1980, 9-57) 
9-504 - APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT 
    The application for a moving permit shall be presented to the City Building Official. Upon examination of the same, the City Manager may issue the permit or may impose such additional conditions as may be deemed expedient for the protection of public health and safety before the permit is issued. If, upon examination of the moving permit for any building with an area of two hundred sixty-four (264) square feet or more, the City Building Official finds everything in order, he/she may grant the moving permit without further approval. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 9.4, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-58) 
ARTICLE 6. - BUILDING DEMOLITION 

9-601 - PURPOSE 
    The purpose of sections 9-601 to 9-611 is to regulate and provide minimum standards for the demolition of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 10.1, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-246 
9-602 - DEFINITION 
    For the purpose of sections 9-601 to 9-611, the word "demolish" shall mean and include the razing, tearing down or removal of all or part of a building; the removal of the outer facing of a building but leaving a skeleton or structural frame; and the removal of an upper story or stories of a building. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 10.2, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-67) 
9-603 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
    No person shall demolish or remove a building, or part thereof, without first having obtained a permit therefor from the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 10.3, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-68) 
9-604 - CONFORMITY WITH SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
    All demolition work shall be performed in conformance with Safety Requirements for Demolition, ANSI A10.6-1969, as published by American National Standards Institute, Inc. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 10.4, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-69) 
9-605 - LIABILITY INSURANCE 
    Whenever any building which is to be demolished has been used or is being used as a residential building other than a type 5 residential building or for any commercial use permitted in the C-0, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2, and all planned commercial or industrial zoning districts, the Building Official shall require that the person applying for the demolition permit file a certificate evidencing liability insurance coverage in the minimum sum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) as a condition to the granting of the demolition permit. Such insurance coverage shall include both bodily injury and property damage liability protection for the property owner, his/her contractor and the City against all claims arising out of the demolition of the building. The Building Official may require a certificate evidencing liability insurance coverage in excess of the minimum sum stated above, and all certificates of insurance shall be approved by the City Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 10.5, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-70) 
9-606 - APPLICATION 
    To obtain a demolition permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the Building Official. Such application shall set forth a statement of the facts necessary to fully describe the building, its use, provide certification to the City that the building(s) about to be demolished has been inspected by a certified asbestos inspector or asbestos-removal contractor and that either no asbestos hazard exists or that all asbestos has been properly removed and disposed, its legal description and address. Provisions shall be made by the applicant for the proper abandonment of all utilities as required by this Code before a demolition permit may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 10.6, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 5097, 1, 2-27-90; Code 1980, 9-71) 
9-607 - BARRICADES 
A.  No person shall perform any demolition work on any building or structure, if by so doing he/she endangers persons or property on adjacent real estate or pedestrians on the street that abuts the property line unless the persons, property or pedestrians are protected as specified below. 
B.  Protection shall be provided for pedestrians on all sides of a building being demolished that borders on a public street or alley by providing a covered walkway four (4) feet in clear width and seven (7) feet in clear height. Such walkway shall be covered on top with two (2) inch (nominal) planking as a minimum and the sides next to the building shall be covered with plywood or other materials approved by the Building Official. The side of the walkway next to the street shall have a splash guard at least two (2) feet in height to protect the pedestrian from splashing caused by passing automobiles. The Building Official may also require a raised subfloor in the walkway. The space within the walkway and the approaches thereto shall be kept well lighted with artificial lighting continuously between sunset and sunrise. 
C.  Any building which is set back more than six (6) feet from the street or alley property line may, in lieu of the covered walkway, be protected by a tightly built fence six (6) feet high approved by the Building Official. The remainder of the property shall be enclosed with a fence not less than four (4) feet high. All material and debris being removed from the premises shall be sufficiently wetted down to settle any dust caused by its removal. 
D.  A substantial protective frame and boarding shall be built around and over every streetlight, utility box, fire or police alarm box, fire hydrant, catch basin and manhole which may be damaged due to work being performed under the permit. This protection shall be maintained until such work is complete. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 10.7, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-72) 
9-608 - UTILITY LINES 
    Water supply and service pipes must be disconnected and sealed in accordance with City water system regulations. House sewers must be disconnected and sealed in accordance with the City sanitary sewer system regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 10.8, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-73) 
9-609 - BURNING MATERIAL 
    No burning of materials during the performance of demolition work shall be permitted without written authorization of the City Fire Chief. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 10.9, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-74) 
9-610 - COMPLETION 
    All demolition work must be completed within ninety (90) days from the date of the demolition permit. Upon completion of the demolition work, the applicant shall clean the premises of all debris, fill in the excavation and grade the area with top soil or other material approved by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 10.10, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-75) 
9-611 - STOPPED BY BUILDING OFFICIAL 
    The Building Official shall have the authority to stop the demolition or removal of any building or structure, or part thereof, when the same is being done in a reckless or careless manner, or in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinances of the City. When such work is stopped by order of the Building Official, it shall not be resumed without approval of the Building Official. A demolition permit may be revoked by the Building Official at any time upon a violation of the terms thereof or upon a violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2730, 10.11, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 9-76) 
ARTICLE 7. - ELECTRICITY 

9-701 - PURPOSE 
    The purpose of this Code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard individual life, limb, health and property, and the public health, safety and welfare by regulating and controlling the quality of material and installation, alteration and repair of all electrical work within the corporate limits of the City and within two (2) miles thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 1.2, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-1) 
9-702 - SCOPE 
    The provisions of this Code shall apply to the installation, alteration or repair of all electrical work including fire alarm and emergency systems of 50 volts or operating voltage, and the practice and materials used in the installation thereof within the corporate limits of the City and within two (2) miles thereof. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this Code specify different materials, methods of installation or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 1.3, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-2, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-703 - GENERAL DEFINITIONS 
    As used in this Code, words and terms shall be defined as they are in Article 100 of the National Electrical Code as referred to in section 9-734 of this Code and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 2.1, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-3) 
9-704 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION 
    Any person upon whom a duty is placed by the provisions of this Code, who shall fail, neglect or refuse to perform such duty or who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code, for which a penalty is not otherwise specifically provided, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00); and, each day that a violation of any section of this Code continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such; provided, that if the defendant be a licensed electrician or fire alarm installer, judgment of conviction may also include a provision for the revocation of the defendant's City of Kearney electrical or fire alarm license for such time as the court shall determine; and provided further, if the license of any defendant be thus revoked, the court shall furnish, or cause to be furnished, the City Clerk certified copies of such judgment of conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 16, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-4, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-705 - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; DESIGNATED 
    Electrical inspectors as referred to in this Code shall be anyone so designated by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 2.2, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-16) 
9-706 - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; DUTIES GENERALLY 
    The Electrical Inspector shall act under the direction of the City Manager and shall have supervision of all electrical installation work within the corporate limits of the City and within two (2) miles thereof, and shall perform such duties as are hereinafter prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 1.1, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-17) 
9-707 - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; RIGHT OF ENTRY 
    The Electrical Inspector shall have the right, during reasonable hours, with the consent of the owner, occupant or person in charge of the premises, to enter any building within the corporate limits of the City and within two (2) miles thereof for the performance of his/her duties. In the event that consent is refused or cannot be obtained, the Inspector may seek an Inspection Warrant from the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 1.1, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-18) 
9-708 - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; INSPECTIONS GENERALLY 
    The Electrical Inspector shall inspect all electrical and fire alarm installations to insure compliance with the requirements of this Code and the installation and construction of the electric and fire alarm system in accordance with the approved plans and the specifications. 
    The Electrical Inspector shall inspect all electric distribution from the weather head within the corporate limits of the City and within two (2) miles thereof and investigate all cases reported to or referred to him/her, of the use of imperfect material or workmanship on any job of electrical or fire alarm work, or the violation of the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 1.1, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-19, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-709 - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; INSPECTIONS; RECORDS 
    The Electrical Inspector shall make and keep a record of all inspections, giving the location, date, name of electrician or fire alarm installer, for whom installed, and also a general description of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 1.1, 11-22, 77; Code 1980, 13-20, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-710 - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; EMERGENCY TERMINATION OF SERVICE 
    The Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electric currents and to cut or disconnect in cases of emergency any wire where such electric current is dangerous to life and property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department. The Chief of the Fire Department or person in charge at times of fire as well as the Electrical Inspector, or either of them, shall have the power to at once cause the removal of all wires or the turning off of all electric current where the circuits interfere with the work of the Fire Department during the process of fighting the fire or investigating the cause thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 1.1, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-21) 
9-711 - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; CORRECTION OF DANGEROUS INSTALLATIONS 
    The Electrical Inspector shall make inspections of any electrical or fire alarm wiring, appliance installations or connections at the request of the installer, department head, owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any building or premises where such electrical or fire alarm wiring or appliance installation is located, to ascertain compliance with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the City of Kearney. Should the Electrical Inspector, upon making such inspection as requested by any of the above find an unsafe or unsatisfactory installation, he/she shall have the authority to shut off the appliance or service at the meter, depending on the severity of the conditions, and tag the same. The Electrical Inspector shall then notify the: (1) installer immediately if the job is a new installation, and/or (2) the owner, agent, tenant or one in charge of the property to cause same to be remedied within a specified time not to exceed ten (10) days, if the same is not a new installation. If any of the above persons fail to make the corrections, changes or repairs, or fail to notify the Electrical Inspector that the work is ready for reinspection, within the specified time after receiving such notification to comply therewith, he/she shall be considered maintaining an unsafe electrical or fire alarm installation, and be in violation of this Code. The Electrical Inspector shall make a reinspection of the premises and cause action to be taken in the proper court to secure compliance. The penalties set forth in this Code shall apply. It shall be the duty and the responsibility of the installer, or one making the corrections, changes or repairs to notify the Electrical Inspector within forty-eight (48) hours after completion. Request for inspection shall be made at the office of the Electrical Inspector not less than eight (8) working hours in advance of inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 1.2, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-22, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-712 - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; WORK STOPPAGE 
    Whenever any electrical or fire alarm installation work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code, the Building Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the work, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building Official to resume work. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 1.4, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-23, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-713 - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; FINAL INSPECTION 
    Final inspection of electrical or fire alarm installations will be made in conjunction with the final building inspection and will constitute a part of the "certificate of occupancy" as defined in the building code of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 1.3, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-24, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-714 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; EXEMPTIONS 
    Any person engaged in dealing in materials or supplies, but not engaged in the installation, alteration, repair or removal of electrical or fire alarm appliances, shall not be required to register under the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 2.1, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-36, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-715 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; REGISTRATION REQUIRED 
    No person shall engage in or work at the business, trade or calling of an electrician or fire alarm installer in the jurisdiction of the City of Kearney until he/she shall have registered as an electrician or fire alarm installer with the City of Kearney. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 2.2, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-37, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-716 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION 
    Application for registration under the provisions of this Chapter shall be made to the Building and Zoning Division and shall include the name, residence, business name and location, insurance and copy of current State of Nebraska Electrical Contractor's, Class A Electrical Contractor's license or Nebraska State Fire Alarm Installers License. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 2.2, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-38; Ord. No. 6186, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 7156, 3-22-2005, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-717 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; INSTALLATIONS BY UNREGISTERED ELECTRICIANS OR FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any job of electrical or fire alarm connections incident to any property owned, managed or controlled by such person unless the electrician or fire alarm installer performing such work has been registered as required by this Code, and has received a permit from the Building and Zoning Division for that particular work; and, any such person causing or permitting any such work to be done in violation of the provisions hereof shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and subject to the penalties provided for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 2.3, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-40, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-718 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; REGISTRATION OF COMPANIES 
    Any corporation, firm or partnership registered with the City of Kearney shall have an electrician holding a State of Nebraska Class A Electrical Contractor's, or a State of Nebraska Fire Alarm Installers license either as an officer of such corporation or as a member of such firm or partnership, or as an employee, and who shall at all times be in actual charge of and be responsible for the installation, removal or repair of any electrical or fire alarm work done by such corporation, firm or partnership. Before such corporation, firm or partnership shall be registered in its corporate, firm or partnership name as an electrical contractor or fire alarm installer, there shall be filed with the Development Services Department a copy of the State of Nebraska Electrical contractor's license or State of Nebraska Fire Alarm Installers license, and insurance as hereinafter required. Provided, that if after registration of such corporation, firm or partnership, such electrician or fire alarm installer as an officer of such corporation or a member of such firm or partnership shall withdraw therefrom and cease to be connected therewith; then and in that event, the registration of such corporation, firm or partnership shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 2.12, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-44; Ord. No. 7156, 3-22-2005, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-719 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; FEES FOR LICENSES 
    For every state electrical or fire alarm installer license holder registered to do business in the City as an electrical contractor or fire alarm installer, there shall be a registration fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule paid to the City for a two-year licensing period. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 2.17, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3912, 1, 4-14-87; Ord. No. 4003, 1, 4-12-88; Code 1980, 13-45; Ord. No. 6186, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 6912, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-720 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7156, 3-22-2005) 
9-721 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8217, 2-13-2018) 
9-722 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; LICENSE EXPIRATION 
    A City license currently held to do work under this Chapter shall expire on the thirtieth (30th) day of April following the date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 2.9, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-50, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-723 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; LICENSE RENEWAL FOR CITY LICENSES ONLY 
    License certificates issued under the provisions of this Article at the time of their expiration, may be renewed upon payment of the required license fee. 
    Any person licensed under the provisions of this Article, as a master or journeyman electrician or fire alarm installer who does not renew his/her license for a period of one (1) month after the expiration, such license shall become null and void. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 2.10, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-51; Ord. No. 6186, 10-8-96, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-724 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; LICENSE ASSIGNMENT 
    Licenses issued under the provisions of this Article shall not be assignable. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 2.9, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-52, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-725 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; LICENSE REVOCATION 
    The Council, by a majority vote, shall have the power to revoke any electrician's or fire alarm installer's license or registration issued by the City of Kearney, if the same was obtained through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is shown to be grossly incompetent, or has a second (2nd) time willfully violated any of the provisions of this Chapter. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to the penalties prescribed for the violation of the provisions of this Chapter. If a certificate of registration be revoked, the holder of the same shall not apply for registration until one (1) year from the date of such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 2.11, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-53, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-726 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; PERMITTING OTHERS TO USE LICENSE PROHIBITED 
    No registered electrician or fire alarm installer shall allow his/her name to be used by another person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit for the installation of any electrical work. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 2.13, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-54, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-727 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; QUALIFICATIONS FOR NONRESIDENT CONTRACTORS 
    Nonresident electrical contractors or fire alarm installers must apply to the Electrical Inspector for a special permit. The permit shall be a temporary permit and shall automatically expire at the completion of the job for which the permit is granted. To qualify for such permit, the nonresident contractor shall: 
A.  Qualify under section 9-718 of this Chapter. 
B.  Provide for insurance as required by this Chapter. 
C.  Pay permit fee as required by section 9-732 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 2.15, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 4019, 2, 5-24-88; Code 1980, 13-56; Ord. No. 7156, 3-22-2005, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-728 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; OWNER'S MAINTENANCE PERMIT CONDITIONS; FEE 
    Any person regularly employed by any person or corporate employer to care for and attend to the electrical or fire alarm apparatus of such person shall submit to the Building and Zoning Division a copy of his/her State of Nebraska Class A Journeyman License or other such State of Nebraska Special Installers License or State of Nebraska Fire Alarm Installers License deemed appropriate to the State Electrical Board to cover the scope of work performed. Said persons shall be registered as required in Section 9-718. Persons registered as owner's maintenance electricians shall not be permitted to perform wiring other than repairs and maintenance to the owner's existing electrical or fire alarm equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 2.16, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 4019, 3, 5-24-88; Code 1980, 13-57, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-729 - ELECTRICIANS, FIRE ALARM INSTALLERS; INSPECTIONS 
    All electrical and fire alarm work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Electrical Inspector. All such work shall remain exposed and accessible until such time as the work has been approved by the Electrical Inspector. 
    It shall be the duty of the permit holder/electrician/fire alarm installer to call for required inspections and to cause the work to remain exposed and accessible for inspection purposes. Neither the electrical inspector nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expenses entailed in the removal or replacement of any materials required to allow inspection. 
    Approval of an inspection shall not be construed to be approval of a violation of this section or any other code or ordinance of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate this Code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. 
    Requests for inspections shall be made at the office of the Electrical Inspector by the electrician or fire alarm installer not less than eight (8) working hours in advance of inspection. 
(Ord. No. 5106, 1, 3-27-90; Code 1980, 13-58, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-730 - PERMITS; REQUIRED 
    No electrical wiring or fire alarm apparatus shall be installed until a permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 4.1, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3986, 1, 3-8-88; Code 1980, 13-82, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-731 - PERMITS; APPLICATION 
    An application for an electrical or fire alarm permit shall be made in writing and shall set forth the name of the owner, agent or occupant of the premises, giving the address and name and business location of the electrician or fire alarm installer having charge of the work and a description of the work being done. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 4.2, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-83, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-732 - PERMITS; SCHEDULE OF FEES 
    Fees to be paid to the City of Kearney and credited to the general fund of the City for electrical and fire alarm permits shall be charged as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 4.3, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3409, 1, 8-11-81; Ord. No. 3902, 1, 3-10-87; Ord. No. 4003, 4, 4-12-88; Code 1980, 13-84; Ord. No. 6912, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-733 - PERMITS; DOUBLE FEES; EMERGENCIES 
    Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is started prior to obtaining the prescribed permit, the fees shall be doubled; provided, in the event of an emergency where it is absolutely necessary to perform the electrical or fire alarm work immediately before a permit can be secured; such as on nights, weekends, or holidays, said fees shall not be doubled if a permit is secured at the earliest possible time after the emergency electrical or fire alarm work has been performed. The payment of such double fees shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code or from any penalties prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. II, 4.3, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-85, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-734 - ELECTRICAL CODE; ADOPTED 
    The regulations contained in the National Electrical Code 2017 Edition (National Fire Protection Association 70-2011), as adopted in whole or amended in part by the Nebraska State Electrical Board Rule 18, copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, subject to the amendments specifically set forth here and after, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City and that area including two (2) miles beyond and adjacent to the corporate limits of the City included in the zoning ordinance. In the event conflict arises between the National Electrical Code and this Code, this Code shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 3, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3524, 1, 5-25-82; Ord. No. 3639, 1, 10-11-83; Ord. No. 3912, 2, 4-14-87; Ord. No. 5106, 2, 3-27-90; Code 1980, 13-97; Ord. No. 6186, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99; Ord. No. 6902, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 7194, 8-23-2005; Ord. No. 7601, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 7674, 9-27-2011; Ord. No. 7905, 6-24-2014, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
State Law reference- Adoption of standard codes, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-132; Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-922 
9-735 - ELECTRICAL CODE; SUBSEQUENT EDITIONS 
    Subsequent editions or revisions of the code adopted by the provisions of this Article shall be considered adopted and of full force and effect within the City upon the approval thereof by the Council and the filing of one (1) copy thereof in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Code 1980, 13-98) 
9-736 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 5, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-99; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99) 
9-736.1 - SERVICE MASTS AS SUPPORTS 
    Section 230-28 of the National Electrical Code 2017 Edition is hereby amended as follows: Where a service mast is used for the support of service-drop conductors, a minimum two inch (2") rigid metal or intermediate metal conduit shall be used and may be required to be supported by braces or guys to withstand safely the strain imposed by the service drop. In addition to the requirements for the service mast on a permanent service, a temporary service shall be a minimum two-inch (2") rigid metal or intermediate metal conduit, when the service conductors are greater than fifty feet (50') from the point of attachment to the public service supplier. 
(Ord. No. 6186, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99; Ord. No. 6554, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 6902, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 7194, 8-23-2005; Ord. No. 7601, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 7674, 9-27-2011; Ord. No. 7905, 6-24-2014, Ord. No. 8166, 7-25-2017) 
9-737 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 6, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3986, 2, 3-8-88; Code 1980, 13-100; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99) 
9-737.1 - PENALTY 
    Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-111 of this Code. Each distinct act or violation of the terms of this Article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 6186, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99) 
9-738 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 7, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-101; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99) 
9-739 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 8, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-102; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99) 
9-740 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 9, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-103; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99) 
9-741 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 10.1, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3986, 3, 3-8-88; Code 1980, 13-104; Ord. No. 6186, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99) 
9-742 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99) 
9-743 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 11, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-106; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99) 
9-744 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 12, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-107; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99) 
9-745 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 13, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-108; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99) 
9-746 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 14, 11-22-77; Code 1980, 13-109; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99) 
9-747 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 2737, Art. I, 15, 11-22-77; Ord. No. 3407, 2, 8-11-81; Code 1980, 13-110; Ord. No. 6526, 4-13-99) 
9-748 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5106, 3, 3-27-90; Code 1980, 13-111; Ord. No. 6186, 10-8-96) 
9-749 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6186, 10-8-96) 
9-750 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6902, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 7194, 8-23-2005; Ord. No. 7478, 11-25-2008) 
9-751 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6902, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 7194, 8-23-2005; Ord. No. 7478, 11-25-2008) 
9-752 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6902, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 7194, 8-23-2005; Ord. No. 7478, 11-25-2008) 
9-753 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6902, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 7194, 8-23-2005; Ord. No. 7601, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 7674, 9-27-2011; Ord. No. 7905, 6-24-2014) 
ARTICLE 8. - HOUSING 
DIVISION I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

9-801 - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE; ADOPTED 
    There is hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of prescribing a code which meets the requirements for effective control of housing conditions, that certain code known as "International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition" as prepared by the International Code Council which is on file in the office of the City Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, subject to the amendments specifically set forth here and after, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City and that area including two (2) miles beyond and adjacent to the corporate limits of the City included in the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1958, 16A.1; Ord. No. 3570, 1, 1-11-83; Ord. No. 5010, 1, 5-23-89; Code 1980, 18-16; Ord. No. 5942, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 6381, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007; Ord. No. 7574, 2-23-2010) 
9-802 - SUBSEQUENT EDITIONS 
    Subsequent editions or revisions of the code adopted by the provisions of this Article shall be considered adopted and of full force and effect within the City upon the approval thereof by the Council and the filing of one (1) copy thereof in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Code 1980, 18-17) 
9-803 - CONFLICTS 
    In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted by this Article and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, State law or City ordinance, rule or regulation, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, State law or City ordinance, rule or regulation shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1980, 18-18) 
9-804 - DEFINITIONS 
    Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the code adopted by this Article, it shall be construed to mean the City of Kearney, Nebraska. 
    Whenever the term "corporation counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the code adopted by this Article, it shall be construed to mean the City Attorney of this City. 
(Code 1980, 18-19) 
9-805 - SECTION 101 AMENDED; TITLE; CITATION OF CODE 
    Section 101 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: 
    Section 101. This Division shall be known and cited as the Kearney Minimum Housing Code and hereinafter will be referred to as "this Code". 
(Code 1980, 18-20; Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062) 
9-806 - SECTION 111.1 AMENDED; MEANS OF APPEAL; APPLICATION FOR APPEAL 
    Section 111.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: 
    Section 111.1. Application for Appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the Building Official or a notice or order issued under this Code shall have the right to appeal to the Kearney Board of Adjustment, provided that a written application for appeals is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. Appeals to the Board shall be filed and processed in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 111 of the International Property Maintenance Code. Copies of all rules of procedure adopted by the Board shall be delivered to the Building Official, who shall make them accessible to the public. 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-807 - SECTION 201 AMENDED; GENERAL DEFINITIONS 
    Section 201 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: 
    Section 201.1. For the purpose of this Code, certain terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this chapter or as specified in the International Building Code. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster's Collegiate Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, copyright 1997, shall be considered as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-808 - SECTION 202 AMENDED; GENERAL DEFINITIONS 
    Section 202 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: 
1.  Approved , as used in this title, shall mean materials or methods of construction authorized by ordinances of the City of Kearney or materials or methods of construction which the Building Official approves as an equivalent material or method to that prescribed by ordinance. Tests or principles made or utilized by nationally recognized experts, scientific organizations, or other competent evidence may be required by the Building Official at the owner's expense prior to approval. 
2.  Basement shall mean any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be classified as a basement unless such floor level qualifies as a first story as defined herein. 
3.  Blight or Blighted shall mean unsightly condition including the accumulation of debris, litter, rubbish, or rubble; fences characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling or rusting; landscaping that is dead, characterized by uncontrolled growth or lack of maintenance, or is damaged and any other similar conditions of disrepair and deterioration regardless of the condition of other properties in the neighborhood. 
4.  Building Code shall mean the International Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council, as adopted by the City Kearney. 
5.  Building Official. The City Building Official or his authorized representative is hereby designated the "Building Official" for purposes of this Code. 
6.  Court shall mean a space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides by walls of a building. 
7.  Debris shall mean substance of little or no apparent economic value including, but not limited to, deteriorated lumber, old newspapers, furniture parts, stoves, sinks, cabinets, household fixtures, refrigerators, car parts, abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, or the scattered remains of items. 
8.  Deterioration shall mean a lowering in quality of the condition or appearance of a building, structure or parts thereof characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or any other evidence of physical decay or neglect or excessive use or lack of maintenance over a substantial or widespread area as opposed to a limited or concentrated area. 
9.  Dormitory shall mean any building or spaces within a building where group sleeping accommodations are provided for more than sixteen persons who are not members of the same family group sleeping in one room or in a series of closely associated rooms under joint occupancy and single management as in college residence halls, fraternity houses, military barracks, shelters for the homeless, with or without meals, but without individual cooking facilities. 
10.  Dwelling shall mean any building, or mobile home, which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for residential purposes, living, or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
11.  Dwelling unit shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. 
12.  Efficiency dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit containing only one (1) habitable room and meeting the requirements of Section 404.6. 
13.  Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code sponsored by the National Fire Protection Association under the auspices of the American National Standards Institute as adopted by the City of Kearney. 
14.  Emergency shall mean a combination of circumstances calling for immediate action to protect the health and safety of persons residing in the city. 
15.  Extermination shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage place; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Health Officer. 
16.  Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food 
17.  Grade shall mean the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line or, when the property line is more than five (5) feet from the building, between the building and a line five (5) feet from the building. 
18.  Habitable Space (Room) shall mean space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closet, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas, are not considered habitable space. 
19.  Health Officer shall mean the employee appointed by the City Manager as Health Officer of the City of Kearney. 
20.  Hot water shall mean hot water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a temperature of not less than one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit. 
21.  Infestation shall mean the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other pests. 
22.  Litter shall mean decaying or non-decaying solid and semi-solid wastes including, but not limited to, both combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, trash, cardboard, waste material, cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, debris, scrap paving material, discarded appliances, discarded furniture, dry vegetation, weeds, dead trees and branches, overgrown vegetation and trees which may become a fire hazard, piles of earth mixed with any of the above or any foreign objects, including inoperable vehicles, except, for purposes of this ordinance, litter shall not include organic materials being composted in a safe and sanitary manner in accordance with Chapter 5 of the Kearney Municipal Code. 
23.  Mechanical Code shall mean the International Mechanical Code promulgated jointly by the International Code Council and the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as adopted by the City of Kearney. 
24.  Manufactured House shall mean a year-round, transportable structure which is a single-family or two-family dwelling unit suitable for permanent (more than thirty [30] days) living quarters, more than eight (8) feet wide and thirty-two (32) feet in length designed and built to be towed on its own chassis and designed to be used be used as a single-family or two-family dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
25.  Multiple dwelling shall mean any dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units. 
26.  Nuisance. The following shall be defined as nuisances: 
(a)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(b)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or on an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
(c)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the Health Officer. 
(d)  Overcrowding a room with occupants. 
(e)  Insufficient ventilation or illumination. 
(f)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities. 
(g)  Uncleanliness, as determined by the Health Officer. 
(h)  Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the Health Officer. 
(i)  Any building or structure which as a result of vandalism, neglect, inadequate maintenance, or lack of repair is permitted to become so blighted, deteriorated or dilapidated that such building or structure is detrimental to or endangers the health, safety, or welfare of the public or occupants thereof. 
(j)  Any premises which as a result of vandalism, neglect or inadequate maintenance or lack of repair is permitted to become so blighted that such premises is detrimental to or endangers the health, safety, or welfare of the public or occupants thereof. 
(k)  Vacant or abandoned buildings which for a period of six (6) months or more have been boarded up, left in a partial state of destruction, or left in a state of partial construction after the expiration of a building permit for such construction. 
(l)  Any nuisance defined by the Kearney City Code, Nebraska law, or declared to be a nuisance in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code. 
27.  Occupant shall mean any person living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
28.  Operator shall mean any person who has charge, care, or control of a building or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
29.  Ordinary minimum winter conditions shall mean the temperature fifteen (15) degrees Fahrenheit above the lowest recorded temperature for the previous ten (10) year period. 
30.  Owner shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(a)  Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(b)  Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner, prime tenant, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this title, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
31.  Plumbing shall mean and include all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: Gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines. 
32.  Plumbing Code shall mean the Uniform Plumbing Code sponsored by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), as adopted by the City of Kearney. 
33.  Reasonable time shall mean a time convenient for the occupant or owner, as the case may be, for the inspection of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit. If, however, a time cannot be agreed upon, a letter shall be sent by the Building Official to the occupant or owner, as the case may be, stating the time the inspection shall be made. At least three (3) days' notice shall be given in the letter for the inspection. 
34.  Rental House(s) shall mean any dwelling containing one (1) or more rental units, in which space is let or rented by the owner or operator to the public including, but not limited to, rooming houses, lodging houses, apartment houses, motels, and hotels, and shall include all buildings, structures, or dwellings containing a room or rooms and/or suites of rooms, or both, in which sleeping accommodations are furnished by the owners or operators, or which are suitable for sleeping accommodations furnished to the tenants or guests, which rooms or suites of rooms are held out to the public to be places where such accommodations are furnished or can be installed, and are rented, let, or leased to members of the public, but shall not include any business which is subject to state inspection and/or licensure. 
35.  Rental Unit shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping which is let or rented to the public. 
36.  Rubbish shall mean combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust. 
37.  Rubble shall mean broken solid surface fragments usually resulting from the decay or deterioration of a building, miscellaneous mass of broken or apparently worthless materials. 
38.  Shelter for the homeless shall mean a structure used as a temporary dwelling for transient or homeless individuals, but not including orphanages or foster homes, operated by nonprofit religious, educational, or philanthropic institutions. 
39.  Story shall mean that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or unused under-floor space is more than six (6) feet above grade as defined herein for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such basement or unused under-floor space shall be considered as a story. 
40.  First story shall mean the lowest story in a building which qualifies as a story, as defined herein, except that a floor level in a building having only one (1) floor level shall be classified as a first story; provided such floor level is not more than four (4) feet below grade for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter, or more than eight (8) feet below grade at any point. 
41.  Supplied shall mean paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
42.  Temporary housing shall mean any tent, trailer, or other type of shelter used for human shelter which may or may not be transportable. 
43.  Trailer shall mean a transportable structure which may be a single-family dwelling unit which has a built-in flush toilet, bath or shower, and kitchen facilities and is suitable for recreational, vacation, or travel purposes, and which is not more than eight (8) feet in width, nor more than thirty-two (32) feet in length including hitch; provided, the length shall not apply if the gross weight does not exceed four thousand five hundred (4,500) pounds. 
44.  Wastewater disposal system. Whenever the provisions of this title require premises to be connected to the wastewater disposal system, such connection shall be governed by the provisions and requirements of Title 124. 
45.  Yard shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except where specifically provided by this Code, on the lot on which a building is situated. 
    Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit'" "rooming house," "rooming unit," "premises," are used in this title, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-809 - SECTION 502 AMENDED; REQUIRED FACILITIES 
    Section 502 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to add a new section 502.5 which reads as follows: 502.5. Dormitories, Rooming Houses, Bed and Breakfasts and Shelters for the Homeless. Dormitories, rooming houses, and shelters for the homeless shall have at least one (1) flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower connected to a water and wastewater system and in good working condition for each ten (10) persons or fraction thereof residing within a shelter for the homeless, including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of said facilities; provided, that in a shelter for the homeless where rooms are let to or occupied by males only, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half (1/2) the required number of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-810 - SECTION 302 AMENDED; EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS 
    Section 302 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby added to read as follows: 
    Section 302.10. Maintenance of Buildings. All buildings, or portions thereof, shall be adequately maintained so as to be free of deterioration that endangers or is likely to endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or occupants thereof. All exposed exterior surfaces, windows and doors of buildings, structures and the premises upon which they are located shall be adequately maintained so as to not present a deteriorated or blighted appearance. 
    Inadequate maintenance of buildings shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Any building or portion thereof, which is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with Section 115 of the International Building Code. 
(2)  Buildings, which for a period of six (6) months or more are boarded up, left in a partial state of destruction, or left in a state of partial construction after expiration of a building permit for such construction. 
(3)  Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions. 
(4)  Unpainted buildings, which have begun to dry rot, warp, or become infested with termites. 
(5)  Buildings, which have substantial and noticeable conditions of blight or deterioration. 
(6)  Buildings, which have cracked, chipped, flaking, peeling, or missing paint over fifty percent (50%) or more of any wall or face of the building. 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-811 - SECTION 302.2 ADDED; DRAINAGE AROUND FOUNDATION 
    Section 302.2 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby added to read as follows: 
    Section 302.2.2 Drainage Around Foundation. All buildings will be provided with proper drainage so that water will drain away from the foundation. 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-812 - SECTION 108 AMENDED; UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT 
    Section 108 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to add a paragraph to 108.1 to read as follows: 
    Section 108.1.5 General (Substandard Buildings). Any building or portion thereof which is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with Section 115 of the International Building Code, or any building or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the conditions referenced in this section to an extent that such condition endangers or is likely to endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof, shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a substandard building. 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-813 - SECTION 108.1.6 ADDED; STRUCTURAL HAZARDS 
    Section 108.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to add a new subsection 108.1.6 to read as follows: 
    Section 108.1.6. Every inside and outside stair, every porch, every handrail, every guardrail and every appurtenance thereto which is so constructed or in lack of repair so as to be unsafe to use and not capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-814 - SECTION 108.1.7 ADDED; STRUCTURAL HAZARDS 
    Section 108.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to add a new subsection 108.1.7 to read as follows: 
    Section 108.1.7. Roof drainage systems, which are not secured and hung properly so as to reduce the risk of all or portions thereof falling to the ground. 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-815 - SECTION 108.1.8 AMENDED; MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES 
    Section 108.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: 
    Section 108.1.8 Maintenance of Premises. Buildings shall be considered substandard when the premises on which the same are located are inadequately maintained. Inadequate maintenance of the premises shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Accumulation of debris, litter, rubbish, rubble, and similar materials or conditions. 
(2)  Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which by reason of rotting or deteriorating condition or storm damage constitute a health or safety hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(3)  Sources of infestation. 
(4)  Premises, which have substantial and noticeable conditions of blight or disrepair. 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-816 - SECTION 108.1.9 ADDED; REMOVAL OR SHUT OFF OF FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT 
    Section 108.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to add a subsection 108.1.9 to read as follows: 
    Section 108.1.9 Removal or Shut Off of Facilities and Equipment. The removal or shutting off or discontinuance of any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is required under this Code for any occupied dwelling, except for temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the Building Official, shall cause the building to be substandard. 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-817 - SECTION 108.1.10 ADDED; INADEQUATE MAINTENANCE 
    Section 108.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to add a subsection 108.1.10 to read as follows: 
    Section 108.1.10 Inadequate Maintenance. Buildings or portions thereof shall be deemed substandard when they are inadequately maintained. Inadequate maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any building or portion thereof, which is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with Section 115 of the International Building Code. 
(2)  Buildings, which are for a period of six months or more boarded up, left in a partial state of destruction, or left in a state of partial construction after expiration of a building permit for such construction. 
(3)  Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions. 
(4)  Unpainted buildings, which have begun to dry rot, warp, or become infested with termites. 
(5)  Buildings, which have substantial conditions of blight or deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-818 - SECTION 111.2 AMENDED; MEMBERSHIP OF BOARD 
    Section 111.2 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to add a subsection to read as follows: 
    Section 111.2.6 Continuances. The Chair of the Board, or in the chair's absence, the vice-chair of the Board, may grant continuances for good cause shown; however, when a hearing examiner has been assigned to such hearing, no continuance may be granted except by the examiner for good cause shown so long as the matter remains before the examiner. 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
9-819 - SECTION 605.2 AMENDED; RECEPTACLES 
    Section 605.2 of the International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: 
    Any new receptacle installed to serve a kitchen countertop surface shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. 
(Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007) 
9-820 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of the ordinance and code adopted by the provisions of this Division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided by section 1-111 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007) 
9-821-9-839 - RESERVED 
DIVISION II. - FAIR HOUSING 

9-840 - PURPOSE 
    The purpose of this division is to promote the general welfare of the residents of Kearney, Nebraska, by endorsing the provisions of the Nebraska Fair Housing Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. 20-301 through 20-344, to the effect that there shall be no discrimination in the City of Kearney, Nebraska, in the acquisition, ownership, possession or enjoyment of housing in accordance with Article I, Section 25 of the Constitution of the State of Nebraska. 
(Ord. No. 5949, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007) 
9-841 - DEFINITIONS 
    As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
A.  Aggrieved person shall include any person who: (1) claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice, or (2) believes that he or she will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur; 
B.  Commission shall mean the Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission. 
C.  Dwelling shall mean any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence for one (1) or more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof; 
D.  Familial status shall mean one (1) or more minors being domiciled with: (1) a parent or another person having legal custody of such individual; or (2) the designee of a parent or other person having legal custody, with written permission of the parent or other person; 
E.  Handicap shall mean, with respect to a person: (1) a physical or mental impairment, excluding the current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-401, which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities, (2) a record of having such an impairment, or (3) being regarded as having such an impairment; 
F.  Person shall include one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries; 
G.  Rent shall include lease, sublease, let and otherwise grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant; and 
H.  Restrictive covenant shall mean any specification limiting the transfer, rental or lease of any housing because of race, creed, religion, color, national origin, sex, handicap, familial status or ancestry. 
(Ord. No. 5949, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007) 
9-842 - UNLAWFUL ACTS 
    Except as exempted by Section 9-812, it shall be unlawful to: 
A.  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny, refuse to show, or refuse to receive and transmit an offer for a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, national original, familial status or sex; 
B.  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, religion, national origin, familial status or sex; 
C.  Make, print, publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status or sex or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination; 
D.  Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status or sex that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is, in fact, so available; 
E.  Cause to be made any written or oral inquiry or record concerning the race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status or sex of a person seeking to purchase, rent or lease any housing; 
F.  Include in any transfer, sale, rental or lease of housing any restrictive covenants or honor or exercise or attempt to honor or exercise any restrictive covenant pertaining to housing. 
G.  Discharge or demote an employee or agent or discriminate in the compensation of such employee or agent because of such employee's compliance with this Division or the Nebraska Fair Housing Act; and 
H.  Induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status or sex. 
    The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any minor. 
(Ord. No. 5949, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007) 
9-843 - HANDICAPPED PERSON; DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
A.  Except as exempted by section 9-812, it shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Discriminate in the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of: 
(a)  The buyer or renter; 
(b)  Any person associated with the buyer or renter; or 
(c)  Any person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available. 
B.  For purposes of this section, discrimination shall include: 
(1)  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the premises, except that in the case of rental, the landlord may, when it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 
(2)  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford the handicapped person equal opportunity to use or enjoy a dwelling; and 
(3)  In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after January 1, 1995, a failure to design and construct the dwellings in such a manner that: 
(a)  The public use and common use portions of the dwelling are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons; 
(b)  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and 
(c)  All premises within the dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
(i)  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
(ii)  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
(iii)  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and 
(iv)  Kitchens and bathrooms such that a handicapped person in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
C.  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standards Institute standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people, ANSI A117.1, shall satisfy the requirements of subdivision (B)(3)(c) of this section. 
D.  For purposes of this section, covered multi-family dwellings shall mean: 
(1)  Buildings consisting of four (4) or more units if such buildings have one (1) or more elevators; and 
(2)  Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more units. 
E.  Nothing in this section shall require that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(Ord. No. 5949, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007) 
9-844 - TRANSACTION RELATED TO RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE; DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in transactions related to residential real estate to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. 
B.  For purposes of this section, transaction related to residential real estate shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance: 
(a)  For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or 
(b)  Secured by residential real estate; or 
(2)  The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status or sex. 
(Ord. No. 5949, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007) 
9-845 - MULTIPLE LISTING SERVICE; OTHER SERVICE; DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED 
    It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status or sex. 
(Ord. No. 5949, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007) 
9-846 - RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION, PRIVATE HOME; PRIVATE CLUB OR HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS; RESTRICTING USE NOT PROHIBITED 
A.  Nothing in this Article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of a dwelling which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes to persons of the same religion or from giving preferences to such persons unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, handicap, familial status or sex. 
B.  Nothing in this Article shall prohibit a private club not, in fact, open to the public which, as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
C.  Nothing in this Article shall prohibit or limit the right of any person or his or her authorized representative to refuse to rent a room or rooms in his or her own home for any reason or for no reason or to change tenants in his or her own home as often as desired, except that this exception shall not apply to any person who makes available for rental or occupancy more than four (4) sleeping rooms to a person or family within his or her home. 
D.  Nothing in this Article regarding familial status shall apply with respect to housing for older persons. For purposes of this subsection, housing for older persons shall mean housing: 
(1)  Provided under any state program that the commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons or defined in the program; 
(2)  Intended for and solely occupied by persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit. 
(Ord. No. 5949, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 6623, 2-2-2000; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007) 
9-847 - INFORMATION 
    The City Clerk, upon request, shall make available to an aggrieved person, or any other person, information regarding the Nebraska Fair Housing Act and the Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission without cost to such individual. 
(Ord. No. 5949, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 6623, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §20-301-20-322 
ARTICLE 9. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 
DIVISION I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

9-901 - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them herein, unless the text clearly indicates otherwise: 
    DRIVE: A right-of-way which affords the principal means of vehicular access to or through a manufactured home or trailer park, and which is owned and maintained by the owner or operator of the park. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME: A dwelling unit built in compliance with National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 USC 5401 to 5426 et seq., and the regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and when constructed shall bear the seal of the Department of Health and Human Services Regulation and Licensure as required by Section 71-1559 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. 
1.  Dwelling units built in compliance with the above may be placed in any zoning district where single family dwelling units are permitted when the following additional requirements are met: 
a.  Any dwelling unit shall have no less than nine hundred (900) square feet of floor area. 
b.  Any dwelling shall have no less than eighteen (18) feet exterior width. 
c.  The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two (2) and one-half (1/2) inches for each twelve (12) inches of horizontal run. 
d.  The exterior shall be of a color, material and scale comparable with existing residential site-built single-family dwellings. The home shall have a nonreflective roof material which is or simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile or rock. 
e.  The dwelling shall have wheels, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus removed if present. 
f.  The dwelling shall be placed upon a permanent foundation approved by the City of Kearney. 
g.  All utility services shall be directly connected to the structure. 
2.  Manufactured homes which do not meet all of the standards in paragraph 1. above, may be placed in a manufactured home park or as permitted by Code, provided the structure is transportable in one (1) or more sections which in the traveling mode are eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, are three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which are built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME PARK : A tract of land containing suitable drives, utilities and other supporting elements, and devoted to the sole purpose of accommodating manufactured homes on a permanent or semi-permanent basis. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE: That area of land within a manufactured home park set aside for use as a site for one (1) manufactured home, including the open spaces around such manufactured home, as are required in this Chapter. 
    MODULAR HOME: "Modular housing unit" shall mean any dwelling whose construction consists entirely of, or the major portions of its construction consists of, a unit or units not fabricated on the final site for the dwelling unit, which units are movable or portable until placed on a permanent foundation and connected to utilities. Modular housing units shall be taxed as real estate. The term "modular housing unit" shall not include a manufactured home. 
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any motor propelled camping vehicle or towed camping trailer designed to be pulled or carried by a truck or vehicle, which is used for traveling and recreational activities, including boats and boat trailers. In no case shall a recreational vehicle be classed as a residence for the purposes of this Chapter or other ordinances of the City. 
    STREET: A right-of-way which affords the principal means of vehicular access to or through a manufactured home or trailer park, and which is held in fee by the public or a governmental unit thereof. 
    TRAILER: A vehicle equipped with wheels, and normally towed over the road behind an automobile or light truck. 
    TRAILER, ADVERTISING: A trailer as defined in this section, but carrying or having attached thereto a sign, billboard or other media for advertising purposes, such advertising being the prime purpose and use of the trailer. 
    TRAILER, HAULING: A trailer, as defined in this section, designed and normally used for over-the-road transportation of belongings, equipment, merchandise, livestock and other objects, but not equipped for human habitation. 
    TRAILER PARK: A tract of land containing sites for the overnight or short-term parking of camping trailers. 
(Code 1958, 29.1; Ord. No. 3903, 1, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-1; Ord. No. 5933, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 5987, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 6238, 2-11-97; Ord. No. 7439, 6-10-2008) 
9-902 - ENFORCEMENT 
    The City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative is hereby designated to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Code 1958, 29.2; Ord. No. 3903, 2, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-2) 
9-903 - RIGHT OF ENTRY 
    The officers of the City charged with the enforcement of the laws of the City are hereby authorized to enter upon any premises on which any manufactured home or trailer is located or about to be located and inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable time. 
(Code 1958, 29.2; Ord. No. 3903, 3, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-3) 
9-904 - MANUFACTURED HOMES PERMITTED IN CITY, WITHIN TWO MILES OF CITY 
    Within the City and within two (2) miles of the corporate limits of the City a manufactured home may be permitted: 
A.  In any zoning district where residential dwellings are allowed, provided the manufactured home complies with subparagraph 1 of the Manufactured Home definition in Section 9-901. 
B.  Within a City approved manufactured home park. 
C.  Following approval of the Council, as a residence for a caretaker or watchman. 
D.  Following approval of the Council, after a public hearing, for the purposes of temporary relief from a local disaster such as a fire, wind or flood damage; provided, that such manufactured home shall be removed from the premises within six (6) months of its original placement. 
E.  One (1) manufactured home as a primary residence for the tenant-operator of a farm, such farm being at least eighty (80) acres in size. 
F.  As a secondary or employee residence on a farm, one (1) manufactured home being permitted for each farm having not less than one hundred sixty (160) acres in one ownership. 
(Code 1958, 29.3; Ord. No. 3903, §4-5, 3-10-87; Code 1980, §21-4, 21-5; Ord. No. 5690, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 5934, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 5988, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 6269, 4-22-97) 
9-905 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5935, 5-9-95) 
9-906 - WHERE TRAILERS PERMITTED; RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 
A.  Recreational vehicles may be parked in a campground or trailer park, provided such camp area is in conformance with the zoning and other ordinances of the City. No such recreational vehicle shall be used for permanent or semi-permanent residential purposes. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the use of tents and other such equipment in an approved campground or camper park. 
B.  Recreational vehicles may also be stored, on the basis of two (2) per family, in private garages, in the side or rear yards of private homes on approved parking pads; or in a commercial or industrial district in approved areas, provided no such vehicle shall be used for residential purposes. No recreational vehicle shall be parked upon the public street for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours and only for the purposes of loading and unloading. 
(Code 1958, 29.3-1(a); Ord. No. 3903, 6, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-6; Ord. No. 7439, 6-10-2008) 
9-907 - WHERE TRAILERS PERMITTED; HAULING TRAILERS 
    Hauling trailers may be stored or rented in a District C-2 to M-2 inclusive. Personal hauling trailers, customarily towed behind passenger cars or light pickup trucks may also be kept or stored, on the basis of two (2) per family, in private garages or in the side or rear yard of private homes on approved parking pads. However, no more than two (2) recreational vehicles or personal hauling trailers in any combination may be stored per family in a residential setting. 
(Code 1958, 39.3-1(c); Ord. No. 3903, 8, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-8; Ord. No. 7439, 6-10-2008) 
9-908 - NONRESIDENTIAL USE 
A.  One (1) or more manufactured homes or trailers may be used as a temporary business office either on a construction or disaster site, provided such structure is removed upon completion of the construction project or repair or rebuilding of a damaged building. In addition, one or more manufactured homes or trailers may be used as construction offices on the site of a construction project, provided such structure is removed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. 
B.  Manufactured structures may be used as temporary classroom activities in connection with public schools, or private schools with equivalent curriculum. 
C.  A manufactured home may be used as an on-site office on a manufactured homes sales site providing it is not used for residential purposes and is not used in conjunction with any other business on the same premises. 
(Code 1958, 29.3-2; Ord. No. 3903, 9, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-9) 
9-909 - LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF OCCUPANTS 
    No manufactured home may be inhabited by a greater number of occupants than that for which it was designed as determined by Table 1004.1.2 of the International Building Code, 2009 Edition. 
(Code 1958, 29.19; Ord. No. 3903, 10, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-10; Ord. No. 6381, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007; Ord. No. 7574, 2-23-2010) 
9-910 - EMERGENCY HEALTH ACTION 
    Whenever the Environmental Health Specialist finds that an emergency exists that requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he/she may, without notice of hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he/she may deem necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Chapter, such orders shall be effective immediately. 
(Code 1958, 29.20; Ord. No. 3903, 11, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-11) 
DIVISION II. - MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

9-911 - OFFICE 
    The owner or manager of every manufactured home park shall maintain in the near vicinity of such manufactured home park, an office in which there shall be a copy of the manufactured home park license and of this Chapter, and the manufactured home park register. 
(Code 1958, 29.17; Ord. No. 3903, 12, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-24) 
9-912 - DUTIES OF OWNER, MANAGER AND LICENSEE GENERALLY 
    It shall be the duty of the owner or manager of any manufactured home park in the City, together with the licensee thereof to: 
A.  Maintain the manufactured home park in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. 
B.  See that the provisions of this Chapter are complied with and enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any violation of this Chapter or any other violations of the law which may come to his/her attention. 
C.  Notify the environmental health officer immediately upon any known or suspected case of a communicable disease. In case of a disease diagnosed as quarantinable, the owner or manager shall not permit the departure of a manufactured home or its occupants or the removal therefrom of clothing or other articles that have been exposed to the infection without approval of the Environmental Health Department. 
D.  Prohibit the use of any manufactured home by a greater number of occupants than that for which it was designed as determined by Table 1004.1.2 of the International Building Code, 2009 Edition. 
E.  Display a map or plan of the manufactured home park at all times in the office or entrances of the manufactured home park, such map or plan to show accurately and clearly the current location of each manufactured home lot, its number and the name of its occupant. Names or numbers of drives and abutting public streets shall be shown. Such map or plan shall be displayed and illuminated in such a fashion that it can be observed at all times of the day or night by persons seeking a particular person or family in the park. 
F.  Maintain all manufactured homes owned by him/her or the park in a manner and condition that will comply with the International Property Maintenance Code and the Mobile Home Landlord and Tenant Act (Sections 76-1450 to 76-14,111, R.R.S.). 
(Code 1958, 29.18; Ord. No. 3903, 12, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-25; Ord. No. 5297, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 5941, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 6381, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 7327, 2-13-2007 effective May 15, 2007; Ord. No. 7574, 2-23-2010) 
9-913 - RESTRICTION OF ANIMALS 
    No dogs, cats or other domestic animals shall be permitted to run at large in the manufactured home park. Such animals shall be kept in restricted enclosures on the individual manufactured home space. The enclosures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Code 1958, 29.16; Ord. No. 3903, 14, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-26) 
Cross reference- Animals Generally, Ch. 8, Art. 13 
DIVISION III. - LICENSE 

9-914 - REQUIRED 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him/her, a manufactured home park within the City, without first having secured a license therefor from the Council. 
(Code 1958, 29.4(a); Ord. No. 3052, 1, 9-11-79; Ord. No. 3239, 1, 6-10-80; Ord. No. 3903, 15, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-34) 
9-915 - APPLICATION 
A.  The application for a license required by the provisions of this division, or a renewal thereof, shall be made on printed forms furnished by the City Clerk, and shall include: 
1.  The name and address of the owner. 
2.  The location of the tract and such a legal description of the premises upon which the park is or will be located as will readily identify and definitely locate the premises. 
B.  If the fee to the property upon which the park is or will be located is vested in some person other than the applicant, a duly verified statement by the person in whom the fee is vested that the applicant is authorized by him/her to construct or maintain the manufactured home park and make the application for license shall accompany the application. 
C.  The application shall be accompanied by four (4) copies of the specifications and manufactured home park plan, in scale, one (1) copy of which shall be placed permanently on file in the office of the City Clerk, and shall show the following either existing or as proposed: 
1.  The extent and area used for park purposes. 
2.  Roadways and driveways. 
3.  Location and number of sites or lots for manufactured homes, of which there shall not be less than ten (10) such sites or lots. 
4.  Location and number of any sanitary conveniences, including toilets or washrooms and equipment thereof, and utility rooms to be used by occupants of manufactured homes. 
5.  That there has been proper conformance with City building, zoning, plumbing and other ordinances. 
6.  Method and plan of sewage disposal. 
7.  Method and plan of garbage and trash removal. 
8.  Plan for water supply to the lots. 
9.  Plan for gas and electric supply to the lots. 
10.  Screening plan when required. 
D.  The provisions of this section shall also apply to all renewal licenses. 
(Code 1958, 29.4(b); Ord. No. 3052, 1, 9-11-79; Ord. No. 3239, 1, 6-10-80; Ord. No. 3903, 16, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-35; Ord. No. 5936, 5-9-95) 
9-916 - FEE 
    The annual license fee for a manufactured home park shall be as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Code 1958, 29.4(b); Ord. No. 3052, 1, 9-11-79; Ord. No. 3239, 1, 6-10-80; Ord. No. 3903, 17, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-36; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
9-917 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5937, 5-9-95) 
9-918 - COMPLIANCE WITH LAW 
    A license required by the provisions of this Article shall be issued only upon compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and any other applicable provisions of law. 
(Code 1958, 29.4(a); Ord. No. 3052, 1, 9-11-79; Ord. No. 3239, 1, 6-1-80; Ord. No. 3903, 19, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-38) 
9-919 - TECHNICAL PERMITS REQUIRED 
    Licenses issued under the terms of this Article shall convey no right to erect any building, to do any plumbing work or to do any electrical work, except upon a permit issued in conformity with building, electrical and plumbing codes of the City. 
(Code 1958, 29.6; Ord. No. 3903, 21, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-40) 
9-920 - EXPIRATION 
    Every license issued under the provisions of this Article shall expire on the first (1st) day of June following the date of its issuance. 
(Code 1958, 29.4(a); Ord. No. 3052, 1, 9-11-79; Ord. No. 3239, 1, 6-10-80; Ord. No. 3903, 22, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-41; Ord. No. 6770, 4-10-2001) 
9-921 - RENEWAL 
    Licenses issued under the provisions of this Article may be renewed from year to year; provided, however, application for such renewal shall be filed no later than the first (1st) day of March of each year. 
(Code 1958, §29.4(a), (b); Ord. No. 3052, 1, 9-11-79; Ord. No. 3239, 1, 6-10-80; Ord. No. 3903, 23, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-42; Ord. No. 5410, 4-14-92) 
9-922 - REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION 
    The Council is hereby authorized to revoke any license issued pursuant to the terms of this Article if, after due investigation, they determine that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter or that any manufactured home or manufactured home park is being maintained in an unsanitary or unsafe manner or is a nuisance. 
(Code 1958, 29.7; Ord. No. 3903, 24, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-43) 
DIVISION IV. - PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS 

9-923 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED 
    No manufactured home park shall be located on any land within the City or within two (2) miles thereof unless a conditional use permit has been duly approved therefor by the Planning Commission and the Council. 
(Code 1958, 29.8(a); Ord. No. 3903, 25, 3-10-87; Ord. No. 5142, 1, 7-10-90; Code 1980, 21-51) 
9-924 - UTILITIES, FIRE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED 
    No manufactured home park shall be located within the City unless City water, sewer and fire protection facilities are available and the applicant for a manufactured home park license, in his/her application, clearly manifests his/her intention to connect thereto before such manufactured home park is occupied. 
(Code 1958, 29.8(b); Ord. No. 3903, 26, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-52) 
9-925 - MINIMUM SPACE SIZE 
    Each manufactured home space shall have dimensions of at least forty-five (45) feet in width and one hundred (100) feet in depth. 
(Code 1958, 29.9(a); Ord. No. 3903, 27, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-53) 
9-926 - STANDS AND SKIRTS 
    Each manufactured home shall be placed upon a masonry or other approved blocking; and each home shall be equipped with skirts on all sides, such skirts to be material harmonious to the manufactured home structure and installed within thirty (30) days after placement of the manufactured home. 
(Code 1958, 29.9(b); Ord. No. 3903, 28, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-54) 
9-927 - STREETS AND DRIVES 
    All public streets within the park shall be improved to City standards for residential streets. All private drives shall comply with current Subdivision Regulations. 
(Code 1958, 29.9(c); Ord. No. 3903, 29, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-55) 
Cross reference- Streets and Sidewalks, Ch. 9, Art. 11 
9-928 - PARKING 
    At least two (2) parking spaces for each manufactured home shall be provided on each manufactured home space. Such parking spaces shall be off the public street or private drive, and each space shall be not less than nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet in size and shall be hard surfaced to at least the standard set out in section 9-925 "Streets and Drives" above. 
(Code 1958, 29.9(d); Ord. No. 3903, 30, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-56) 
9-929 - PARK AND PLAYGROUND SPACE 
    Park and playground space shall be provided for occupants of the manufactured home park on the basis of three hundred (300) square feet for each space in the park. Such playground space shall be separate and aside from the open space provided on each manufactured home space and shall be equipped and maintained for the use of the residents of the park and shall be so located that all manufactured homes will be served within a reasonable walking distance. 
(Code 1958, 29.9(e); Ord. No. 3903, 31, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-57) 
Cross reference- Park and Recreation, Ch. 7 
9-930 - OPEN SPACE 
    Each manufactured home shall be located on the manufactured home space so that no part of one (1) manufactured home structure, including canopies, awnings, carports and other protrusions, is closer than fifteen (15) feet to another manufactured home or eight (8) feet to the edge of the surface of a drive; except that when a side of the manufactured home faces a drive or public street, it shall not be closer than fifteen (15) feet to such drive or closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a public street. Sight distance at all intersections shall be maintained in compliance with section 9-1209, "Vision Clearance" of the City Code. 
(Code 1958, 29.9(f); Ord. No. 3903, 32, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-58) 
9-931 - UTILITIES 
    All liquid waste shall be disposed of through the City's sanitary sewer system, the plans of which shall be approved by the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative prior to construction. All solid wastes shall be disposed of by accumulation in tight containers, and removed at regular intervals by methods to be approved by the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative. All natural gas, power and telephone lines shall be underground, and shall be in compliance with standards of the utility corporation involved. All water supply and distribution shall be approved by the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative prior to construction. 
(Code 1958, 29.9(g); Ord. No. 3903, 33, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-59) 
9-932 - DRAINAGE 
    The site of the manufactured home park shall be graded so that surface water will not accumulate, but will run off in a manner that will not adversely affect the residential character of the park or adjacent property. The proposed drainage systems shall be approved by the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative prior to construction of streets or other portions of the park. 
(Code 1958, 29.9(h); Code 1980, 21-60) 
9-933 - WATER SUPPLY 
    An adequate supply of pure water for each manufactured home shall be furnished through a piped distribution system laid at a depth of not less than four and one-half (4-1/2) feet from the surface of the ground and connected with the City water main. There shall be supply faucets located not more than two hundred (200) feet from any manufactured home and each of these supply pipes shall be capable of supplying at least one hundred twenty-five (125) gallons of water per day per manufactured home space. 
    The water distribution system shall be constructed from cast iron or Type K copper pipe or other approved types. The piping shall be able to supply six (6) to eight (8) gallons per minute at a minimum pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square inch at each manufactured home space outlet, and the individual manufactured home supply lines shall be not less than three-fourths (3/4) inch Type K copper terminating with a connection at an appropriate location at each manufactured home space with a riser extending at least four (4) inches above the ground surface, with two (2) three-fourths (3/4) inch valve outlets. Check valves shall not be installed on any rise. The outlets shall be threaded so that screw connection, using flexible copper tubing, may be made from one outlet to the manufactured home's water piping system, leaving the other for use as a hose connection for fire control or other uses. The ground surface around the riser pipe shall be graded so as to divert surface water drainage away from the connection. The riser pipe shall be encased in a six (6) inch cast iron pipe, with the intervening space filled with an insulating material to protect it from freezing. An insulated cover shall be provided, which will encase both valve outlets, but not prevent connection to the manufactured home during freezing weather. When the manufactured home space is unoccupied during cold weather, the outlet shall be protected from freezing by draining of the pipes. A shut-off valve or other approved freezeless arrangement shall be placed below frost depth on the service line. All necessary precautions shall be taken in laying all water pipes. They shall not be laid in water, nor where they can be flooded by water or sewage during the laying process period. Dirt and other contaminating material shall be excluded from the pipe. 
    Each water supply distribution system provided for a manufactured home park shall be approved by the Building Official or his/her designee after construction and before it is covered or placed in service. 
    No common drinking vessel shall be permitted, nor shall any common drinking water faucet or drinking fountain be placed in any toilet room. 
(Code 1958, 29.10; Ord. No. 3903, 35, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-61) 
Cross reference- Water regulations generally, 10-301, et seq. 
9-934 - WASTE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
    Each manufactured home space shall be equipped with a sewer connection in compliance with the Plumbing Code and reaching at least four (4) inches above the surface of the ground. The connection between the manufactured home drain and the sewer shall be made water tight by suitable fittings. A threaded or fitted-in clamp connection shall be made at the manufactured home drain and at the sewer outlet drain. The sewer outlet shall consist of a standard ferrule with a four (4) inch by three (3) inch screw plug. The sewer connection may be connected to the ferrule directly or by use of pipe fittings. 
    All sewer lines shall be laid in trenches separated at least ten (10) feet horizontally from any drinking water supply line under pressure, at a grade of one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot. All joints on the sewer line shall be made watertight and every effort shall be made to minimize ground water infiltration into the sewerage system. Connections in manholes shall be so constructed as to prevent surface water from entering the sanitary sewers. Manholes shall be provided at every change in direction, at every junction of two (2) or more branch sewers, and at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet. Cleanouts extending to grade may be used instead of manholes on four (4) and six (6) inch lines. They should be provided wherever a manhole would otherwise be necessary, and at intervals of not more than one hundred (100) feet. All cleanouts shall be capped with cleanout plugs. Sewer mains shall be designed to handle the estimated sewage flow and shall be a minimum of four (4) inch lines that service each manufactured home. These four (4) inch lines shall be connected to an eight (8) inch main which empties into the City's sewer system. All materials used and installation shall be subject to approval of the Building Official or his/her designee before installation. 
(Code 1958, 29.11; Ord. No. 3903, 36, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-62) 
9-935 - ELECTRICITY 
    Every manufactured home park shall be equipped with electric power. An electric outlet supplying one hundred ten (110) to one hundred fifteen (115) volts shall be provided for each manufactured home space, and shall be weatherproof and accessible to the parked manufactured home. Each manufactured home shall be grounded by a suitable ground connection approved by the Electrical Inspector. In no instance shall any power line over the manufactured home park area be less than eighteen (18) feet above the ground. All electrical wiring in the manufactured home park shall be in compliance with the National Electrical Code, and shall be subject to the approval of the Building Official or his/her designee. 
(Code 1958, 29.12; Ord. No. 3903, 37, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-63) 
Cross reference- Electricity, Ch. 9, Art. 7 
9-936 - FUEL 
    The use of liquid petroleum gas shall not be permitted for a primary home heating source, including such uses as cooking, water heating, clothes drying, etc. 
(Code 1958, 29.13; Ord. No. 3903, 38, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-64) 
9-937 - FIRE PROTECTION 
    Approved fire hydrants shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of each manufactured home. Open fire shall not be permitted within the area of the manufactured home park, except in equipment specifically designed for such purposes and approved by the Fire Chief, and in compliance with the existing regulations governing such fires. 
(Code 1958, 29.14; Ord. No. 3903, 39, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-65) 
Cross reference- Fire regulations, Ch. 4 
9-938 - TIE-DOWNS REQUIRED 
    Each manufactured home space shall be equipped with a deadman type of tie-down consisting of not less than four (4) points of attachment to the manufactured home structure. Such tie-down anchors shall be placed when the space is constructed and the manufactured home shall be securely attached thereto within twenty-four (24) hours of its location on the space. The design and construction of the tie-down anchors shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works prior to improvement of the spaces. 
(Code 1958, 29.15; Ord. No. 3903, 40, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 21-66) 
DIVISION V. - PRE-EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS (PRIOR TO MAY 14, 1968) 

9-939 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; EXISTING 
    Owners of manufactured home courts which existed in operation under a license issued by the City of Kearney on May 14, 1968, may, not later than Friday, August 2, 1991, at five o'clock (5:00) P.M. file a letter with the City Manager of the City of Kearney requesting that the operation of their manufactured home court be regulated under the provisions of sections 9-939 through 9-961 inclusive. A site plan showing the layout of lots within the court and manufactured homes properly spaced in compliance with this Chapter of the Code shall also be submitted with the request. All courts not in compliance at the time of this request must be brought into compliance not later than April 30, 1992, or their annual license will be subject to non-renewal. In the event the operator of the court increases the density of population within the court by adding additional units, then the court shall again be subject to regulation under the remaining provisions of Chapter 9 of this Code, after a thirty (30) day notice letter is given by the City Manager or his/her designated officer. In the event that a court operator or owner increases the area of the manufactured home court, all such new additional areas shall be subject also to the regulations provided under the remainder of Chapter 9 of this Code. All manufactured home parks not approved for operation under the provisions of sections 9-939 to 9-961 shall continue to be subject to the terms and provisions of Chapter 9 of this Code, and the provisions of this Chapter shall have no effect or application to mobile home parks except those licensed on May 14, 1968 whose owners have filed the required letter with the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-100, 5-28-91) 
9-940 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; DEFINITIONS 
    Wherever used in Sections 9-939 to 9-961, unless a different meaning appears from the context: 
    AUTOMOBILE TRAILER, TRAILER COACH, OR TRAILER: One so designed and constructed in such manner as will permit occupancy as sleeping quarters for one (1) or more persons, or the conduct of any business or profession, occupation, or trade (or use as a selling or advertising device), and so designated that it is mounted to wheels or reasonably may be mounted to wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or City streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other automotive power. 
    DEPENDENT TRAILER COACH: A trailer coach which does not have a bathtub or shower and a toilet. 
    INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH: A trailer coach which has a bathtub or shower and a toilet. 
    PERSON: Shall be construed to include persons, partnerships, firms, companies, corporations, tenants, owners, lessees, their agents, heirs, or assigns. 
    SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing separate toilet and/or bathing facilities for men and women, and also having laundry facilities. 
    TRAILER CAMP: Any park, trailer park, trailer court, tract of land designated, maintained, or intended for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodation for any trailer coach or trailer coaches and upon which any trailer coach or trailer coaches are parked and shall include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof whether a charge is made of the use of the trailer camp and its facilities or not. "Trailer Camp" shall not include automobiles or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection or sale or storage. 
    UNIT: A section of ground in a trailer camp or court, designed for the accommodation of one (1) trailer coach. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-101, 5-28-91) 
9-941 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; ENFORCEMENT 
    The City Manager of the City of Kearney, Nebraska, is hereby designated to enforce the provisions of sections 9-939 to 9-961, and may delegate such authority for enforcement to the City Building and Zoning Division as he/she sees fit. It is hereby made the duty of said City Manager to enforce all provisions as may hereafter be enacted, and for the purposes of securing such enforcement any officer of the City of Kearney shall have the right and is hereby empowered to enter upon any premises, on which any trailer is located, or about to be located, and inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable time. The City Manager is further empowered to recommend to the Council of said City, the issuance of orders granting, renewing, and revoking such permits and licenses as are provided for in accordance with the provisions of sections 9-939 to 9-961. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-102, 5-28-91) 
9-942 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; LOCATION OUTSIDE CAMPS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION 
A.  It shall be unlawful within the limits of the City of Kearney, for any person to park any trailer on any street, alley or highway or other public place or on any tract of land owned by any person occupied or unoccupied within the City of Kearney, except as provided in this section. 
B.  Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street, alley, or highway for not longer than one (1) hour subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway. 
C.  No person shall park or occupy any trailer on the premises of any occupied or unoccupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any occupied or unoccupied dwelling either of which is situated outside an approved trailer camp; except the parking of only one (1) unoccupied trailer in an accessory private garage building or in a rear yard in any district, is permitted, provided no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in said trailer where such trailer is so parked or stored; provided, however, any person who shall have parked an occupied trailer on private premises under license from local authority prior to the effective date of this section may be permitted to maintain said trailer under said original license, until said original license expires. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-103, 5-28-91) 
9-943 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; APPLICATION AND LICENSE FOR TRAILER CAMP 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain or permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property, owned or controlled by him/her, a trailer camp within the City, without having first secured a license therefor from the Council, such license to be granted and existing in compliance with the terms of this Chapter and any other applicable ordinance of the City. Such license shall expire on the first (1st) day of May following the date of its issuance, but may be renewed under the provisions of this section for an additional period of one (1) year. 
    The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each camp, and where trailer spaces exceed ten (10) and not more than fifteen (15), a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00); and where trailer spaces exceed fifteen (15) and not more than thirty (30), a fee of forty dollars ($40.00); and where trailer spaces exceed thirty (30) and not more than forty-five (45), a fee of fifty-five dollars ($55.00); and where trailer spaces exceed forty-five (45) and not more than sixty (60), a fee of seventy dollars ($70.00); and where trailer spaces exceed sixty (60) and not more than seventy-five (75), a fee of eighty-five dollars ($85.00); and where trailer spaces exceed seventy-five (75) and not more than ninety (90), a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00); and where trailer spaces exceed ninety (90) and not more than one hundred and five (105), a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars ($115.00); and a license bond in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) to guarantee compliance with the terms of sections 9-939 to 9-961. Applications for a renewal license shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk no later than the first (1st) day of April of each year. The application for a license or a renewal thereof shall be made on printed forms furnished by the City Clerk and shall include the name and address of the owner, the location of the tract and such a legal description of the premises upon which the trailer camp is or will be located as will readily identify and definitely locate the premises. If the fee is vested in some person other than the applicant, a duly verified statement by the person in whom the fee is vested, that the applicant is authorized by him/her to construct or maintain the trailer camp and make the application for a license pursuant to this section, shall also accompany the application. The application shall be accompanied by four (4) copies of the specifications and camp plan in scale, one (1) copy of which shall be placed permanently on file in the office of the City Clerk and shall show the following either existing or as proposed: 
A.  The extent and area used for camp purposes. 
B.  Roadways and driveways. 
C.  Location and number of sites or units for trailer coaches, of which there shall not be less than ten (10) such sites or units. 
D.  Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets or washrooms and equipment thereof and utility rooms to be used by occupants of trailer coaches. 
E.  That there has been proper conformance with City building, zoning, plumbing and other ordinances. 
F.  Method and plan of sewage disposal. 
G.  Method and plan of garbage removal. 
H.  Plan for water supply. 
I.  Plan for electric supply of units. 
    The provisions of this section shall also apply to all renewal licenses. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-104, 5-28-91) 
9-944 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; RENEWAL LICENSE 
    Before such license shall be issued there shall be a favorable recommendation by a majority of the Council of the City of Kearney, Nebraska; and the premises must be inspected and approved by the City Manager or his/her duly authorized representative and/or other city officers of said City as complying with all provisions of sections 9-939 to 9-961 and all other applicable ordinances of the City of Kearney, Nebraska, whereupon it shall be at the discretion of the Council to issue the same. 
    Licenses issued under the terms of sections 9-939 to 9-961 shall convey no right to erect any building, to do any plumbing work, or to do any electrical work except upon permit issued in conformity with existing building, electrical and plumbing codes of the City. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-105, 5-28-91) 
9-945 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; ZONING OF TRAILER CAMPS 
A.  No trailer camp shall be located in any zone of the City of Kearney other than a Commercial or M-Industrial. 
B.  No trailer camp shall be located within the limits of the City of Kearney unless City water, sewer, and fire protection facilities are available and the applicant, in his/her application, clearly manifests his/her intention to connect thereto before said camp is occupied. 
C.  No occupied trailer shall be located in any trailer camp within the City limits of said City outside of the recognized setback line for the zoning district in which such camp is located and such trailers shall be no less than five (5) feet from any other building, vehicles, or the boundary line of the tract upon which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-106, 5-28-91) 
9-946 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; COURT OR CAMP PLAN 
A.  Location. The trailer court shall be well drained, and shall not be adjacent to swamps, marshes, breeding places for insects or rodents, or heavy industrial zones with objectionable odors or noise. The court shall have good natural drainage, or storm drainage systems shall be provided; this drainage shall not endanger any water supply. The site shall be graded and ditched to eliminate standing water; however, ditching shall not create accident hazards. The area of the trailer court shall be sufficient to accommodate the number of trailer coach spaces for which the court is designed, parking areas for motor vehicles, and service areas and playgrounds. 
B.  Units shall be clearly designated and the camp so arranged that all units shall face or abut on a driveway of not less than sixteen (16) feet in width, giving easy access from all units to a public street. Such driveway shall be at least graveled or cindered and maintained in good condition, having proper drainage into the City's drainage system, be well lighted at night, and shall not be obstructed. 
C.  The camp shall be so laid out that no dependent trailer coach shall be located further than two hundred (200) feet from the toilets and service buildings provided for herein; and walkways to such buildings shall be at least graveled or cindered and well lighted at night. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-107, 5-28-91) 
9-947 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; SPACE LIMITATIONS 
    Each trailer coach space shall contain a minimum of twelve hundred (1200) square feet and shall be at least thirty (30) feet wide. The boundary lines of such limitations shall be plainly and permanently marked. Trailers shall be so harbored on their specific unit. There shall be at least fifteen (15) foot clearance between trailers; provided, however, that with respect to trailers parked end-to-end, clearance between trailers may be less than fifteen (15) foot, but not less than ten (10) foot. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-108, 5-28-91) 
9-948 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; WATER SUPPLY 
    An adequate supply of pure water for each trailer and each service house shall be furnished through a piped distribution system laid at a depth of not less than four and one-half (4-1/2) feet from the surface of the ground and connected with the City water main. There shall be supply faucets located not more than two hundred (200) feet from any trailer and each of these supply pipes shall be capable of supplying at least one hundred twenty-five (125) gallons of water per day per trailer coach space. 
    The water distribution system shall be constructed from cast iron or Type K copper pipes. The piping shall be able to supply six (6) to eight (8) gallons per minute at a minimum pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square inch at each coach space outlet, and the individual trailer coach supply lines shall be not less than three-fourths (3/4) inch Type K copper terminating with a connection at an appropriate location at each trailer coach space with a riser extending at last four (4) inches above the ground surface, with two (2) three-fourths (3/4) inch valve outlets. Check valves shall not be installed on any riser. The outlets shall be threaded so that a screwed connection, using flexible copper tubing, may be made from one (1) outlet to the coaches water piping system, leaving the other for use as a hose connection for fire control or other uses. The ground surface around the riser pipe shall be graded so as to divert surface drainage way from the connection. The riser pipe shall be encased in a six (6) inch cast iron pipe, with the intervening space filled with an insulating material to protect it from freezing. An insulated cover shall be provided which will encase both valve outlets but not prevent connections to the trailer during freezing weather. When the coach space is unoccupied during cold weather, the outlet shall be protected from freezing by draining of the pipes. A shut off valve or other approved freezeless arrangement shall be placed below frost depth on the service line. All necessary precautions shall be taken in laying all water pipes. They shall not be laid in water, nor where they can be flooded by water or sewage during the lying process period. Dirt and other contaminating material shall be excluded from the pipe. 
    Each water supply distribution system providing for a trailer court shall be approved by the plumbing inspection after construction and before it is covered or placed in service. 
    No common drinking vessels shall be permitted, nor shall any common drinking water faucets or drinking fountains be placed in any toilet room. 
    An abundant supply of hot water shall be provided at all times for laundry and bathing facilities. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-109, 5-28-91) 
9-949 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; SERVICE BUILDING AND ACCOMMODATIONS 
    Every trailer camp or court shall have erected thereon, at a distance not greater than two hundred (200) feet from any dependent trailer coach a service building or buildings for housing toilets, shower facilities, and laundry facilities. Each service building shall meet the following specifications: 
A.  Construction and Maintenance. The service building shall be of permanent construction, with an interior finish of moisture resistant material which will stand frequent washing and cleaning. The floors shall be of impervious material easily cleanable and sloped to floor drains connected to the sewage system. The interior of each service building shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and shall be washed and disinfected at least once daily. All rooms of the service building shall be well ventilated, provided with trap drains connected to the City sanitary sewage system and all exterior openings shall be covered with sixteen (16) mesh screen. All rooms in the service building shall be well lighted at all times with general lighting being no less than five (5) foot candles. The laundry room shall have illumination of forty (40) foot candles in work areas, such as washtubs, ironing boards, and sorting tables. In the toilet rooms the area in front of the mirror shall have an illumination of not less than forty (40) foot candles. Each room shall have window area which will be not less than twelve percent (12%) of the floor area and windows shall be well distributed. The service building shall have heating facilities capable of maintaining a minimum temperature of seventy degrees (70;deg;) F in cold weather. Hot water shall be provided for lavatory, bathing, and laundry room fixtures with facilities of sufficient capacity to supply three (3) gallons per hour per coach space. Separate men's and women's toilet rooms shall be provided and distinctly marked and they shall be separated by a sound resistant wall. The vestibule or screen wall shall be provided to prevent direct view into the toilet room when the exterior doors are opened. 
B.  Fixture Requirements. Every trailer court shall provide adequate toilet and laundry facilities. In no instance shall there be less than: One (1) laundry unit; two (2) toilets, one (1) lavatory, one (1) shower or bathtub for women; and one (1) toilet, one (1) urinal, one (1) lavatory, one (1) shower or bathtub for men. 
In trailer camps where dependent trailers, tents or camping out facilities are permitted, a slop water closet shall be provided in each service building. This slop water closet shall have hot and cold water facilities located over the bowl and shall be provided with a flush mechanism for the complete rinsing of the bowls. The slop water closet shall be in a separate room of the service building with a single, direct opening to the outside. 
Facilities provided for by this section shall be deemed to accommodate up to twenty (20) dependent trailer coaches. One (1) additional toilet for each sex will be provided for each ten (10) additional dependent trailer coaches or any part thereof. One (1) additional lavatory for each sex shall be provided for every ten (10) additional dependent coaches or any part thereof; and one (1) additional shower or bathtub shall be provided for each sex, for every twenty (20) additional dependent coaches or any part thereof. There shall be one (1) laundry tray for every twenty (20) trailer coach spaces. Each toilet and shower shall be in a separate compartment, with self-closing doors on all toilet compartments. The shower stall shall be a minimum of three (3) by three (3) feet in area. Showers and bathtubs shall have a dressing compartment with stool or bench. A room containing the laundry trays shall be separated from the toilet rooms, and shall have an exterior entrance only. Installation of fixtures in excess of the minimum requirements will depend upon the number of dependent trailer coaches which the trailer court operator expects to serve. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-110, 5-28-91) 
9-950 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; REFUSE DISPOSAL; GENERAL 
    The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse from the trailer court or camp shall be so conducted as to avoid the creation of health hazards, such as rodent harborages or insect breeding areas, air pollution, and accidents. The court area shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and all other inflammable material at all times. 
    Containers. All refuse shall be stored in durable, fly-tight, water-tight, and rodent-proof containers in accordance with rules and regulations set forth by the City Sanitation Department and they shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and in good repair at all times. Sufficient capacity shall be provided to prevent the overflowing of any refuse container between collections. Each trailer coach shall be provided with a minimum of four (4) to six (6) gallons of refuse storage capacity per day. 
    Container Racks. Permanent location shall be selected for the refuse containers and satisfactory racks or holders shall be provided which shall minimize spillage and container deterioration and insure lids shall be kept in place on the containers. The storage racks shall have twelve (12) inches of clear space beneath them and the rack stations shall not be more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any trailer coach. Collection and removal of garbage and rubbish shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the City Health and Sanitation Department. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-111, 5-28-91) 
9-951 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; WASTE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
    Each trailer coach space shall be equipped with at least a four (4) inch cast iron sewer connection, trapped by a cast iron soil pipe P trap below frost line and reaching at least four (4) inches above the surface of the ground. The sewer connection shall be protected by a concrete collar at least three (3) inches deep and reaching eight (8) inches in all directions. The connection between the coach drain and the sewer shall be made watertight by suitable fittings. A threaded or fitted in clamp connection shall be made at the trailer coach drain and at the sewer outlet drain. The sewer outlet shall consist of a standard ferrule with a four (4) by three (3) inch screw plug. The screw plug shall be fastened by chain or other device to the concrete collar surrounding the sewer connection to prevent its removal from the site while the sewer connection is in use. The threaded hose connection may be connected to the ferrule directly or by use of pipe fittings. In the case of temporary pipe connections, the two (2) inch pipe can be inserted into the ferrule and caulked to make an acceptable connection. For overnight parking of trailer coaches, and plumbing fixtures within the coaches shall not be used unless provided with satisfactory means of disposal of all sewage wastes. These overnight coaches shall be parked close to the service buildings and the trailer coach occupants shall be directed to use the facilities in the service building or the coach shall be connected to the sewage system. All sewer lines or parts thereof shall be accessible for cleaning out, and shall be properly vented at each trailer site. 
    All sewer lines shall be laid in trenches separated at least ten (10) feet horizontally from any drinking water supply line under pressure, at a grade of one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot except that when sewer lines and water lines are laid in the same ditch, the sewer main shall be permanently made root-proof and water-tight by means of approved hot poured joints. All joints on the sewer line shall be made water-tight and every effort shall be made to minimize ground water infiltration into the sewage system. Connections in manholes shall be so constructed as to prevent surface water from entering the sanitary sewers. Manholes shall be provided at every change in direction, at every junction of two (2) or more branch sewers, and at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet. Cleanouts extending to grade may be used instead of manholes on four (4) and six (6) inch lines. They should be provided wherever a manhole would otherwise be necessary and at intervals of not more than one hundred (100) feet. All cleanouts shall be capped with cleanout plugs. Each sewer lateral serving a row of coaches shall be vented at its upper end. Sewer mains shall be designed to handle the estimated sewage flow and shall be a minimum of four (4) inch lines that service each trailer. These four (4) inch lines shall be connected to an eight (8) inch main which empties into the City's sewer system. All materials used and installation shall be subject to approval of the Plumbing Inspector before installation. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-112, 5-28-91) 
9-952 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; ELECTRICITY 
    Every trailer court or camp shall be equipped with electric power. An electric outlet supplying one hundred ten (110) to one hundred fifteen (115) volts shall be provided for each trailer coach space, and shall be weatherproof and accessible to the parked trailer. Each trailer shall be grounded by a suitable ground connection approved by the Electrical Inspector. In no instance shall any power line over the trailer court area be less than eighteen (18) feet above ground. All electrical wiring in the court shall be in compliance with applicable State and local codes of the State of Nebraska and the City of Kearney, or where none exists with the National Electrical Code and shall be subject to the approval of the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-113, 5-28-91) 
9-953 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; FUEL 
    Cylinders containing liquefied petroleum gas, to be used as fuel by trailer occupants shall be connected to the stoves or heaters of the trailer by copper or other metallic tubing, in such a manner as to provide leakproof connections. The cylinders shall be securely fastened in place, outside of and not less than five (5) feet from any coach exit. State and local regulations applicable to the installation of equipment, and the handling of liquefied petroleum gas and fuel oil shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-114, 5-28-91) 
9-954 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; FIRE PREVENTION 
    Approved fire hydrants shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of each trailer coach. In no case will any trailer court or camp be without hand fire extinguishers located in convenient places approved by the Fire Chief in the ratio of one (1) extinguisher to each eight (8) units. Such fire extinguishers shall be inspected regularly and kept in good repair. Fires shall not be permitted within the area of the trailer court or camp except in equipment specifically designed for such purposes and approved by the Fire Chief and in compliance with the existing regulations governing such fires. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-115, 5-28-91) 
9-955 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; ALTERATIONS, REPAIRS, AND ADDITIONS 
    All plumbing and electrical alterations or repairs shall be made in accordance with local regulations. No permanent additions of any kind shall be built onto, or become a part of, any trailer coach. The skirting of coaches shall be permitted, but skirting shall not attach a coach permanently to the ground, nor provide a harborage for rodents, nor create a fire hazard. The wheels of coaches shall not be removed except temporarily for repairs not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours. This need not prevent the placing of jacks or stabilizers under the frame of a coach to prevent movement on the springs while it is parked and occupied. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-116, 5-28-91) 
9-956 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; RESTRICTION ON PETS 
    No dogs, cats, or other domestic animals shall be permitted to run at large in the trailer court. Such animals shall be kept in restricted enclosures on the individual coach space. The enclosure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-117, 5-28-91) 
9-957 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; DUTIES OF MANAGER OR OWNER OF TRAILER COURTS OR CAMPS 
    The owner or manager of every trailer court or camp shall maintain in the near vicinity of such camp an office in which there shall be a copy of the camp license and of sections 9-939 to 9-961, and the camp register. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner, or manager together with the licenses to: (1) keep at all times a register of all guests which shall be open to State and Federal officers and officers of the City of Kearney, Nebraska showing for all guests: (a) names and addresses, (b) dates of entrance and departure, (c) license numbers of all automobiles and trailers entering, (d) state issuing such licenses, (e) place of last location and length of stay, (f) color and make of trailer; (2) maintain the camp in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition at all times; (3) see that the provisions of sections 9-939 to 9-961 are complied with and enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any violation of sections 9-939 to 9-961 or any other violations of the law which may come to his/her attention; (4) notify the Environmental Health Specialist immediately upon any known or suspected case of a communicable disease. In case of a disease diagnosed as quarantinable, the owner or manager shall not permit the departure of a trailer coach or its occupants or the removal therefrom of clothing or other Articles that have been exposed to the infection without approval of the Building and Zoning Division; (5) prohibit the use of any trailer by a greater number of occupants than that for which it was designed. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-118, 5-28-91) 
9-958 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; LIMITATIONS OF OCCUPANTS 
    No trailer may be inhabited by a greater number of occupants than that for which it was designed. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-119, 5-28-91) 
9-959 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION 
    The Council is hereby authorized to revoke any license issued pursuant to the terms of sections 9-939 to 9-961 if after due investigation, they determine that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of sections 9-939 to 9-961 or that any trailer or trailer camp is being maintained in an unsanitary or unsafe manner or is a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-120, 5-28-91) 
9-960 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; EMERGENCY HEALTH ACTION 
    Whenever the City Environmental Health Specialist finds that an emergency exists that requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he/she may without notice, or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he/she may deem necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of sections 9-939 to 9-961, such orders shall be effective immediately. (Ord. No. 5255, 21-121, 5-28-91) 
9-961 - MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS; PENALTIES 
    Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of sections 9-939 to 9-961 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; their license shall be revoked, or they shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) and not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and shall be committed to the City jail until such fine and costs are paid, and every day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such hereunder. Provided, however, the foregoing provisions shall not be construed to preclude any other remedies. In addition thereto, the appropriate authorities of the City of Kearney may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion or use, or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of the structures or land concerned. 
(Ord. No. 5255, 21-122, 5-28-91) 
ARTICLE 10. - PLUMBING CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Art. 10 has been ameded in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 10, §§ 9-1001-9-1015, pertained to Plumbing Code, Gas Code, and Examining Board of Plumbers and derived from Ord. No. 6132, adopted June 11, 1996. 

9-1001-9-1015 - Repealed 
DIVISION I. - UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE 

9-1016 - UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE; ADOPTED 
    The regulations contained in the Plumbing Code known as the "Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition" and the whole thereof, except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, are hereby adopted, incorporated and made a part of this Code of Ordinances, and are applicable within the City and within the two (2) miles of the corporate limits, the same as those spread at large herein. One printed copy of such Code shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. Subsequent editions or revisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be considered adopted and in full force and effect within the City and the area within two (2) miles thereof upon the approval thereof by the Council and the filing of one copy thereof in the office of the City Clerk. By this Ordinance, the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition is adopted with the amendments, modifications and deletions as cited below. 
(1)  The following chapters, sections and tables of the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition are not adopted or approved and shall not be a part of the Code, and shall be of no force or effect in the City and its jurisdiction: 
1.  Table 1-1 Plumbing Permit Fees. 
2.  Chapter 13-Health Care Facilities and Medical Gas and Vacuum Systems. 
3.  Chapter 16-Nonpotable Water Reuse Systems. 
All appendices will be adopted on a case by case basis with special permission from the Building Official. 
(Code 1959, Ch. 23; Ord. No. 2348, 7-10-73; Code 1980, 30-16; Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 6868, 3-26-2002; Ord. No. 7184, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 7382, 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 7574, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 7794, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 8083, 6-28-2016 effective date October 16, 2016; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017; Ord. No. 8323 , § 1, 2-12-2019) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 18-132 and 19-922 
9-1017 - AMENDMENTS TO UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE, 2015 EDITION 
    The Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by the provisions of this Article is hereby amended, altered, changed or modified as follows: 
(1)  Section 415.2 Drinking Fountain Alternatives is hereby amended to read: Water stations as approved by the Building Official shall be permitted to be substituted for drinking fountains. Bottle filling stations shall be permitted to be substituted for drinking fountains up to 50 percent of the requirements for drinking fountains. Drinking fountains shall not be for an occupant load of 30 or less. 
(2)  Section 603.4.2 Testing is hereby amended by adding the following text to the end of the section: Pressure vacuum breakers installed to serve lawn sprinkler systems shall conform to all other requirements of this Code and shall be tested upon installation and before being put into use. Thereafter, such devices shall be tested in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(3)  Section 604.13 Water Heater Connectors is hereby amended by adding the following exception to the end of the section: Exception: PEX tubing may be installed within the first eighteen (18) inches of an electric water heater. 
(4)  Section 608.5 Discharge Piping is hereby amended by adding the following text to the end of the section: Relief valves may be piped to within eight (8) inches of the finished floor in areas which are served by a floor drain. Exception: In existing situations, relief valves are permitted to be piped to within eight (8) inches of the floor where no floor drain exists, with approval from the Administrative Authority having jurisdiction. 
(5)  Section 609.11.1 Insulation Requirements is hereby amended by deleting the section in its entirety and adding the following language: The following domestic hot water piping shall be insulated as follows: 
1.  Hot water piping one (1) inch and larger 
2.  All piping located outside conditioned spaces 
3.  All piping located under a floor slab 
4.  All buried piping 
(6)  Section 610.8 Size of Meter and Building Supply Pipe Using Table 610.4, Item 6 is hereby amended by adding the following text: One and two family dwelling units are each to be served by a water service with a minimum of one (1) inch nominal pipe size which conforms to ASTM D 2239. 
(7)  Section 612.3.1 Required Sprinkler Locations is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(8)  Section 705.5.2 Solvent Cement Joints is hereby amended by removing the following text: purple in color. 
(9)  Section 710.4 Discharge Line is hereby amended by adding the following text to the end of the first paragraph: The gate or ball valve may be omitted in single family dwelling units. 
(10)  Section 710.6 Backwater Valves is hereby amended by adding the following text to the section: Backwater valves in sewer lines will only be required when specified by the Administrative Authority having jurisdiction, but may be installed when the need is determined by the user or installer. 
(11)  Section 713.4 Public Sewer Availability is hereby amended to read: The public sewer shall be considered as being available when such public sewer or any building or any exterior drainage facility connected thereto, is located not more than three hundred (300) feet (91.2m) from any proposed building or exterior drainage facility on any lot or premises which abuts and is served by such public sewer. 
(12)  Section 715.1 Materials is hereby amended to read: The building sewer, beginning two (2) feet from any building or structure, shall be of one of the following approved materials: Schedule 40 PVC or ABS, cast iron soil pipe or vitrified clay pipe with rubber compression joints. 
(13)  Section 717.1 General the last sentence of the first paragraph is hereby amended to read: No building sewer shall be of less than four (4) inch nominal pipe size. 
(14)  Section 719.1 Locations is hereby amended by adding the following text after the first paragraph: All sewers, except in mobile home courts, shall be provided with a 2-way cleanout at the connection of the building drain to the building sewer and that cleanout shall be accessible and cut no taller than finished grade height. Mobile homes shall be provided with a three (3) inch minimum cleanout accessible from outside the skirting. 
(15)  Section 720.0 Sewer and Water Pipes is amended by adding the following section: 720.2 Sewer and Water Pipe Separation. At the property line, and ten (10) feet back of it, water and sewer lines shall be separated by a minimum often (10) feet of horizontal distance. 
(16)  Section 723.1 General is hereby amended by adding the following text to the section: The Administrative Authority Having Jurisdiction can waive the requirement for a sewer test. 
(17)  Section 807.3 Domestic Dishwashing Machine is hereby amended by adding the following text to the section: Residential dishwasher drains may be connected to a separate trap extended as high as practically possible within the cabinet and connected by means of an air break, or they may be directly connected to a garbage grinder/disposal or to a separately trapped branch tailpiece after first being routed to the underside of the countertop and secured at that location. When being attached to a garbage grinder/disposal it shall be gravity piped in a way that does not expose the dishwasher line to the grinder/disposals waste. 
(18)  Section 901.2 Vents Required is hereby amended by adding the following exception: Exception: Air admittance valves or automatic vent devices shall only be allowed, with prior approval from the Administrative Authority having jurisdiction, for remodel work, for fixtures of one (1) or two (2) drainage fixture units and where it is determined by the Administrative Authority having jurisdiction that conventional venting methods are not possible and/or reasonably practical. 
(19)  Section 1106.2.3 Exceptions is hereby amended to read: Storm drainage shall not be required to be tested where installed with Schedule 40 PVC pipe and solvent weld joints. Systems installed with cast iron pipe and no-hub connections shall not be required to be tested unless the total elevation change from the flood level rim of the highest roof drain or overflow drain to the invert of the pipe at the point of discharge to atmosphere exceeds twenty-five (25) feet. If the twenty-five (25) feet of elevation change is exceeded, the requirements of Section 1106.2.1 and 1106.2.2 shall be followed. 
(20)  Section 1210.11.2 Emergency Shutoff Valves is hereby amended by adding the following text to the end of the section: Emergency shutoff valves shall be of a type approved for use with the gas and pressure intended and shall be such that operation of the valve will require the use of a tool and not be able to be accomplished with a bare hand. 
(21)  Section 1211.2 Bonding of CSST Gas Piping is hereby amended to add the following exception to the end of the section: 
Exception: CSST piping is listed with an arc resistant jacket or coating system in accordance with ANSI LC 1/CSA 6.26. 
(Ord. No. 3410, 1, 8-11-81; Ord. No. 3427, 1, 8-25-81; Ord. No. 3476, 1, 11-10-81; Ord. No. 3829, 1, 2-25-86; Ord. No. 3905, 1, 3-10-87; Ord. No. 3909, 1, 3-31-87; Ord. No. 3919, 1, 5-12-87; Ord. No. 3962, 1, 1-10-87; Ord. No. 3987, 1, 3-8-88; Ord. No. 4002, 1, 4-12-88; Ord. No. 4020, 1, 5-24-88; Ord. No. 5092, 1, 2-13-90; Code 1980, 30-17; Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 6187, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 6769, 3-27-2001; Ord. No. 6868, 3-26-2002; Ord. No. 7184, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 7382, 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 7574, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 7794, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 8083, 6-28-2016 effective date October 16, 2016; Ord. No. 8323 , § 2, 2-12-2019) 
Cross reference- Occupation taxes, Ch. 3, Art. 18 
9-1018 - SEPTIC SYSTEMS AND LEACH FIELDS 
    Appendix H of the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition is specifically not adopted and shall not be a part of the Code. However, the requirements and provisions of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Control Title 124, Rules and Regulations for Design, Operation and Maintenance of Septic Tanks, shall remain in full force and effect. The minimum lot area in which a private disposal system may be installed is fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, and the minimum lot area in which a private water system and a private disposal system may be installed is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. Furthermore, the following requirements for liquid waste disposal in areas having no public sewer available shall apply. 
    All buildings having water connections or supply shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer where such sewer is available as per Section 713.4, amended. Where buildings are to be hereafter constructed or land uses changed in a fashion that sewage, wastewater or any type of contaminated or polluted liquid waste is produced and public sewer connections are not possible or practical, septic tank and disposal field systems may be permitted, provided the following requirements are met. These requirements and procedures apply to all the City of Kearney and the area lying within two (2) miles of the City limits. 
    All Private Sewage Systems shall be registered and permitted with the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (NDEQ). No dwelling or other building may be occupied until proof is provided that the waste water system has been registered with the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 6868, 3-26-2002; Ord. No. 7184, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 7382, 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 7574, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 7794, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 8083, 6-28-2016 effective date October 16, 2016; Ord. No. 8323 , § 3, 2-12-2019) 
9-1019 - ALL OCCUPIED PREMISES SHALL HAVE POTABLE WATER 
    The use of private wells within the limits of the City for domestic purposes shall be permitted only when the City's water distribution system is not available to the premises on which water is required. The City water distribution system shall, for the purposes of this Code, be considered available when a water distribution main is located within three hundred (300) feet of any part of said property on which water is required as measured from the property line along a street, alley or public utility easement. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96) 
9-1020 - OIL INTERCEPTORS FOR SERVICE FACILITIES AND MANUFACTURING PROCESSES 
    Oil interceptors for service and industrial applications shall be sized according to the following table or may, with the approval of the Chief Building Official, be sized by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Nebraska. 
Number of Bays Served Volume of Interceptor/ 
Flow Capacity of Interceptor Storage 
Capacity 1 or 2 bays 10 gallon per minute 50 gallons 3 bays 6 Cu. Ft./25 gpm 100 gallons 4 bays 7 Cu. Ft./35 gpm 100 gallons 5 bays 8 Cu. Ft./35 gpm 100 gallons 6 bays 9 Cu. Ft./50 gpm 100 gallons 7 bays 10 Cu. Ft./50 gpm 100 gallons 8 to 14 bays 20 Cu. Ft./75 gpm 100 gallons 15 to 20 bays 23 Cu. Ft./100 gpm 250 gallons 21 to 25 bays 28 Cu. Ft./150 gpm 250 gallons 26 to 35 bays 38 Cu. Ft./200 gpm 250 gallons 36 to 50 bays 53 Cu. Ft./250 gpm 500 gallons  
Over 50 bays to be designed by registered engineer 
    Storage areas in conjunction with service areas shall cause an increase in the required volume of the interceptor of one (1) cubic foot capacity per one hundred (100) square feet of storage area and the corresponding flow rate and storage capacity shall apply. 
    Mechanical car washes shall be served by a sand and gravel interceptor with a minimum static water capacity of fifty (50) cubic feet, which shall receive all waste water from the washing facility. Such interceptor shall have a minimum seal of six (6) inches and no outlet from a sand and gravel interceptor shall be discharged to an oil interceptor. Where motor cleaning services are rendered at mechanical car washing facilities, an oil interceptor shall be installed in that section of the drainage system which receives waste water from the motor cleaning operation. 
    Wash bays where vehicles are cleaned without the use of moving equipment shall be equipped with a sand interceptor which shall have an area of four (4) square feet minimum and be a minimum depth of two (2) feet below the invert of the outlet pipe and have a minimum of a six (6) inch seal depth. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 8323 , § 4, 2-12-2019) 
9-1021-9-1029 - RESERVED 
DIVISION II. - PLUMBING PERMITS 

9-1030 - PERMITS AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
    No installation of any plumbing shall be made within the City or the two (2) mile jurisdictional area outside the City limits, without first obtaining a written permit from the Building and Zoning Division of the City to do so. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 7184, 6-14-2005) 
9-1031 - OWNER TO ALLOW ONLY LICENSED PLUMBER TO DO WORK 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any plumbing or drainage work to be done in connection with any property owned, managed or controlled by such person unless the plumber doing such work has been registered as required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96) 
9-1032 - MINOR INSTALLATIONS BY OWNER 
    A permit may be issued only to a properly registered master plumber of the City of Kearney; provided that a permit may be issued to the owner of a single family dwelling to do plumbing or drainage work in such dwelling where the same is used exclusively for the purposes of such owner, who resides in such dwelling. Said work shall be limited to no more than three (3) fixtures and only at the discretion of the Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ), depending on plumbing experience. Such plumbing or drainage work performed by an owner shall be performed by him/herself without compensation or pay to any other person therefor. Any owner doing plumbing or drainage work hereunder shall apply for the required permit, pay the prescribed fee therefor, call for inspections and do all work in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 7656, 6-28-2011; Ord. No. 8345 , § 1, 5-14-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8345 , § 1, adopted May 14, 2019, renamed § 9-1032 from "installations by owner" to "minor installations by owner." 
9-1033 - MINOR REPAIRS 
    No permit shall be required for minor repair work. Minor repair work as used in this Code is hereby defined to be repairing leaks in pipes or traps, or opening waste or supply pipes or repairing broken fixtures or frozen pipes within the building, but where alterations are made either in soil, waste or vent pipes, or where the location or kind of fixture is changed, permits will be required. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96) 
9-1034 - APPLICATION FOR PERMITS 
    The application for a plumbing permit shall provide the name of the owner, agent or occupant of the premises, giving the address, the name and business location of the plumber having charge of the work and a description of the work to be done, setting forth the number and kind of fixtures. The applicant for such permit shall pay a fee as provided in Section 9-1035 which follows. Any applicant who is delinquent in their indebtedness to the City as a result of a previous permit or permits, may be refused further permits until the indebtedness has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96) 
9-1035 - PLUMBING PERMIT FEES 
    The fees as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule are to be paid to the City for plumbing permits and credited to the general fund of the City. The fees for permits issued for work in the area between the corporate limits and the two (2) mile jurisdiction line shall be one and one-half (11/2) times the listed rates. 
    Whenever work for which a permit is required is commenced without first having obtained such permit, if such permit is subsequently issued, said permit shall be issued at double the rate listed. However, this provision does not apply to emergency work when it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Building Official that such an emergency existed and was urgently necessary and that it was not practical therefore to obtain a permit before commencement of work. In such cases, the double permit fee will be waived if the permit is obtained within the first eight (8) hours that the office of the Building and Zoning Division is open for business following such an event or the commencement of such work. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 6912, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 8323 , § 5, 2-12-2019) 
9-1036-9-1039 - RESERVED 
DIVISION III. - LICENSING AND REGULATION OF PLUMBERS 

9-1040 - REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF PLUMBERS 
    No person shall engage in or work at the business, trade or calling of a plumber in the City or within two (2) miles thereof until he/she has been duly authorized to do so by being licensed in one of the classifications described in Section 9-1041, as hereinafter provided. (Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96) 
9-1041 - CLASSIFICATIONS OF LICENSES 
(1)  Master Plumber: Any person who is skilled in the planning, superintending and practical installation of plumbing and drainage, who is familiar with the ordinances and regulations governing the same, and who is engaged in the installation, repair, alteration or removal of plumbing or drainage with the full responsibility of supervision, whether doing such work by him/herself or employing journeymen plumbers and apprentices to assist him/her. The term master plumber shall include every person doing work of any character connected with the installation, repair or removal of any plumbing system or material connected with the drainage of building or property and all work requiring connections with street sewers, water mains or other plumbing, other than journeymen plumbers or plumbers' apprentices or helpers as defined in this Code and who has submitted to examination by the Building Official to determine his/her qualification to hold a master's license and has subsequently been granted such license. 
(2)  Journeyman Plumber: Any person, employed by a master plumber, other than a plumber's apprentice or helper, who as his/her principal occupation is engaged in the practical installation, alteration, repair or removal of plumbing and who has submitted to examination by the Building Official to determine his/her qualification to hold a journeyman's license and has subsequently been granted such license. 
(3)  Plumber's Apprentice or Helper: Any person, other than a journeyman plumber or master plumber, who as his/her principal occupation is engaged in learning and assisting in the installation, repair, alteration or removal of plumbing and drainage. No apprentice or helper shall be permitted to work at the installation, repair or removal of any plumbing or drainage, except under the personal supervision and direction of a duly licensed journeyman or master plumber. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 7656, 6-28-2011; Ord. No. 8323 , § 6, 2-12-2019) 
9-1042 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 6868, 3-26-2002; Ord. No. 7184, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 7382, 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 7574, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 7656, 6-28-2011) 
9-1043 - LICENSE FEES 
    The fees as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule are to be paid to the City for licenses. Journeyman and Master applicants shall pay examination fees directly to National Inspection Testing Certification. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 6913, 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 7656, 6-28-2011) 
9-1044 - APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION 
    No company shall engage in or work at the business or trade of plumbing in the jurisdiction of the City of Kearney until such company has registered as a plumbing contractor with the Development Services of the City of Kearney. Each registration shall be in the name of a master plumber in the classification applied for, who is a full time employee of the company and who is in actual supervision of the work performed by the company. 
    Application for registration under the provisions of this Article shall be made to the Development Services office. Such application shall include the name and address of the applicant, the business location of the applicant, proof that the applicant is the holder of a current master plumber's license which shall not have been revoked. Registration shall run concurrently with licenses expiring on the last day of January of the second year following the date of issuance and shall not be assignable. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 6187, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 6913, 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 7156, 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 7382, 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 7656, 6-28-2011; Ord. No. 7922, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 8218, 2-13-2018) 
9-1045 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 8217, 2-13-2018) 
9-1046 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7156, 3-22-2005) 
9-1047 - REPEALED 
(Code 1994, 9-1010-9-1015; Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 7231, 1-10-2006; Ord. No. 7656, 6-28-2011; Ord. No. 7922, 8-12-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1901 
9-1048 - EXAMINATION AND LICENSING REQUIREMENTS 
    An applicant for examination, having met the experience requirements specified below with documented experience time, shall apply in writing to take the examination desired. The application shall include the applicant's full name and current address, a summary of work experience and a request to be examined. The Building Official shall review all applications and, if the requirements are met, shall approve the applicant to take the examination as requested. Approved applicants must make testing arrangements with National Inspection Testing Certification Center and schedule a testing session with the Development Services Department, which will only be offered by the City of Kearney, quarterly, on the fourth Friday of the following months: January, April, July, October. 
Classification Experience Required Master Plumber Applicant shall have worked under the supervision of a master plumber for a period of four (4) years, minimum, after having obtained a journeyman's plumber's license. Journeyman Plumber Applicant shall have worked under the supervision of a master or journeyman plumber for a period of three (3) years or have worked under said supervision for a period of two (2) years and also have completed a training class which is approved by the Building Official, after obtaining an apprentice plumber's license. Apprentice Applicant shall be a part-time employee of a registered master plumber.  
    Any experience time accrued as an apprentice, in order to be considered for the examination to become a journeyman, shall only be accrued under the registration of a registrant in that classification and any experience time accrued as a journeyman to become a master plumber shall only be accrued under the registration of a registrant in that classification. 
    An applicant failing to pass an examination shall not be eligible for re-examination until ninety (90) days after the failed examination. The applicant shall pay an examination fee for each re-examination required. Applicants that wish to dispute his/her test grade or questions on the examination shall contact National Inspection Testing Certification directly. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 7656, 6-28-2011; Ord. No. 7675, 9-27-2011; Ord. No. 7922, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 8323 , § 7, 2-12-2019) 
9-1049 - ISSUANCE OF LICENSE 
    Before the applicant shall be licensed as journeyman or master plumber or as, he/she shall be approved to take the examination by the Building Official, as prescribed above in Section 9-1048, pay an examination fee directly to the National Inspection Testing and Certification, and shall be required to submit to and pass a standardized, online examination, administered by National Inspection Testing Certification and proctored by the Building Official or a representative designated by the Building Official. Applicants must receive a grade of seventy-five percent (75%) in order to have shown him/herself to the satisfaction of the Building Official to be fit, competent and qualified to engage in the business, trade or calling of a master, or journeyman plumber. Applicants receiving a score of greater than seventy-five percent (75%) may be approved by the Building Official to receive a valid license. Once approved to receive a license, applicants shall pay a licensing fee to the City of Kearney as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 6419, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 6913, 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 7656, 6-28-2011; Ord. No. 7922, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 8323 , § 8, 2-12-2019) 
9-1050 - EXPIRATION OF LICENSES 
    Licenses shall expire on the last day of January of the second year following the date of issuance and shall not be assignable. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 7382, 9-25-2007) 
9-1051 - RENEWAL OF LICENSES 
    Licenses, at the time of their expiration, may be renewed with the approval of the Building Official, without an examination, upon payment of the required license fee. 
    Any person licensed under the provisions of this Code as a master or journeyman who does not renew his/her license for a period of thirty (30) days after the expiration of same, shall pay the examination fee required by this Code for a master or journeyman plumber, as the case may be, and shall submit him/herself to an examination by National Inspection Testing Certification before such person can again be licensed hereunder. 
    Exception: Already tested and passed an exam by the National Inspection Testing Certification agency or equivalent and approved by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 7656, 6-28-2011; Ord. No. 7922, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 8323 , § 9, 2-12-2019) 
9-1052 - REVOCATION OF LICENSE 
    The Building Official shall, upon having written sworn charges against the licensee filed with it, set the matter for hearing and serve written notice of the said charges and the place and time of hearing, upon the license holder at least three (3) days prior to the said hearing. The Building Official by a majority vote shall have the power to revoke or suspend any journeyman, or master plumber license, if the license was obtained through error or fraud, or if the licensee is shown to be incompetent, or has willfully violated the rules, regulations or requirements of the City, any provisions of this Code or the Building Code of the City or other causes sufficient to justify suspension or revocation of the license. This penalty shall be cumulative, and in addition to the penalties prescribed for the violation of the provisions of this Code. If a license is revoked, the holder of the same shall not apply for a license until one (1) year after the date of such revocation. The licensee may appeal said revocation to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 6419, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 7656, 6-28-2011; Ord. No. 7922, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 8323 , § 10, 2-12-2019) 
9-1053 - PERMITTING OTHERS TO USE LICENSE 
    No registered company or individual shall allow his/her name to be used by another entity, directly or indirectly, either to obtain a permit for the installation of any plumbing, as herein required, or to do any plumbing work. If any licensed plumber violates this provision, the Building Official may, after appropriate notice and hearing, revoke the registration issued to such company or individual. In addition to having registration revoked, the plumber of record for purposes of registration may be prosecuted under the penalty for violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 6419, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 7922, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 8323 , § 11, 2-12-2019) 
9-1054 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of the Uniform Plumbing Code as amended and adopted by the provisions of this Article, or of any provision of this Article, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-112 of this Code. Every day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 6132, 6-11-96) 
9-1055 - LICENSES; RECIPROCITY 
    Any person validly licensed as a master or journeyman plumber by a city in Nebraska, provided the testing mechanism of that municipality has been verified by the City Manager or his/her designee to meet or exceed the standards of the National Inspection Testing Certification, may apply for exemption from taking the examination specified by Section 9-1049 and, provided the applicant is otherwise qualified pursuant to this Code, the Building Official may approve the applicant to receive a valid license, and direct his/her designee to execute and deliver the license to the applicant. 
    The Building Official shall determine applicant's qualifications, and shall have the right to require any applicant to take an examination. In the event that an applicant is denied a license, he or she may appeal to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 6398, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 6419, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 6423, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 7656, 6-28-2011; Ord. No. 7863, 12-23-2013; Ord. No. 7922, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 8323 , § 12, 2-12-2019) 
ARTICLE 11. - (REPEALED) 

9-1101 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5827, 8-23-94) 
9-1102 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5827, 8-23-94) 
9-1103 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5827, 8-23-94) 
9-1104 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5827, 8-23-94) 
9-1105 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5827, 8-23-94) 
9-1106 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 5827, 8-23-94) 
ARTICLE 12. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 

9-1201 - SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONCRETE STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ADOPTED 
    The specifications for concrete used in sidewalks, curbs, driveways and under construction on City property shall be governed and controlled by the standards as set forth in specifications adopted by resolution of the Council. 
(Code 1958, 27.13; Code 1980, 33-1) 
9-1202 - BUILDINGS TO CONFORM TO GRADES 
    Any and all persons who shall build, construct, rent or occupy any building that is not situated or built in accordance with the grade established for the abutting street, alley or other public way shall do so at his/her own risk insofar as floodwaters are concerned, whether of surface waters or otherwise, and moreover no building shall be constructed unless the same conforms to such grade and the lowest line of any opening or access into the building is at least twelve inches (12") higher than the top of adjacent curblines. 
(Code 1958, 27.16; Code 1980, 33-2) 
9-1203 - CURBLINES 
    The curblines are hereby established on all the streets and avenues with the City by the City Engineer. 
(Code 1958, 27.17; Code 1980, 33-3) 
9-1204 - IMPROVEMENT OF STREETS FOR PURPOSES OTHER THAN TRAVEL 
    The Council may by ordinance or resolution order or permit the conversion to a park or improvement as lawn of any portions of any street or avenue in the City which shall not be, in their judgment, necessarily required for actual travel. When so converted to a park, planted or improved, it shall be unlawful for any person to lead, ride or drive any animal or vehicle upon the portion of the street so parked or improved. 
(Code 1958, 27.20; Code 1980, 33-4) 
9-1205 - REPEALED 
    See Article 5 "Trees and Shrubbery" of Chapter 7. 
(Code 1958, 27.18; Code 1980, 33-5; Ord. 7353, 5-8-2007) 
9-1206 - REPEALED 
    See Article 5 "Trees and Shrubbery" of Chapter 7. 
(Code 1958, 27.19; Code 1980, 33-6; Ord. No. 7353, 5-8-2007) 
9-1207 - REPEALED 
    See Article 5 "Trees and Shrubbery" of Chapter 7. 
(Code 1958, 27.21; Code 1980, 33-7; Ord. No. 7353, 5-8-2007) 
9-1208 - REPEALED 
    See Article 5 "Trees and Shrubbery" of Chapter 7. 
(Code 1958, 27.22; Ord. No. 3917, 1, 5-12-87; Code 1980, 33-8; Ord. No. 7353, 5-8-2007) 
9-1209 - REPEALED 
    See Article 5 "Trees and Shrubbery" of Chapter 7. 
(Code 1980, 33-9; Ord. No. 7353, 5-8-2007) 
9-1210 - PERMIT, DEPOSIT, BOND AND GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR PAVEMENT CUTS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or grind into any paving, curb or sidewalk for any purpose whatsoever, without first having applied for a permit at the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative. The permit fee shall be as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. Before any person shall obtain such a permit, he/she shall make application for such permit in writing informing the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative of the place where such cutting or grinding is to be done and it shall be the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative's duty to cause an inspection to be made of the place of entry into the paving, sidewalk or curb before the same is cut. Permit fee shall be doubled when any person cuts or grinds into paving, curb, or sidewalk prior to the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative inspecting and approving the location of such cut or grinding. When cutting into any paving, it shall be the duty of the party so cutting to make the same under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative. When the person making the cut is ready to close the opening, he/she shall inform the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative who shall supervise and inspect the materials used and the work done in closing the opening. The office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative may do the work and charge the cost thereof, as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule per lineal foot for all paving, curb or sidewalk cuts, to the party who obtained the permit, or he/she may consent to the same being done by the party holding such permit. Before any permit is issued by the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative, the applicant for such permit shall deposit with the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative a sum as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule for all paving, curb or sidewalk to be cut. The deposit shall be retained by the City for the purpose of replacing the paving, curb or sidewalk in case the work is done by the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative. In case the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative elects to require the applicant to replace the paving, curb or sidewalk, the deposit shall be retained by the City until the work is completed to the satisfaction of the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative. 
    The applicant will, if requested by the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative, promptly replace and repair each and every place cut into any paving, curb or sidewalk, under such rules as may be prescribed by the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative, in as good condition as before the same was cut; and, that the applicant will promptly compensate the City for all work done by the office of the City Manager or his/her duly appointed representative in replacing or repairing any places cut by the applicant. 
    The applicant will obey all the provisions of the Code or other ordinances of the City in doing such work and will save the City harmless from any damages which may occur as a result of either cutting or repairing pavement, curb or sidewalk. 
(Code 1958, 27.23; Ord. No. 4006, 1, 4-12-88; Ord. No. 4055, 1, 11-22-88; Code 1980, 33-10; Ord. No. 6912, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 7156, 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
9-1211 - NAMING OF STREETS AND AVENUES 
A.  That street presently named and known as Central Avenue as the same is presently located and laid out over and across the northwest quarter of Section 13, Township 8 North, Range 16 West from a point lying north of the main channel of the Platte River and running north through Section 12 and Section 1, Township 8 North, Range 16 West; continuing north through Section 25 and Section 36, Township 9 North, Range 16 West, and continuing north to a point where said existing Central Avenue would intersect with 46th Street shall be and is hereby determined as the central street in the City. All streets running north and south in the City shall be known as avenues, and be designated and known as follows: 
1.  All the avenues lying north of Interstate 80 and east of Central Avenue shall be named by the consecutive letters of the alphabet beginning at the avenue next to Central Avenue with the letter "A." Following Avenue "Z," avenues shall be named by the use in alphabetical order of county names of the counties in the State of Nebraska. 
2.  All the avenues lying south of Interstate 80 and east of Central Avenue shall be named by the consecutive letters of the alphabet followed by the designation "South" with the avenue next to Central Avenue being "Avenue A South"; and, following "Avenue Z South," avenues shall be named by the use in alphabetical order of county names of the counties in the State of Nebraska followed by the designation "South." 
3.  All avenues lying west of Central Avenue shall be named by consecutive numbers, beginning at the avenue next to Central Avenue with "First." Those avenues lying south of Interstate 80 and west of Central Avenue shall be named by consecutive numbers followed by the designation "South," beginning at the avenue next to Central Avenue and south of Interstate 80 with "First Avenue South." 
B.  The streets running east and west in the City shall be known as "streets" and designated by Arabic numerals as follows: 
1.  Beginning at the north side of Interstate 80 with "1st Street," and thence each street to the north, with consecutive numerals following the number "1st Street." 
2.  Beginning at the south side of Interstate 80 with "1st Street South," with each street to the south, with consecutive numerals following the number "1st Street South." 
(Code 1958, 27.6; Ord. No. 3994, 1, 3-22-88; Code 1980, 33-11) 
9-1212 - DRAINING WASTE, ETC., ON STREETS 
    It shall be unlawful for any person conducting or engaged in carrying on any hotel, cafe, eating house, boardinghouse, butcher shop, bakery, laundry, soft drink stand, drugstores, grocery stores or of any other business in the City to allow, suffer or permit any dishwater, washwater, acid, battery water or other liquid chemical to escape and run upon any street or to stand or percolate on any street or on any place adjacent to any street in the City. 
(Code 1958, 27.14; Code 1980, 33-12) 
9-1213 - OBSTRUCTIONS GENERALLY 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to erect or maintain any building or structure in such manner as to be unsafe, injurious or annoying to the public, or to allow any sidewalk, curbstone, gutter, awning or awning posts to be placed or remain in a dangerous condition or to place or suffer to remain on any sidewalk or street any obstruction injurious to the public use of the same. 
(Code 1958, 27.3; Code 1980, 33-13) 
State Law reference- Power of city to remove street and sidewalk obstructions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-207 
9-1214 - OPENINGS, ETC., ALONG STREETS PROHIBITED 
    It shall be unlawful for the property owners abutting on the streets and alleys to use the streets and alleys or the sidewalks for any of the following purposes: 
A.  Open stairway leading to an entrance into the building on either the first floor, the upper stories or to the basement of any building; 
B.  For an airway for light or air or for any other purpose; 
C.  For coal holes, covered stairs or elevators, unless covered in a manner approved by the Building Inspector and the City Manager in writing, and in no event to extend above the level of the sidewalk or the alley paving more than two-tenths of one inch; 
D.  For show windows; 
E.  For supports for any part of the building; 
F.  For a signpost, awning post, hitching post, telephone pole, telegraph pole, booth or other obstruction on Central Avenue between Eighteenth (18th) Street and the north line of Twenty-fifth (25th) Street in the City. 
(Code 1958, §27.1, 27.11; Code 1980, 33-14) 
9-1215 - OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS, ETC., WITH MERCHANDISE, ETC.; EXCEPTION 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to erect, maintain or suffer to remain on any street or public sidewalk or on any portion of the area between the lot line and the curbline of any street any stand, wagon, merchandise, machinery or any other obstruction injurious to, inconvenient or inconsistent with the public use of the same; provided, that a reasonable time shall be allowed to remove goods, wares and merchandise being received and shipped. 
    No Sidewalk Occupation Permit provided by this section shall be issued without prior approval by the City. The City has established criteria for considering the approval or denial of a Sidewalk Occupation Permit. The City Council has authorized and designated the City Manager as the agent to determine whether a Sidewalk Occupation Permit is to be issued by the City for use by the holder of the Sidewalk Occupation Permit. 
(Code 1958, 27.4; Code 1980, 33-15; Ord. No. 7282, 7-11-2006) 
9-1216 - CLEANING SNOW, MUD, ETC., FROM SIDEWALKS 
    It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot or the owner of any vacant lot within the City to suffer or permit snow, sleet, mud, ice, slush or other substance to accumulate and remain on the abutting sidewalk for a period of time in excess of twenty-four (24) hours after the cessation of a storm. Snow removed from private property shall not be placed in or upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public ways; provided, that in the business district of the City, snow from sidewalks may be pushed into the gutter of the street outside the curbline. 
(Code 1958, 27.5; Ord. No. 3559, 1, 12-14-82; Code 1980, 33-16) 
9-1217 - SNOW, MUD, ETC., REMOVAL; LIABILITY; REFUSAL OR NEGLECT TO CLEAR SIDEWALKS 
    The owner of property abutting on public streets is hereby charged with the duty of keeping and maintaining the abutting sidewalks in a safe and sound condition, free from encumbrances, obstructions, and accumulations of snow, ice, sleet, mud, or slush. In the event a property owner violates this section by refusing, failing, or neglecting to so maintain sidewalks abutting his/her property, such owner shall be liable for injuries or damages to any person who is injured by such failure or neglect. 
    In the event of such refusal or neglect by an owner to remove such encumbrances, obstructions, or accumulations after three (3) days' notice by publication or, in place thereof, personal service of such notice by an employee or agent designated by the City Manager, the City Manager may cause such encroachments to be removed or cleaned, and shall report the costs thereof to the Council, whereupon the Council shall assess the costs of notice and removal against such abutting property as a special sidewalk assessment which shall be levied and collected in a like manner as other special assessments, and shall be subject to the same penalties and shall draw interest from the date of the assessment. The City shall charge a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first hour, and thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per hour thereafter against each tract of land, lot, block or parcel of real property. 
(Ord. No. 5339, 12-10-91) 
9-1218 - REPEALED 
    See Section 8-915.1 
(Code 1958, 27.5-1; Ord. No. 3670, 1, 2-28-84; Code 1980, 33-17; Ord. No. 6724, 11-28-2000) 
9-1219 - ENCUMBERING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS WITH FENCES, ETC. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or encumber by fences, gates, buildings, structures or otherwise any of the public streets or sidewalks of the City, except as authorized or permitted by the Council in accordance with the terms of Section 19-4301, R.R.S. 
(Code 1958, 27.24; Code 1980, 33-18) 
9-1220 - BUSINESS DISTRICT DEFINED 
    For purposes of this Article, the boundaries of the business district are as follows: Commencing at the southeast corner of the intersection of Central Avenue and Railroad Street; thence east along the south right-of-way line of Railroad Street to the west right-of-way line of Avenue B; thence north along the west line of Avenue B to the south right-of-way line of 25th Street; thence west to the east right-of-way line of Avenue A; thence north along the east right-of-way line of Avenue A to the south right-of-way line of 26th Street; thence west along the south right-of-way line of 26th Street to the west right-of-way line of 1st Avenue; thence south along the west right-of-way line of 1st Avenue to the south right-of-way line of 25th Street; thence west along the south right-of-way of 25th Street to the east right-of-way line of 2nd Avenue; thence south along the east right-of-way line of 2nd Avenue to the south right-of-way line of Railroad Street; thence east along the south right-of-way line of Railroad Street to the west right-of-way line of Central Avenue; thence south along the west right-of-way line of Central Avenue to the north right-of-way line of 19th Street; thence west along the north right-of-way line of 19th Street to the east right-of-way line of 1st Avenue; thence south along the east right-of-way line of 1st Avenue to the south right-of-way line of 19th Street; thence east along the south right-of-way line of 19th Street to the west right-of-way line of Central Avenue; thence south along the west right-of-way line of Central Avenue to the south right-of-way line of 15th Street; thence east along the south right-of-way line of 15th Street to the east right-of-way line of Central Avenue; thence north along the east right-of-way line of Central Avenue to the south right-of-way line of 19th Street; thence east along the south right-of-way line of 19th Street to the west right-of-way line of Avenue A; thence north along the west right-of-way line of Avenue A to the north right-of-way line of 19th Street; thence west along the north right-of-way line of 19th Street to the east right-of-way line of Central Avenue; thence north along the east right-of-way line of Central Avenue to the point of beginning, all in the City of Kearney, Buffalo County, Nebraska. 
(Ord. No. 3559, 2, 12-14-82; Code 1980, 33-19) 
9-1221 - SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR; NOTICE TO CONTIGUOUS OWNERS TO CONSTRUCT NEW SIDEWALK; CONSTRUCTION AT OWNER'S EXPENSE 
    Whenever the Council shall deem it necessary that a sidewalk shall be constructed in front of any lot in the City in a place where there is no sidewalk, they shall so order and the Director of Public Works shall thereupon notify in writing the owner of such lot of the work or improvement to be done, and such owner so notified shall be allowed thirty (30) days from the service of the notice in which to construct the same. The notice shall be given by delivering the same to the owner in person or by leaving it at his/her usual place of residence in the City, or if he/she be a nonresident of the City, by publication of the notice one (1) time in a legal newspaper published in and of general circulation in the City. The notice shall notify such owner of the passage of the resolution and that he/she will have thirty (30) days from and after the service of notice, or from day of publication in the event of notice in that manner, within which to construct the sidewalk so ordered or cause the same to be done and further notifying the owner that if he/she fails to construct the sidewalk, or cause the same to be done within thirty (30) days after notice as aforesaid, that then and in that case the City will cause the sidewalk to be constructed and that the cost will be levied and assessed thereafter by the Mayor/President and Council of the City as a special tax against the premises. 
(Code 1958, 27.28; Code 1980, 33-32) 
9-1222 - SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR; DUTY OF CONTIGUOUS OWNERS TO REPAIR SIDEWALKS 
    Every owner of any lot within the limits of the City shall at all times keep and maintain the sidewalk along and contiguous to the lot, as the case may be, in good and proper repair and in a condition reasonably safe for travel for all travelers thereon. In case the owner of any lot or land abutting on any street or part thereof shall fail to construct or repair any sidewalk in front of his/her lot or land within the time and in the manner as directed and required by this Chapter, after having received due notice to do so, he/she shall be liable for all damages or injury occasioned by reason of the defective or dangerous condition of any sidewalk and the Council shall have power to cause such sidewalk to be constructed or repaired and assess the costs thereof against such property. 
(Code 1958, 27.29; Code 1980, 33-33) 
9-1223 - SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR; NOTICE TO REPAIR SIDEWALKS 
    Whenever the Director of Public Works shall deem it necessary that any sidewalk shall be repaired, or it shall be required by the Council, he/she shall notify the owner of the lot along and contiguous to which such sidewalk is situated, to repair the same or submit a plan to repair the same within ten (10) days from and after the giving of such notice. Oral notice to the owner shall be deemed sufficient. If the owner is not found by the Director of Public Works, then a written notice left in the house situated on such lot or posted upon such premises shall be sufficient, and the ten (10) days shall begin to run from the leaving or posting up of such notice, as the case may be. 
(Code 1958, 27.30; Code 1980, 33-34) 
9-1224 - SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR; NOTICE TO WIDEN, REPLACE, ETC., SIDEWALKS 
    Whenever the Council shall deem it necessary that an old sidewalk shall be widened, replaced or reconstructed, it shall order the same to be done and the Director of Public Works shall give notice in the manner and form provided in the preceding section to widen, replace or reconstruct the same within thirty (30) days from and after such notice. 
(Code 1958, 27.31; Code 1980, 33-35) 
9-1225 - SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR; SIDEWALK REPAIR, ETC., BY CITY AT OWNER'S EXPENSE 
    If any owner shall neglect or refuse or shall have failed, after notice has been given as provided by sections 9-1223 and 9-1224 to construct, repair, replace or reconstruct any sidewalk within the time limited in the notice given in such case and whose duty it is made by this Chapter to construct, repair or rebuild and reconstruct such walk, the City Manager or his/her representative, shall proceed at once without further notice to such owner or person to have such sidewalk constructed, repaired, rebuilt or reconstructed, as the case may be and the expense of such work shall be assessed to such lot and collected as provided by law. 
(Code 1958, 27.32; Code 1980, 33-36) 
9-1226 - SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR; SIDEWALKS TO BE CONCRETE, WIDTH OF SIDEWALKS 
    All sidewalks on either side of the streets and avenues of the City, in front of or along any lot, abutting upon the same, which shall be hereafter constructed, reconstructed or replaced shall be of concrete. No person shall construct, reconstruct or replace any sidewalk of any other material within the limits of the City and no person shall reconstruct any sidewalk constructed of any other material. All sidewalks in the City shall not be less than four (4) feet in width. 
(Code 1958, 27.33; Code 1980, 33-37) 
9-1227 - SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR; CONSTRUCTION PERMIT; SURVEY; BIDDING PROCEDURE 
    All concrete sidewalks and all curbing constructed or reconstructed along any street or avenue in the City shall be in conformity with such plans and specifications as may be prepared by the City Manager and adopted and approved by the Council. Any person desiring to construct or cause to be constructed any curbing or sidewalk on any street or avenue abutting his/her property in the City shall obtain a permit and survey; and it shall be unlawful for any person to construct any curbing or sidewalk without first having obtained the permit and survey. Application for the permit shall be made in writing, be filed in the office of the City Clerk, and give a description of the lot along which it is desired to construct the curbing or sidewalk. The City Clerk shall thereupon deliver the application to the City Manager, who shall grant the permit unless good cause shall appear why the permit should be denied; provided, that if it is desired to construct the curbing or sidewalk at other than the regularly prescribed location, grade or elevation or the curbing of other than the regularly prescribed type of construction, the City Manager shall submit the application to the Council which shall determine whether the permit shall be granted or denied. When a permit is granted for construction of curbing or sidewalk, the City Manager shall direct the City Engineer or other engineer employed by the City, to make a survey and set stakes indicating the location, grade and elevation of the curbing or sidewalk and it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be constructed such curbing or sidewalk at any other location, grade or elevation than so designated. In determining such location, grade and elevation the engineer shall conform to such specifications, rules or regulations as the Council may prescribe. The survey shall be made and stakes set by the engineer within ten (10) days after being directed so to do. The fees of the engineer shall be paid by the City, but if the person obtaining the permit and survey fails or neglects to construct the curbing or sidewalk within sixty (60) days thereafter the applicant shall be liable to the City for the fee paid for the survey. Whenever the City shall construct curbing or construct, widen, replace or reconstruct any sidewalk notice specifying the work to be done and calling for bids for doing the work and furnishing the necessary material and labor shall be published in at least one (1) issue of a legal newspaper published in the City, the bids to be filed within ten (10) days after date of first publication and to be opened at the next regular or special meeting of the Council, which shall award the work to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(Code 1958, 27.34; Code 1980, 33-38) 
9-1228 - SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR; CURBING TO BE CONCRETE 
    All curbing that may be ordered set by the Council shall be of concrete. 
(Code 1958, 27.35; Code 1980, 33-39) 
9-1229 - SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR; CESSATION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF WORK IN VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 
    In case any lot owner within the City, under notice given or otherwise, constructs a sidewalk or curb in violation of this Article, the City Manager may stop the work of such construction and order the same to be made in accordance with this Article and the work already made to be changed, and on the failure of such owner to change any such work, the City Manager shall forthwith change the work, and the expense of the same shall be assessed and taxed to the lot and collected as other taxes as provided by law. 
(Code 1958, 27.36; Code 1980, 33-40) 
9-1230 - SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR; PETITION FOR SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION 
    Upon the petition of any freeholder, the Mayor/President and Council may order permanent sidewalks built in accordance with this Chapter, upon the freeholder's making, executing and delivering to the City an agreement to pay for the same and that the cost of the same, until paid, shall be a perpetual lien upon the real estate along which the freeholder desires such sidewalk to be constructed, and giving and granting to the City the right to assess and levy the costs of the same against the real estate and promising to pay for the same with interest. The total cost of such improvement shall be levied, allocated, financed and specially assessed as provided by law. 
(Code 1958, 27.37; Code 1980, 33-41) 
9-1231 - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS; SYSTEM GENERALLY 
    All storerooms, residences and other buildings facing on any street or avenue in the City shall be numbered on the building itself or by painting the number on the curb in front of the premises, as follows: 
A.  On avenues from south to north, odd numbers on east, and even numbers on west side of avenues. The first number on each block to be that of the intersecting street multiplied by one hundred (100). 
B.  On streets west from Central Avenue even numbers on the south side and odd numbers on the north side; on streets east of Central Avenue, even numbers on the north side, and odd numbers on the south side, the first number on each block to be the number of the intersecting avenue multiplied by one hundred (100), except that in blocks abutting on Central Avenue, the first number in each block shall be one (1). 
C.  Twenty-five (25) feet shall be allowed for each number except in cases where the City Engineer shall designate a less space. 
(Code 1958, 27.7; Code 1980, 33-53) 
9-1232 - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS; PAINTING AND MARKING NUMBERS AT STREET CORNERS 
    All streets and avenues shall be plainly marked at each corner with their proper names legibly painted on signs in letters and figures, in dimensions at last two and one-half inches (2-1/2") high, which sign shall be secured to the corner of the fence, building or other structure; otherwise such a sign number shall be painted on the curb or on posts at the corner of the street or avenue. 
(Code 1958, 27.8; Code 1980, 33-54) 
9-1233 - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS; DISPLAY OF NUMBERS 
    Each owner or occupant of any residence, storeroom or other building situated on any street or avenue in the City shall cause to be displayed in a conspicuous place upon such residence, storeroom, building or painted on the curb in front of the premises a sign upon which shall be painted the proper street number of such residence, storeroom or other building, in figures not less than two and one-half inches (2-1/2") high. 
(Code 1958, 27.9; Code 1980, 33-55) 
9-1234 - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS; FAILURE TO DISPLAY; DEFACING, ETC., NUMBERS 
    Any person who shall fail to number any residence, storeroom or other building shall be fined for each residence, storeroom or other building upon or for which he/she may fail to place and maintain such sign, the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each offense. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or injure any street sign, name or number and any person so doing shall be punished as provided in section 1-111 of this Code. 
(Code 1958, 27.10; Code 1980, 33-56) 
9-1235 - HANDICAPPED PARKING STALLS 
    Property owners shall be obligated to maintain within any parking lots whether they be privately owned or otherwise the number of handicapped parking stalls as is required by the City's building code and the International Building Code, as amended, adopted by the City of Kearney. Property owners shall be obligated to erect and maintain handicapped parking signs for each handicapped parking stall required by the building code with said signage to comply with the requirements as set forth in Section 8-912(n) of the City Code as well as the Uniform Traffic Code. Failure to erect and otherwise maintain the appropriate number of handicapped parking stalls and signage in parking lots and other designated parking areas by the property owner shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided by Section 1-111 of the City Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 7333, 3-27-2007) 
ARTICLE 13. - DEVELOPER CONSTRUCTED INFRASTRUCTURE 
DIVISION I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

9-1301 - TITLE 
    This ordinance shall be known, referred to, and cited as the "City of Kearney Developer Constructed Infrastructure Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 5739, 1-1, 3-22-94) 
9-1302 - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to create an alternative means for a Developer whether an individual, group or corporation, to construct or have constructed public infrastructure, including streets, alleys, storm sewer, water, and sanitary sewer, and associated work, based on a design approved and provided by the City. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 1-2, 3-22-94) 
9-1303 - JURISDICTION 
    These regulations shall apply to all land located within the City of Kearney, referred to as City. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 1-3, 3-22-94) 
9-1304 - CITY POINT OF CONTACT 
    The City's primary point of contact will be the Director of Public Works or his/her designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 1-4, 3-22-94) 
DIVISION II. - TECHNICAL PROVISIONS 

9-1305 - ELIGIBILITY 
    To be eligible for the methods described herein, all terms and conditions of this ordinance must be met by the Developer. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-1, 3-22-94) 
9-1306 - INFRASTRUCTURE AGREEMENT 
    An Infrastructure Agreement shall be entered into by both the Developer and the City, prior to designing the work, establishing the respective rights and responsibilities of both parties. The City's representative for the agreement shall be the Mayor/President of the City Council. The Agreement shall, at a minimum, address the requirements of this ordinance. The Infrastructure Agreement may be included in the Subdivision Agreement required by Chapter 57 "Improvement Financing and Guarantees" of the Unified Land Development Ordinance, being a part of the Code of the City of Kearney. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-2, 3-22-94; Ord. No. 6867, 3-26-2002) 
9-1307 - DESIGN 
    The design shall be developed by an engineer approved by the City. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-3, 3-22-94; Ord. No. 6622, 2-8-2000) 
9-1308 - DESIGN COSTS 
    The Developer shall pay for all design costs prior to commencing any construction. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-4, 3-22-94) 
9-1309 - CONSTRUCTION 
    The Developer shall be fully responsible and accountable for providing the infrastructure construction, and associated work, in compliance with the approved construction design. This includes, but is not limited to, contracting with a qualified construction firm and providing all contract management services. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-5, 3-22-94) 
9-1310 - CONSTRUCTION COSTS 
    The Developer shall pay for all construction and associated work costs. For all Developer Constructed Infrastructure Agreements approved by the City Council after January 1, 2013, the City will reimburse the Developer for infrastructure costs considered the responsibility of the City as outlined in paragraphs 1, 2, 3, and 4 of Section 57-103(B.) of the Kearney City Code. The reimbursement will be made to the Developer by the City after the City Council has accepted the improvements pursuant to Section 9-1318 of the Kearney City Code. The reimbursement shall be calculated by the City Engineer based on the most recent unit price bids received by the City, and approved by the City Council, for similar projects. The City will not participate in any reimbursement of costs to the Developer if the City determines, because of budgetary constraints, that general obligation bonds or revenue bonds must be issued to fund the reimbursement. If the City determines that general obligation bonds or revenue bonds must be issued to fund costs considered the responsibility of the City as outlined in paragraphs 1, 2, 3, and 4 of Section 57-103(B) of the Kearney City Code, Improvement Districts must be requested by the Developer. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-6, 3-22-94; Ord. No. 7779, 12-26-2012) 
9-1311 - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION AND TESTING 
    Construction inspection and testing shall be performed by the City or an engineer approved by the City, as determined necessary by the City or its Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-7, 3-22-94; Ord. No. 6622, 2-8-2000) 
9-1312 - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION AND TESTING COSTS 
    The Developer shall pay for all construction inspection and testing performed or required by the City or its Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-8, 3-22-94) 
9-1313 - PERFORMANCE AND PAYMENT BONDS OR IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT 
    The Developer shall require the Contractor to furnish to the City performance and payment bonds or an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of the value of the work to be performed (including construction and construction inspection and testing) as security for the faithful performance and payment of all Contractor's obligations under the contract documents. The bonds or irrevocable letter of credit shall be furnished to the City prior to commencement of any construction work on the public improvements. These bonds or irrevocable letter of credit shall remain in effect at least until one (1) year after acceptance of the construction work, except as otherwise provided by law or regulation. All bonds shall be in the forms prescribed by law or regulation or by the contract documents and be executed by such sureties as are named in the current list of "Companies Holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Sureties on Federal Bonds and as Acceptable Reinsuring Companies" as published in Circular 570 (amended) by the Audit Staff Bureau of Accounts, U.S. Treasury Department. All bonds signed by an agent must be accompanied by a certified copy of the authority to act. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-9, 3-22-94; Ord. No. 6622, 2-8-2000) 
9-1314 - INSURANCE 
    The Developer shall require the Contractor to purchase and maintain such comprehensive general liability insurance in a minimum coverage of $1,000,000 per occurrence and other insurance as is appropriate for the work being performed and furnished and as will provide protection from claims set forth below which may arise out of or result from Contractor's performance and furnishing of the work and Contractor's other obligations under the contract documents, whether it is to be performed or furnished by Contractor, by any Subcontractor, by anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them to perform or furnish any of the work, or by anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable: 
(1)  Claims under workers' or workmen's compensation, disability benefits and other similar employee benefit acts; 
(2)  Claims for damages because of bodily injury, occupational sickness or disease, or death of Contractor's employees; 
(3)  Claims for damages because of bodily injury, sickness or disease, or death of any person other than Contractor's employees; and 
(4)  Claims arising out of operation of laws or regulations for damages because of bodily injury or death of any person or for damage to property. 
    Documentation of the insurance coverage shall be provided to the City prior to the commencement of any construction work. The insurance required by this paragraph shall include the specific coverages and be written for not less than the limits of liability and coverages required by law or the conditions of this contract, whichever is greater. The comprehensive general liability insurance shall include completed operations insurance. All of the policies of insurance so required to be purchased and maintained (or the certificates or other evidence thereof) shall contain a provision or endorsement that the coverage afforded will not be canceled, materially changed or renewal refused until at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice has been given to City and Engineer by certified mail. All such insurance shall name the City of Kearney as an additional insured, and remain in effect until final payment and at all times thereafter when Contractor may be correcting, removing or replacing defective work. In addition, Contractor shall maintain such completed operations insurance for at least one (1) year after final payment and furnish the City with evidence of continuation of such insurance at final payment and one (1) year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-10, 3-22-94; Ord. No. 6622, 2-8-2000) 
9-1315 - INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION PERMIT 
    After the Developer has met all prerequisites for commencing construction identified in this ordinance, the Developer may apply to the City for an "Infrastructure Construction Permit." Issuance of this permit is required prior to commencing any construction work. This permit will be issued by the Director of Public Works at no charge to the Developer. Following receipt of the permit, the Developer may begin construction work. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-11, 3-22-94) 
9-1316 - COMPLETION 
    The construction work shall be completed within the time frame allowed by the permit. The completion time will be established by mutual agreement between the Developer and the City prior to issuance of the permit. The Developer may request time extensions which will be subject to City approval. If the construction is not completed within the time allowed by the permit and extensions are not granted, the City has the option to complete the work using the bonds. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-12, 3-22-94) 
9-1317 - HOLD HARMLESS 
    The Developer shall indemnify and hold harmless the City and its agents, officers, and employees for any and all claims, damages, losses, or expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, that arise out of or allegedly arise out of the design, construction, or maintenance of the systems and facilities described in this agreement that are not due to negligence or omission on the part of the City, its agents, officers, and employees. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-13, 3-22-94) 
9-1318 - ACCEPTANCE 
    Following construction completion, certification that there are no liens or other encumbrances against the construction work, and a determination by the City that the work is in compliance with the design, the City will accept the construction work. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-14, 3-22-94) 
9-1319 - GUARANTEE 
    The Developer shall guarantee the work is free from defects for a period of one year from the date of acceptance. Should the work be found to have defects, the City will notify the Developer of such and the Developer shall have all such defects promptly corrected at no additional cost to the City. 
(Ord. No. 5739, 2-15, 3-22-94) 
ARTICLE 14. - DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY BOARD 

9-1401 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7326, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 7364, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 7647, 5-24-2011) 
9-1402 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7326, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 7335, 4-10-2007; Ord. No. 7364, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 7647, 5-24-2011) 
9-1403 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7326, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 7364, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 7647, 5-24-2011) 
9-1404 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7326, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 7364, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 7647, 5-24-2011) 
9-1405 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7326, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 7364, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 7647, 5-24-2011) 
9-1406 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7326, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 7364, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 7647, 5-24-2011) 
9-1407 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7326, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 7364, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 7647, 5-24-2011) 
9-1408 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7326, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 7647, 5-24-2011) 
9-1409 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7326, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 7364, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 7647, 5-24-2011) 
9-1410 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7326, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 7364, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 7647, 5-24-2011) 
9-1411 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7326, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 7647, 5-24-2011) 
9-1412 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 7326, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 7364, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 7647, 5-24-2011) 
ARTICLE 15. - CITY OF KEARNEY ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION CODE 
DIVISION I. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE GENERAL PROVISIONS 

9-1501 - TITLE 
    This Article shall be known, referred to, and cited as the "City of Kearney Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Ordinance." 
9-1502 - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
    The purpose of this Article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the citizens of Kearney through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable required by federal and state law. This Article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this Article are: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges from any user. 
(2)  Prohibit Illicit Connection and Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the City of Kearney's separate storm sewer system. 
(4)  Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 7500, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1503 - JURISDICTION 
    These regulations shall apply to all land located within the City of Kearney, referred to as City. 
9-1504 - CITY POINT OF CONTACT 
    The City's primary point of contact will be the Director of Public Works or his/her designated representative. 
9-1505 - DEFINITIONS 
    ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE: A discharge prohibited by this Article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior occurrence. 
    AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Employees or designees of the City of Kearney designated to enforce this Article. 
    BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving water, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and subsequent amendments thereto. 
    CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to the NPDES Construction Permits. Currently, these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one (1) acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavation and demolition. 
    HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infections characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in Section 9-1521 of this Article. 
    ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the City of Kearney or, any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the City of Kearney. 
    INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
    NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342 (B) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to water of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutions may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, sediments, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so in the same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables, excessive pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coli form and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking areas. 
    STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of uncontaminated water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
(Ord. No. 7500, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1506 - APPLICABILITY 
    This Article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the City of Kearney. 
9-1507 - REFERENCE TO; CONFLICTS 
    In addition to the rules of construction and definitions specified in this Article, the following rules shall be observed in the construction of this Code: 
A.  All references to Chapters, Articles or Sections are to the Chapters, Articles and Sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
B.  If the provisions of different Chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each Chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such Chapter. 
C.  If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same Chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in numerical order shall prevail unless such construction would be inconsistent with the meaning of such Chapter. 
9-1508 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION 
    The City Manager or his/her designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the City of Kearney may be delegated in writing by the City Manager of the City of Kearney to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City. 
9-1509 - SEVERABILITY OF PARTS 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
9-1510 - HOLD HARMLESS 
    The standards set for herein and promulgated pursuant to this Article are minimum standards; therefore this Article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the United States caused by said person. The owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of Kearney and its agents, officers, and employees for any and all claims, damages, losses, or expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, that arise out of or allegedly arise out of the design, construction, or maintenance of the systems and facilities described in this agreement that are not due to negligence or omission on the part of the City, its agents, officers, and employees. 
9-1511-9-1520 - RESERVED 
DIVISION II. - DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS 

9-1521 - PROHIBITION OF ILLEGAL DISCHARGES 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standard, other than stormwater. 
    The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this Article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active ground water dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one (1) PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the City of Kearney as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the City of Kearney prior to the time of test. 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under a NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(Ord. No. 7500, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1522 - PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS 
    The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
    This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
9-1523 - WATERCOURSE PROTECTION 
    No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drain system, or water of the United States, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, excessive sediment, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in streets in proper covered waste receptacles for the purpose of collection are exempted from this prohibition. All waste containers must be solid and able to retain all accumulated liquids. The discharge of accumulated liquids onto paved surfaces is prohibited. Waste receptacles shall be equipped with covers to prevent rainwater accumulation. 
9-1524 - DISCHARGES IN VIOLATION OF INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY NPDES STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity, NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City of Kearney prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. 
(Ord. No. 7500, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1525-9-1535 - RESERVED 
DIVISION III. - REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 

9-1536 - REQUIREMENTS TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 
    If requested, the City of Kearney will provide guidance on Best Management Practices applicable to common activities, operations or facilities which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or water courses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 7500, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1537 - REQUIREMENT TO ELIMINATE ILLEGAL DISCHARGES 
    The City of Kearney may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the effective date of this Article; and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges. 
9-1538 - STREAM BANK PROTECTION 
    Every person owning property, through which a watercourse passes, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actual necessary for maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property. 
9-1539 - REQUIREMENT TO MONITOR AND ANALYZE 
    The City of Kearney may require by written notice of requirement that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illegal discharges, and/or non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system or waters of the United States, to undertake at said person's expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the City of Kearney as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 7500, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1540 - NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of the law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the City's storm sewer system, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. Said person shall notify the City of Kearney in person, by phone or by facsimile no later than twenty-four (24) hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Director of Public Works or his/her designee within three (3) business days of the phone call or by personal notification. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial of industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the action taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
    In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(Ord. No. 7500, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1541-9-1550 - RESERVED 
DIVISION IV. - INSPECTION AND MONITORING 

9-1551 - RIGHT OF ENTRY 
    Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this Article, or where the City of Kearney has reasonable cause to believe that there exists a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this Article and may contribute to pollution, the City of Kearney or its designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this Article, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises be unoccupied, the City Engineer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Director of Public Works shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
9-1552 - AUTHORITY TO SAMPLE AND TEST 
    During any inspection as provided herein, the City of Kearney or its designee may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. 
9-1553-9-1560 - RESERVED 
DIVISION V. - ENFORCEMENT 

9-1561 - NOTICE OF VIOLATION 
    Whenever the City of Kearney finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Article, the City Engineer may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  The violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
    If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by the City or a contractor designated by the Director of Public Works and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator pursuant to Section 9-1567 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 7500, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1562 - APPEAL 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 9-1565 of this Article, any person receiving a Notice of Violation under Section 9-1561 of this Article may appeal the determination of the City Engineer to the Director of Public Works. The notice of appeal must be received by the Director of Public Works within five (5) days from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of City's receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall be final. 
9-1563 - ABATEMENT BY CITY 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal under Section 9-1562 of this Article, within ten (10) days of the decision of the Director of Public Works upholding the decision of the City Engineer, then the City or a contractor designated by the Director of Public Works shall enter upon the subject private property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or agent in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the City or its designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
9-1564 - CHARGING COST OF ABATEMENT/LIENS 
    Within fifteen (15) days after the City of Kearney taking action to abate a violation, the owner or party in possession of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs incurred in curing the violation. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within ten (10) days to the City of Kearney. If the amount due is not paid within thirty (30) days of the decision of the City of Kearney or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall become liable to the City by reason of such violation, at which time the City may file civil action to collect said costs, plus interest and reasonable attorney's fees. 
9-1565 - URGENCY ABATEMENT 
    The Director of Public Works is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this Article that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public or the environment. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the Director of Public Works, the City of Kearney is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the City of Kearney shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this Section shall not prevent the City from seeking other and further relief authorized under this Article. 
9-1566 - VIOLATION DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored by the City at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the City. 
9-1567 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of Article 15 adopted by the provisions listed within the above paragraphs shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided by Section 1-111 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 7500, 1-13-2009) 
ARTICLE 16. - CONSTRUCTION AND POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER CODE 
DIVISION I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

9-1601 - PURPOSE/INTENT 
    The intent of this Article is to protect and enhance the water quality of local receiving waters in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act and also to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Kearney through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) according to locally approved standards as required by federal and state law. The objectives of this Article are: 
A.  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges from construction activity and development; 
B.  To reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges from construction activity by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land; 
C.  To require the construction of locally-approved, permanent stormwater runoff controls to protect water quality and maintain non-erosive hydrologic conditions downstream of construction activity and development; 
D.  To require responsibility for and long-term maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management; and 
E.  To enable legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1602 - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth in this Section. 
    BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, and drainage from raw materials storage. 
    BUILDER: Shall mean the general contractor responsible for permitting and constructing a structure and associated construction activity. 
    BUILDING PHASE OF DEVELOPMENT: Period of construction activity when a portion(s) of a common plan of development or sale requires a building permit. 
    COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing activities may be taking place at different times, on different schedules, but under one proposed plan which may include, but is not limited to, any announcement or piece of documentation (including a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, computer design, etc.) or physical demarcation (including boundary signs, lot stakes, surveyor markings, etc.) indicating construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
    CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, demolition and other land disturbing actions. 
    CONSTRUCTION SITE: Any location where construction activity occurs. 
    CONTRACTOR: Any person performing or managing construction work at a construction site, including, but not limited to, any construction manager, general contractor or subcontractor, and any person engaged in any one or more of the following: earthwork, pipe work, paving, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, landscaping or material supply. 
    CLEARING: Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. 
    DISTURBED AREA: Area of the lands surface disturbed by any work or activity upon the property by means including, but not limited to, grading; excavating; stockpiling soil, fill, or other materials; clearing; vegetation removal; removal or deposit of any rock, soil, or other materials; or other activities which expose soil. Disturbed area does not include the tillage of land that is zoned for agricultural use. 
    DRAINAGE DESIGN GUIDANCE OR MANUAL: Documentation that references design criteria and guidance by a community for stormwater management. 
    EARTHWORK: The disturbance of soil on a site associated with construction activities. 
    EIGHTIETH (80TH) PERCENTILE RAIN EVENT: A rainfall storm event equivalent to a depth of rainfall which is not exceeded in eighty (80) percent of the historic runoff producing rainfall events. The depth of rainfall to be used shall be that which is identified in the Post Construction Stormwater Management Plan (PCSMP). The depth of rainfall is used in hydrologic calculations to determine the water quality volume or rate of discharge to be controlled for. 
    EROSION: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    EROSION CONTROL: Measures that prevent soil erosion to the maximum extent practicable. 
    EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A plan that indicates the specific measures and sequencing to be used for controlling sediment and erosion on a development site during construction activity according to locally approved standards, specification, and guidance. 
    FINAL DRAINAGE PLAN: A plan that indicates the characteristics of the complete project. The plan will also indicate the future conditions post-construction BMPs will be maintained under. 
    FINAL STABILIZATION: When all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and vegetative cover has been established with a uniform density of at least seventy (70) percent of pre-disturbance levels, or equivalent permanent, physical erosion reduction methods have been employed. For purposes of this Article, establishment of a vegetative cover capable of providing erosion control equivalent to pre-existing conditions at the site is considered final stabilization. 
    GRADING: Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
    LAND DEVELOPMENT: Any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
    LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY: Any land development that may result in soil erosion from wind, water and/or ice and the movement of sediments into or upon waters, lands, or right-of-way 
    MS4 BOUNDARY: This area is defined as the Urbanized Area map boundary prepared by the U.S. Census Bureau. This is the minimum boundary adopted by the EPA for Phase II communities as part of the MS4 program. 
    MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, catch basins, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage ditches/channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by the EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) i.e. Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the State. 
    NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    OPERATOR: The individual who has day-to-day supervision and control of activities occurring at the construction site. This can be the owner, the developer, the general contractor or the agent of one of these parties. It is anticipated that at different phases of a construction project, different types of parties will satisfy the definition of "operator" and the pertinent portions of any applicable permit authorization from the State of Nebraska will be transferred as the roles change. 
    OWNER: The person who owns a facility, development, part of a facility, or land. 
    PERSON: Means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation, cooperative, limited liability company or other entity recognized by law. 
    PHASING: Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase before the clearing of the next. 
    POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coli form and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; wastes and residues that result from mobile washing operations; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    POLLUTION: The presence in waters of the State of any substances, contaminants, pollutants, or manmade or man-induced impairment of waters or alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water in quantities or at levels which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life, or property or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation unless authorized by applicable law. 
    POST-CONSTRUCTION: The general time period referenced in perpetuity from the approval for final acceptance of the construction phase of any construction activity. 
    POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The management of stormwater for a period of time in perpetuity from approval for final acceptance of the construction phase of any construction activity. The management of stormwater includes the use of STFs that meet minimum site performance standards in accordance with Kearney's MS4 Permit. STFs are intended to provide stormwater treatment during this time period and are considered functional after vegetation has been established. 
    POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: Documentation supporting analysis, design, maintenance and inspection of STFs installed on a site in order to meet minimum site performance standards in accordance with Kearney's MS4 Permit. 
    POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM: Municipality controlled program that stems from requirements in the MS4 Permit. This is the guiding document behind designs for the required STFs and Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan for each site. 
    PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel or tract of land, or portion thereof, whether improved, or unimproved, and including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    RECEIVING WATER: Any water of the State of Nebraska, including any and all surface waters that are contained in or flow in or through the State of Nebraska, all watercourses, even if they are usually dry, irrigation ditches that receive municipal stormwater, and storm sewer systems owned by other entities. 
    REDEVELOPMENT: Any construction, alteration or improvement performed on a previously developed site. 
    SEDIMENT: Soil (or mud) that has been disturbed or eroded and transported naturally by water, wind or gravity, or mechanically by any person. 
    SEDIMENT CONTROL: Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
    SEVENTIETH (70TH) PERCENTILE RAIN EVENT: A rainfall storm event equivalent to a depth of rainfall which is not exceeded in seventy (70) percent of the historic runoff producing rainfall events. The depth of rainfall to be used shall be that which is identified in the Post Construction Stormwater Management Plan (PCSMP). The depth of rainfall is used in hydrologic calculations to determine the water quality volume or rate of discharge to be controlled for. 
    SITE: The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
    SPILL: A release of solid or liquid material, which may cause pollution of the MS4 or waters of the State. 
    STABILIZATION: The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
    STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A document which describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person during the construction activities, which identifies sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters. 
    STORMWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES (STFS): Permanent Best Management Practices (BMPs) put in place to provide control and treatment of stormwater runoff after construction for land development is complete. These facilities are physical in nature and sometimes referred to as "Structural" BMPs. 
    SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT: Includes activities associated with the platting of any parcel of land into two or more lots and all construction activity taking place thereon. 
    UTILITY AGENCY/CONTRACTOR: Private utility companies, public utility departments, or other utility providers contractors working for such private utility companies, or public entity utility departments, or other utility providers engaged in the construction or maintenance of utility lines and services, including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas, telephone, television and communication services. 
    WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
    WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel through which water can flow. 
    WATERS OF THE STATE: Any and all surface and subsurface waters that are contained in or flow in or through the State of Nebraska. The definition includes all watercourses, even if they are usually dry. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1603 - LIABILITY 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this Article are minimum standards that shall apply to all construction activities which require an approval according to Section 9-1606 of this Article. Compliance with this Article does not act as a waiver or defense to any person for operating a construction site in a manner that allows or causes stormwater contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. The owner and operator of any approved construction activity shall be responsible for ensuring all activity; including the actions of all contractors, subcontractors, trade professionals, delivery personnel and others present at a construction site; are in compliance with all requirements of this Article. An owner shall be responsible for notifying the City when any transfer of ownership and liability under this Article occurs. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1604 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION 
    The City shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the City may be delegated by the Mayor or City Manager to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010) 
9-1605 - SEVERABILITY 
    The provisions of this Article are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Article or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010) 
9-1606 - APPLICABILITY 
A.  This Article shall be applicable to all construction activity and land developments requiring; including, but not limited to site plan applications, subdivision applications, building applications, and right-of-way applications from the City, unless exempt pursuant to Paragraph B of this Section below. These provisions apply to all portions of any common plan of development or sale which would cause the disturbance of at least one acre of soil even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
B.  The following activities are exempt from this Article: 
(1)  Any emergency activity that is necessary for the immediate protection of life, property, or natural resources; and 
(2)  Construction activity that provides maintenance and repairs performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of a facility. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010) 
9-1607 - PROHIBITIONS 
A.  Except as provided in Article 15 entitled "City of Kearney Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Code" of Chapter 9 of the City Code, it is unlawful for any person to discharge non-stormwater into the City MS4. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person or representative at a construction site to cause or allow to be caused the impact, damage and/or removal of any approved stormwater pollution control measure without the owner's knowledge and consent. 
C.  Stormwater discharges from construction activities shall not cause or threaten to cause pollution, contamination or degradation of waters of the State. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1608-9-1615 - RESERVED 
DIVISION II. - CONSTRUCTION 

9-1616 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES 
A.  Except for construction activity relating to the Building Phase of Development, the City shall require proof of coverage by a NDEQ general permit authorization for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Sites before providing approval for construction activity covered in Section 9-1606 of this Article. 
B.  A pre-construction meeting shall be scheduled with an appointed official with the City to review the installation of all temporary erosion and sediment control BMPs included on the approved erosion and sediment control plan at least two (2) business days before any construction activities are scheduled to start. 
C.  Solid waste, industrial waste, yard waste and any other pollutants or waste on any construction site shall be controlled through the use of BMPs. Waste or recycling containers shall be provided and maintained by the owner or contractor on construction sites where there is the potential for release of waste. Uncontained waste that may blow, wash or otherwise be released from the site is prohibited. Sanitary waste facilities shall be provided and maintained in a secured manner. 
D.  Ready-mixed concrete, or any materials resulting from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing such materials or used in transporting or applying ready-mixed concrete, shall not be allowed to discharge from any construction site. 
E.  Cover or perimeter control shall be applied within fourteen (14) days to any soil stockpiles, which will remain undisturbed for longer than thirty (30) calendar days. 
F.  Disturbed soil shall be managed with BMPs that are adequately designed, installed, and maintained according to locally-approved technical standards, specifications and guidance for the duration of the construction activity to minimize erosion and contain sediment within the construction limits. 
G.  Sediment tracked or discharged onto public right-of-way shall be removed immediately. 
H.  Bulk storage structures for petroleum products and other chemicals shall have adequate protection to contain all spills and prevent any spilled material from entering the MS4 or waters of the State. 
I.  Temporary BMPs shall be removed and disturbed areas shall be stabilized with permanent BMPs at the conclusion of all approved construction activity. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1617 - REQUIREMENTS FOR THE BUILDING PHASE OF DEVELOPMENT 
    Any person who engages in construction activity is responsible for compliance with this Article and all applicable terms and conditions of the approved construction activity and SWPPP as it relates to the building phase of development. The following information shall be included with the application for a building permit and be submitted to the Chief Building Official: 
A.  Either the legal description and NPDES permit number for the Larger Common Plan of Development; OR 
B.  The location of the property where the building phase of development is to occur; AND 
C.  A certification that the building phase of development for the property described on the application for a building permit will be conducted in conformance with this Article and the Construction Activity SWPPP. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010) 
9-1618 - CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) 
A.  A SWPPP shall be prepared and updated in accordance with locally-approved technical standards, specification, and guidance for construction activity within the City and shall include an erosion and sediment control plan for land disturbance. 
B.  The SWPPP shall include a description of all potential pollution sources, temporary and permanent BMPs that will be implemented at the site as approved by the City. 
C.  The erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the City for review with any application covered in Section 9-1606 of this Article. 
D.  Land disturbing activities may not proceed until approval of the erosion and sediment control plan is provided by the City. 
E.  The owner or operator is required to have a copy of the SWPPP readily available for review with content that reflects the current condition of the construction activity and all records that demonstrate compliance and are required by this Article. 
F.  The SWPPP shall include a description of routine site inspections. 
(1)  The owner or their representative shall inspect all BMPs at intervals of no greater than fourteen (14) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours after any precipitation event of at least one half (1/2) inch. 
(2)  Inspections of BMPs shall be conducted by an individual who person knowledgeable in the principles and practice of erosion and sediment controls who possesses the skills to assess conditions at the construction site that could impact stormwater quality and to assess the effectiveness of any erosion and sediment control measures selected to control the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction activity. 
(3)  Inspection reports shall provide the name and qualification of the inspector, date of the evaluation, risks to stormwater quality identified, and all corrective actions necessary to prevent stormwater pollution. 
(4)  The owner or operator of a construction activity may be requested to submit copies of inspection reports for review on a periodic basis by the City. 
G.  Based on inspections performed by the owner, operator, authorized City personnel, State or Federal regulators modifications to the SWPPP will be necessary if at any time the specified BMPs do not meet the objectives of this Article. In this case, the owner shall meet with an appointed official of the City to determine the appropriate modifications. All required modifications shall be completed within seven (7) calendar days of receiving notice of inspection findings, and shall be recorded in the SWPPP. 
H.  The owner or operator of a construction site shall be responsible for amending the SWPPP whenever there is a significant change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the potential for discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or receiving waters, or if the SWPPP proves to be ineffective in achieving the general objectives of controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with land disturbance. 
I.  Records of inspection are to be maintained with the SWPPP for the life of the project. Inspection records are to be available to City inspectors upon request. Delay in providing a copy of the SWPPP or any requested records shall constitute a violation of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1619 - REQUIREMENTS FOR UTILITY CONSTRUCTION 
A.  Utility agencies or their representatives shall develop and implement BMPs to prevent the discharge of pollutants on any site of utility construction within the City. The City may require additional BMPs on utility construction activity. If the utility construction disturbs greater than one (1) acre, the utility agency must comply with the requirements of Section 9-1616 and Section 9-1617 of this Article. 
B.  Utility agencies or their representatives shall implement BMPs to prevent the release of sediment from utility construction sites. Disturbed areas shall be minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed and construction site exits shall be managed to prevent sediment tracking. Sediment tracked onto public right-of-way shall be removed immediately. 
C.  Prior to entering a construction site or subdivision development, utility agencies or their representatives shall obtain and comply with any approved erosion and sediment control plans for the project. Any impact to construction and post-construction BMPs resulting from utility construction shall be evaluated prior to disturbance by the developer and utility company. Repairs to the disturbed BMPs must be completed within forty-eight (48) hours, by individuals agreed upon during the design phase or at a preconstruction meeting. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010) 
9-1620-9-1625 - RESERVED 
DIVISION III. - POST-CONSTRUCTION 

9-1626 - POST-CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENT OF PERMANENT BMPS 
A.  Land development that meets the requirements of Section 9-1606 of this Article must address stormwater runoff quality through the use of permanent BMPs. Permanent BMPs shall be provided for in the drainage plan for any subdivision plat, annexation plat, development agreement, subdivision agreement or other local development plan. 
B.  Structural BMPs located on private property shall be owned and operated by the owner(s) of the property on which the STF is located; unless the City agrees in writing that a person or entity other than the owner shall own or operate such STF. As a condition of approval of the STF, the owner shall also agree to maintain the STF in perpetuity to its design capacity unless or until the City shall relieve the property owner of that responsibility in writing. The obligation to maintain the STF shall be memorialized on the subdivision plat, annexation plat, development agreement, subdivision agreement or other form acceptable to the City and shall be recorded with the City of Kearney Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1627 - CERTIFICATION OF PERMANENT BMPS 
    Upon completion of a project, and before a Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted, the City shall be provided a written certification stating that the completed project is in compliance with the approved Final Drainage Plan. All applicants are required to submit "as built" plans for any permanent BMPs once final construction is completed and must be certified by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Nebraska. A final inspection by the City, or City appointed personnel, of all post-construction STFs shall be required before a Certificate of Occupancy will be issued or any public infrastructure is accepted. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1628 - ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF PERMANENT BMPS 
A.  The owner of site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the permanent BMPs. 
B.  Permanent BMPs included in a Final Drainage Plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and to ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this Article. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1629 - TIMELINE FOR POST-CONSTRUCTION CRITERIA IMPLEMENTATION 
    Implementation for the following timeline will be after August 31, 2017: 
A.  Proposed Redevelopment: (Applies to lands which have been platted and previously built upon) Stormwater Treatment Facilities must be accounted for on any proposed redevelopment project if it has not already submitted a complete preliminary plat or building permit for approval. Proposed redevelopment projects that are exempt from treatment are those that have already submitted a complete plat, preliminary plat or building permit for approval. Any non-exempt projects must account for a seventieth (70th) Percentile Rain Event. 
B.  Proposed New Development: (Applies to lands which are being platted for development or have been platted but have not previously been built upon) Stormwater Treatment Facilities must be accounted for on any proposed new development project that has not already submitted a complete preliminary plat or building permit for approval. Proposed new development projects that are exempt from treatment are those that have already submitted a complete final plat, preliminary plat or building permit for approval. Any non-exempt projects must account for an eightieth (80th) Percentile Rain Event. 
(Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1630-9-1632 - RESERVED 
DIVISION IV. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS, SUBMISSIONS, INSPECTION AND MONITORING 

9-1633 - TECHNICAL STANDARDS, SPECIFICATIONS, AND GUIDANCE 
    All BMPs designed to meet the requirements of this Article shall reference the appropriate technical standards, specifications and guidance as follows: 
A.  City Standards and Specifications for Construction. 
B.  Nebraska Department of Roads Drainage Design and Erosion Control Standards, Specifications and Guidance. 
C.  Any other alternative methodology approved by the City of Kearney Engineering Department, which is demonstrated to be effective. 
D.  Further description of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Program can be found at the City of Kearney Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1634 - SUBMISSIONS FROM THE GENERAL PUBLIC 
    The City will consider information from the public as it pertains to the implementation and enforcement of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010) 
9-1635 - AUTHORIZATION OF ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL 
    The City shall designate appointed personnel with authority to conduct inspections, issue notices of violations and implement other enforcement actions under this Article as provided by the City. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010) 
9-1636 - RIGHT OF ENTRY AND SAMPLING 
    Whenever the City has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this Article, the owner or operator shall provide access to the premises at any reasonable time to determine if there exists an actual or potential violation requirements of this Article. In the event that the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter has been made, the City is hereby empowered to seek assistance from a court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
    The City shall have the right to employ such devices and undertake such an inspection, on or off premises, as are necessary to determine whether the requirements of this Article are met. The inspection may include, but is not limited to the following: sampling of any discharge and/or process waters, the taking of photographs, interviewing staff on alleged violations, and access to any and all facilities or areas within the premises that may have any effect on the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010) 
9-1637-9-1642 - RESERVED 
DIVISION V. - ENFORCEMENT 

9-1643 - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Article. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article, shall be subject to one or more of the enforcement actions outlined in this Section. Any violation or threatened violation may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
    In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the City representative is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The City is authorized to seek costs of abatement as outlined below in Section 9-1643 F of this Article. 
A.  Compliance Directive. In addition to any other remedy available to the City, City inspectors may issue compliance directives at the time of inspection to require a person to implement actions that will correct any violation of this Article. 
B.  Notice of Violation. Whenever the City finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Article, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
If abatement of a violation or the restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to complete the remediation or restoration within the established deadline, the work may be done by the authorized enforcement agency or its designee and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
C.  Appeal of Notice of Violation. Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within ten (10) days from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or its designee shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. 
D.  Enforcement Measures after Appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten (10) days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency and its designees are authorized to enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the City or designated agent to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
E.  Stop Work Order. Whenever the City determines that any activity is occurring which is not in compliance with the requirements of this Article, the City may order such activity stopped upon service of written notice upon the owner and/or operator responsible for or conducting such activity. Such owner and/or operator shall immediately stop all activity until authorized in writing by the City to proceed. If the appropriate owner and/or operator cannot be located, the notice to stop shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the area where the activity is occurring. The notice shall state the nature of the violation. The notice shall not be removed until the violation has been cured or authorization to remove the notice has been issued by the City. It shall be unlawful for any owner and/or operator to fail to comply with a stop work order. 
F.  Cost of Abatement of the Violation. If the authorized enforcement agency abates a violation, then within ten (10) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. Such notice shall be given by personal delivery or by mail to the last known address of the owner as shown in the records of the County Assessor. Such notice shall be effective upon the date of mailing or personal delivery. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within ten (10) days of the effective date of the notice. If no protest is filed, then the charges shall become due and payable on the date set forth in the notice, which date shall be after the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, and such charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. In the event a protest is filed, a hearing on such protest shall be held before the appropriate authority or its designee within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the written protest. If any charges are upheld upon completion of such hearing, then such charges shall become due and payable ten (10) days after the issuance of the order upon such protest and if not timely paid, such charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Such charges may also be recovered in a civil action against the owner or other person in control of the premises for which such charges were incurred, and any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be liable to the City for all costs, fees, charges and expenses, including but not limited to administrative costs and legal fees and costs, by reason of such violation. 
G.  Civil Penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the Notice of Violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days after the City has taken the actions described above, the City may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000), depending on the severity of the violation, for each day the violation remains unremedied after the receipt of the Notice of Violation. 
H.  Criminal Penalties; Enforcement Costs. Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000) per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed one (1) year. 
The City may recover all attorneys' fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this Article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
I.  Injunctive Relief. The authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining any person from undertaking any activities which would result in a violation or continued violation of this Article, and may seek mandatory injunctive relief compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of any violation of this Article. 
J.  Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided herein, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, or may be subject of a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance. 
K.  Remedies Not Exclusive. Except as expressly provided above, the remedies in this Section are cumulative and the exercise of any one (1) or more remedies shall not prejudice any other remedies that may otherwise be pursued for a violation of this Article. The remedies listed in this Article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-2017) 
9-1644 - ACTION WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE 
    Any person who violates a prohibition or fails to meet a requirement of this Article will be subject, without prior notice, to one (1) or more of the enforcement actions identified Section 9-1643 of this Article, when attempts to contact the person have failed and the enforcement actions are necessary to stop an actual or potential discharge which presents or may present imminent danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010) 
9-1645 - OTHER LEGAL ACTION 
    Notwithstanding any other remedies or procedures available to the City, if any person discharges into the MS4 in a manner that is contrary to the provisions of this Article, the City Attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and equitable relief including damages and costs in the County Court. The City Attorney may seek a preliminary or permanent injunction or both which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the discharger. 
(Ord. No. 7573, 2-23-2010) 
Chapter 10 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

10-101 - UTILITIES GENERALLY; PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES, ETC., FOR PUBLIC UTILITIES SYSTEMS 
    The City Manager is empowered to purchase such supplies, equipment, tools, machinery and materials as may be required for the efficient operation and maintenance of the public utilities systems, in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1958, 2.29; Code 1980, 34-1) 
10-102 - DETERMINATION OF RATES AND CHARGES 
    The rates and charges to be imposed for the use or consumption of water service, sewer service, garbage and trash collection or any other utility service offered by the City shall be as determined by ordinance of the Council from time to time and on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Code 1958, §2.30, 2.31, 26.5-26.8, 31.12-1-31.12-4, 31.13, 31.13-1; Ord. No. 2679, 7-26-77; Ord. No. 2680, 7-26-77; Ord. No. 3355, 1, 3-10-81; Code 1980, 34-2) 
10-103 - SERVICE COMPANY POLES, WIRES, MAINS, ETC. 
    Poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines and other appurtenances of public service companies shall be erected or located over, upon or under the streets, alleys and common grounds, or elsewhere, within the City, only after application shall have been made to the City Manager and permission in writing shall have been given by him/her to do so. Public service companies heretofore or hereafter granted right-of-way for the erection and maintenance of poles, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines and wires, and all appurtenances thereto, for the purposes of transacting their business upon, under and over the streets, alleys and public grounds of the City, shall at all times, when requested by the City Manager, erect, locate or relocate their poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines and other appurtenances to such places and in such manner as designated by the Manager. Such poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines and other appurtenances shall be removed or relocated by such companies at their own expense when requested to do so by the City Manager. Whenever it becomes necessary for the City to use the ground where the poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines and other appurtenances are located, or whenever reasonable means of ingress or egress to private or public property or the public safety or convenience requires the relocation of the poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines or other appurtenances of public service companies which now occupy any portion of the public street or alley from lot line to lot line, the City Manager shall notify the company or its agent in the City and the company shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after receiving such notice, at their own expense, cause the poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines or other appurtenances to be removed. The City Manager shall designate some place as close as possible where such poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines or other appurtenances may be reset or placed. All poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines or other appurtenances shall be erected in such a manner that they will not interfere with the water system, the sewer system, or the wires, lines, equipment or apparatus on the poles and arms of any public utility of the City, located on the same street or alley or with the travel through the streets and alleys of the City, or with the buildings now erected or which may be hereafter erected. When permitted, such poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines or other appurtenances shall be confined to the alleys where possible. 
(Code 1958, 2.63; Code 1980, 34-3) 
10-104 - CONNECTIONS TO WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS 
    All premises, including commercial or industrial businesses, or premises which are habitable or used for human occupancy within the City limits shall be directly connected to a public water distribution main and the public sewer system where these mains are available within three hundred (300) feet of any part of the premises upon which the occupied premise or habitable dwelling is located. 
    Water or sewer distribution connections to abutting lots or properties, or to other separate occupied premises or habitable dwellings are prohibited, unless specifically approved by the Council. 
(Ord. No. 3888, 1, 1-27-87; Code 1980, 34-4) 
ARTICLE 2. - SEWERS 

10-201 - CONSTRUCTION AND COST OF SEWER SERVICE BY CITY 
    The City, through the City Manager, reserves the right to elect to construct all sewer service in public streets and alleys or other public grounds in the City between the main sewer and the applicant's property line. Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer main or line which carries sewage and excludes storm, surface and ground water. The City will maintain, at its expense, the sewer main. It will be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain, repair and replace the sewer service between the sewer main and the occupied premises or habitable dwelling. 
(Code 1958, 26.1; Code 1980, 34-16; Ord. No. 6087, 3-12-96) 
10-202 - STORM SEWERS AND DRAINAGE DITCHES; OBSTRUCTING WITH RUBBISH, ETC. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or cause to be obstructed any public drainage ditch or storm sewer within the City, by placing or dumping therein any dirt, rubbish, litter, trash, grass clippings or any other matter whatsoever. 
(Code 1958, 26.2; Code 1980, 34-17) 
10-203 - STORM SEWERS AND DRAINAGE DITCHES; CONNECTING SANITARY SEWER TO STORM SEWER UNLAWFUL 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any private sanitary sewer or drain with any public drainage ditch or storm sewer within the City or to permit any such private sanitary sewer or drain previously connected with any public drainage ditch or storm sewer to remain connected therewith. It is unlawful to connect roof drains or downspouts, interior and exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater, cooling water, basement dewatering sump pumps, swimming pool discharge, or other non-contact or non-process water, either directly or indirectly, to the public sanitary sewer system. It is unlawful to discharge toxic waste or other pollutants in amounts or concentrations that endanger the public safety or the physical integrity of the wastewater treatment plant, or cause the violation of the effluent limits at the wastewater treatment plant or to preclude the selection of the most cost-effective alternative for wastewater treatment and sludge disposal. Private sewer services and their connections, and new sewer mains and their connections to existing City sewer mains, must meet the requirements of the specifications of the City Utility Department Design Manual. 
(Code 1958, 26.3; Code 1980, 34-18; Ord. No. 6087, 3-12-96) 
10-203.1 - SEWERS; NEW INFLOW SOURCES PROHIBITED 
A.  No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, interior and exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
B.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
C.  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the City Utilities Department. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the City Utilities Department to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 6087, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-17) 
10-203.2 - SEWERS; PROPER DESIGN 
A.  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City Utilities Department. 
B.  There shall be two (2) types of sewer permits: (a) for tapping a sanitary sewer, and (b) for tapping a storm sewer. In either case, the owner or his/her agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the City Building and Zoning Division. A permit and inspection fee for a sewer permit shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed. 
C.  All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
D.  Old sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the City Utilities Department, to meet all requirements of this ordinance. 
E.  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of Code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
F.  Whenever possible, the sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
G.  The connection of the sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the S.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the City Utilities Department before installation. 
H.  The applicant for the sewer permit shall notify the City Building and Zoning Division when the sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the City Building and Zoning Division or their representative. 
I.  All excavations for sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. 
(Ord. No. 6087, 3-12-96) 
10-203.3 - SEWERS; TOXIC WASTES PROHIBITED 
A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
1.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
2.  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gasses in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters or at the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
3.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
4.  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shaving, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, mild containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
B.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the City Utilities Department, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the City Utilities Department will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
1.  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
2.  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and/or similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the City Utilities Department for such materials. 
3.  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the City Utilities Department as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, Federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
4.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the City Utilities Department in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations. 
5.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
C.  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Subsection B of this Section, and which, in the judgment of the City Utilities Department, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life to constitute a public nuisance, the City Utilities Department may: 
1.  Reject the wastes; 
2.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
3.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
4.  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of Section 10-207 of this Article. 
    If the City Utilities Department permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Utilities Department, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. No. 6087, 3-12-96) 
10-204 - CHARGES; PURPOSE 
    The Council of the City hereby finds and determines: The City has constructed and owns and operates a sanitary sewerage system and plant for the treatment, purification and disposal in a sanitary manner of the liquid and solid wastes, sewage and night soil from the City and adjacent territory and it will be necessary from time to time to extend and improve the system and plant. For the purpose of operating, maintaining, extending and improving the sewerage system and plant and paying the principal and interest on the bonds issued by the City from time to time as authorized by Section 18, Article 5 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, as amended, it is necessary to establish and collect the rental or use charges for the use of its sewerage system as provided by this Article. 
(Code 1958, 26.4; Code 1980, 34-26) 
10-205 - CHARGES; COLLECTION; RECONNECTION CHARGES 
    The rental or use rates prescribed by this Article shall be charged to each property served by the City's sewerage system and shall be a lien upon the premises or real property served and may be collected either from the owner of the property or the user requesting the service, and the water service to such user or property may, except for domestic subscribers who are entitled to notice and hearing, if requested, in accordance with Section 70-1605, et seq. of the Nebraska Revised Statutes prior to disconnection, be disconnected until the rental charges are paid in full. The rental and use charges shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same officers as water charges are collected by the City. If the rental or use charge is not paid within twenty (20) days after it is billed to the user, it shall be deemed delinquent; and the water service to such user or property, after notice and opportunity for hearing, may be discontinued until the rental charges are paid in full. If water service is discontinued by reason of delinquency, a charge as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be made to the Director of Finance and Administration for the reconnection during normal working hours. A charge as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be made for the reconnection after hours, weekends and holidays. In addition thereto, all delinquent rental or use charges shall be certified to the Director of Finance and Administration for levy and collection thereof according to the provisions of Section 16-682 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes or as otherwise prescribed by law for delinquent and unpaid assessments. When a City employee disconnects a customer's utilities for nonpayment, there shall be charged a reconnection fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule if reconnection is made during working hours (8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday), and a reconnection fee if reconnection is made between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, all day Saturday or Sunday, or a legal holiday. This charge, as well as the bill, must be paid before service is reconnected. 
(Code 1958, 26.9; Ord. No. 5033, 1, 7-25-89; Code 1980, 34-27; Ord. No. 6087, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
10-206 - CHARGES; USE OF FUNDS 
    All money collected under this Article shall be placed in a "sewer revenue account" within a separate fund to be known as the "sewer revenue fund" and used to service and retire such sewer revenue bonds as may from time to time be issued by the City and secured by a pledge of such funds and to defray the expense of administering the terms and provisions of this Article and for the construction, extension, maintenance, operation and all purposes necessary and incidental to the sewerage system of the City, including its disposal plants or for a reserve fund for future maintenance or construction of new systems. 
(Code 1958, 26.10; Code 1980, 34-28) 
10-207 - SEWER USE CHARGES 
A.  The following rates shall be levied against each property served directly or indirectly by the sanitary sewerage system of the City: 
1.  Residential Units. Each and every consumer of City water used exclusively for residential purposes shall be billed a minimum monthly charge as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule for the use of the sanitary sewer system. In addition to the minimum monthly charge, each and every consumer of City water used exclusively for residential purposes shall be charged a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per each one hundred (100) cubic feet of water used based on the average water usage for that property as shown by the water billing rendered during the months of January, February and March, last preceding the date of billing for sewer charges for the use of the sanitary sewer system. Until consumptive history is properly established for previously unoccupied residential properties, or if the metering does not allow the establishment of water usage for individual residences, the monthly charge shall be set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
2.  Multiple Residential Units and Apartment Houses. Each and every multiple residential unit or apartment house using the sanitary sewerage system shall be billed a minimum monthly charge as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per water meter for the use of the sanitary sewer system. In addition to the minimum monthly charge per water meter, each and every consumer using the sanitary sewerage system exclusively for multiple residential or apartment house purposes shall be charged a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per each one hundred (100) cubic feet of water used based on the average water usage for that property as shown by the water billing rendered during the months of January, February and March, last preceding the date of billing for sewer charges for the use of the sanitary sewer system. Until consumptive history is properly established for previously unoccupied multiple residential units or apartment houses, or if the metering does not allow the establishment of water usage for individual multiple residential units or apartment houses, the monthly charge shall be as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per each multiple residential unit or apartment unit. 
3.  Commercial and Industrial Units. Each and every commercial or industrial unit using the sanitary sewerage system shall be billed a minimum monthly charge as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. In addition to the minimum monthly charge, each commercial or industrial unit shall be charged a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per each one hundred (100) cubic feet of water used. For units not serviced by a water meter, the rate will be based on the size of water service 
4.  Manufactured Home Courts. Each and every manufactured home court using the sanitary sewerage system shall be billed a minimum monthly charge as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per water meter for the use of the sanitary sewer system. In addition to the minimum monthly charge per water meter, each and every consumer using the sanitary sewerage system exclusively for manufactured home court purposes shall be charged a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per each one hundred (100) cubic feet of water used based on the average water usage for that property as shown by the water billing rendered during the months of January, February and March, last preceding the date of billing for sewer charges for the use of the sanitary sewer system. Until consumptive history is properly established for previously unoccupied manufactured home courts, or if the metering does not allow the establishment of water usage for the manufactured home court, the monthly charge shall be as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per each available space. 
5.  Industrial - High Volume, Low Strength. Each and every high volume, low strength industrial unit using the sanitary sewerage system shall be billed a minimum monthly charge as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. In addition to the minimum monthly charge, each commercial or industrial unit shall be charged a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per each one hundred (100) cubic feet of water used. For units not serviced by a water meter, the rate will be based on actual wastewater flow through sewer flow meters as defined in Paragraph F of this Section. 
B.  Special Contracts. A special contract may be negotiated between the large users and the City. The contract shall be based on both the quantity and strength of the waste emptied into the City's sanitary sewer system. 
C.  Service Outside City Limits. Connections with the City's sanitary sewer system outside the corporate limits of the City shall be made only when permission is granted by the City. 
D.  Exceptions to Rates. Exceptions shall be made to the above schedule of rates in the following cases: 
1.  Where, in the judgment of the City, special conditions affecting the real property of any user served by the sanitary sewerage system of the City shall exist to the extent that the rental charges set out in the above schedule will result in an inequitable or unfair charge for either the City or the property, the City may, based upon the facts and circumstances of each individual case, levy a special rental or use charge applicable to that particular property. 
2.  No rental or use charge shall be levied against any property not served directly or indirectly by the sanitary sewerage system of the City. If any user discharges only a part of waste produced on the property connected to the City's sanitary sewerage system into the City's sanitary sewerage system and disposes of the balance in some other way, the user shall be charged only for that portion of the waste discharged into the City's sanitary sewerage system. 
E.  Delinquency Fee. If the rates or charges billed against each property served by the sanitary sewerage system of the City are not paid to the City of Kearney by the due date as indicated on the utility bill, such bill shall become subject to a delinquency fee of five percent (5%) of the total bill. 
F.  Sewer Flow Meters Required. Wherever dischargers to the sanitary sewer system use private wells for process water or claim a consumptive use of City water, the City will require that the owner(s) meter the discharge with equipment meeting City specifications. Said meter reading will be used to calculate the monthly sewer use charge. The flow metering equipment will be owned by the discharger and will be purchased, maintained and replaced at the discharger's expense. If the discharger fails to maintain or replace the metering equipment, the City will maintain or replace the equipment and will charge the discharger the costs of the maintenance or replacement. 
G.  Toxic Pollutant Discharges. Dischargers of toxic pollutants will be charged for the increased operation and maintenance costs incurred because of the toxic pollutants. 
H.  Wastewater Treatment Charges. The City will notify each user, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill or other means, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. 
I.  User Charge System; Precedence. All parties are hereby notified that the user charge system takes precedence over any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts between the City and users (including industrial users, special districts, other municipalities, or Federal agencies or installations) which are inconsistent with the requirements of Section 204(b)(1)(A) of the Clean Water Act and the corresponding regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3352, 1, 3-10-81; Ord. No. 3561, 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 3594, §1, 3, 5-26-83; Ord. No. 3855, 1, 6-24-86; Code 1980, 34-29; Ord. No. 5536, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 5864, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 6087, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 6600, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 7259, 5-9-2006; Ord. No. 7753, 10-23-2012) 
10-208 - HOOK-UP FEE FOR UNASSESSED PROPERTIES 
    All property owners requesting sewer service for properties abutting or adjacent to a sewer main constructed as part of a sewer main connection district and for which the special benefits have been certified by resolution to the Register of Deeds of Buffalo County shall pay the connection fee in the amount of the benefits. All property owners requesting sewer service for properties which do not abut a sewer main and have not been assessed or been included in a sewer district but want to connect to a sewer main through a private sewer service shall pay a hook-up fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule based upon the present costs of laying and assessing a sewer main to the property in lieu of an assessment and protest right in a properly created district in the future. Where records are incomplete or otherwise unavailable, the City Manager may waive the fee. 
(Ord. No. 6087, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
ARTICLE 3. - WATER 

10-301 - STANDARDS FOR DOMESTIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS 
    All domestic water supply systems shall comply with the standards as set forth by the State of Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and State of Nebraska Department of Health. The use of private wells within the City limits for domestic drinking supplies is prohibited, except when public water supply is not available and upon approval by the City Manager. Connections of private water supplies or services to the City's water system are prohibited. 
(Code 1958, 16.19-1; Code 1980, 34-40) 
10-302 - ORDER PREREQUISITE TO TURNING ON WATER; EXCEPTION 
    Water will not be turned into any house, or service pipe except upon the order of the City Manager, and plumbers are prohibited from turning the water into any service pipe except on such order; provided, that this rule shall not be construed to prevent plumbers admitting water to test pipes, but for that purpose only. 
(Code 1958, 31.1; Code 1980, 34-41) 
10-303 - TAPPING BETWEEN METER AND WATER MAIN 
    No person shall be permitted to have, make or have made, any taps or connections with the service pipe between the meter and the mains. 
(Code 1958, 31.2; Code 1980, 34-42) 
10-304 - ACCESSIBILITY OF METER; RIGHT OF ENTRY 
    The owner or tenant shall provide ready and convenient access to the meter so that it may be easily examined and read, and all consumers of water shall permit duly designated City employees at all hours between seven o'clock (7:00) a.m. and six o'clock (6:00) p.m. to enter their premises or buildings for the purpose of testing any meters or to examine the pipes, meters or other fixtures. All meters of consumers shall be read at a time designated by the City Manager to cover the period in which the water was consumed. 
(Code 1958, 31.3; Code 1980, 34-43) 
10-305 - TAPPING FEES; REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT OF SERVICE 
    The applicant for water service from the water works system of the City shall accompany the application with a tap fee in such sum as the City Manager shall in each case fix, which shall not exceed the actual cost based upon measurement from the center of the street upon which the main is located and which sum shall be paid. The City Manager will tap or cause to be tapped the commercial main to which the applicant's service pipe will be joined. For the tap fee, the City will furnish all material and labor to bring the water service from the commercial main to a point at or near the curb line where the stop box is placed; provided that the above service shall be furnished for the tap fee only in those cases where the applicant's property abuts a street where a commercial main is now laid or is hereafter laid. The applicant at his/her own expense shall build water service from the curb line in and upon his/her own premises and shall keep the same in repair. The City will repair any water service from the commercial main to the curb including the stop box; but when the water service between the commercial main and the lot line shall completely wear out and require replacement on account of ordinary use over a period of years, the consumer shall be liable for the actual cost of such replacement as in the case of a new tap or installation. 
(Code 1958, 31.4; Code 1980, 34-44; Ord. No. 5290, 8-13-91) 
10-306 - SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY 
    Applicants for water service whose property is situated outside the corporate limits of the City shall pay tap and installation fees in such sums as the City Manager shall in each case fix; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to obligate the City to furnish water service to such property unless it is able to do so without curtailing the demands of City consumers or without overloading its pumps, machinery or other equipment. 
(Code 1958, 31.5; Code 1980, 34-45) 
10-307 - CONSTRUCTION OF METER PITS 
    All meter pits, if meters are not set in basements, shall be constructed by the applicant or property owner, at his/her own expense, at a point near the property line and shall be of such design as sanctioned and approved by the City Manager; provided, that all meters shall be set in a position so that the same may be easily read, whether the same be set in a meter pit or in a basement. The City Manager shall, whenever it is inconvenient to make readings of any meter now set or hereafter to be set in a meter pit or in a basement, be empowered to give the property owner twenty (20) days' notice in writing to reset such meter in a position so that the same may be easily read, and if the property owner refuses or neglects to do so, then the City Manager shall set such meter and the cost thereof shall be charged to and paid by such property owner. 
(Code 1958, 31.6; Code 1980, 34-46) 
10-308 - INSTALLATION OF SERVICE WHERE PROPERTY DOES NOT ABUT ON A MAIN 
    If commercial mains are not laid along a street abutting the applicant's property, the applicant, at his/her own expense, under the direction of a licensed plumber shall pay for and install pipes, trenching, labor and attachments to bring water service from the curb line to the streets where the commercial main is laid to and upon the applicant's premises; provided, that the commercial main may be extended into unsupplied territory within or without the corporate limits by means of water extension or connection district, as provided by law, by resolution or ordinance of the Mayor/President and Council; and provided further, that no credit for construction costs of water service to be paid for by the applicant shall hereafter be given any applicant or consumer for any purpose. 
(Code 1958, 31.7; Code 1980, 34-47) 
10-309 - TAPPING MAINS 
    No person except the City Manager or the engineer employed by the City, or a licensed plumber under the supervision of the City Manager, will be permitted, under any circumstances, to tap the mains or distributing pipes, or insert stopcocks or ferrules therein. 
(Code 1958, 31.8; Code 1980, 34-48) 
10-310 - CONNECTION OF BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS TO WATER MAINS 
    Proprietors of business establishments will be permitted to connect such places by larger pipes, with hydrants and hose couplings, with the water mains, at their own expense, upon application to, and under the supervision of, the City Manager, and will be allowed to use the water for fire purposes only; provided, however, that the City shall put in the water meter at the expense of the proprietor; and provided further, that each proprietor shall be charged and pay for all water taken through such meters, except when taken in cases of fire; when used in case of fire the proprietor shall forthwith notify the City Manager of the use of water for such purpose; if such notice is not given as above provided, the proprietor shall be charged and pay for the water taken through such meter at the same rates as are provided for other consumers. 
(Code 1958, 31.9; Code 1980, 34-49) 
10-311 - USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS AND PUBLIC FOUNTAINS 
    All hydrants erected by the City for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to be public hydrants, and no person other than members of the Fire Department, and then only for the use and purpose of the Fire Department, or persons specially authorized by the City Manager, and then only in the exercise of the authority delegated by the City Manager, shall open any of such hydrants, or attempt to draw water from the same, or in any manner interfere with the same. No hydrants, except the public fire hydrant aforesaid or except for public drinking fountains, shall be placed within the limits of any streets; and no drinking fountain shall be so erected which has openings by which it can be used as a source of domestic supply. 
(Code 1958, 31.10; Code 1980, 34-50) 
10-312 - USE OF WATER FOR IRRIGATION, ETC., PURPOSES 
    The City reserves the right to suspend the use of water for sprinkling yards, lawns, gardens or for irrigation purposes, whenever in the opinion of the Council the public exigency may require it. 
(Code 1958, 31.11; Code 1980, 34-51) 
10-313 - REPAIR OF METERS; WATER CHARGES WHEN METER OUT OF ORDER, ETC.; DAMAGE TO METERS 
    Should any meter become out of order or in need of repair and fail to register properly, the consumer will be charged at the average monthly consumption as shown by the meter reading when in good order for the six (6) months previous or fraction thereof; if the same has not been used that long, all such meters shall be repaired by the City Manager; and all meters shall be sealed by the Manager, and it shall be unlawful to break such seal or open any meter except under the direction or upon the order of the City Manager. 
(Code 1958, 31.12; Code 1980, 34-52) 
10-314 - COLLECTION OF CHARGES 
    All water and meter rates shall be charged to and collected from the owner of the premises, and the same shall be a lien on such premises or real estate where used and may be collected by the City at any time after the same becomes due by civil action in the courts. If the rental or use charge is not paid within twenty (20) days after the due date billed to the user, it shall be deemed delinquent, and it shall be the duty of the Utilities Director, subject to the notice and hearing requirements for domestic subscribers, to shut off the water to any and all premises where the bills or charges therefor are delinquent. The Utilities Director may report the names of owners of any premises served with water who are delinquent in the payment of their water bills or charges for a period of three (3) months after due date. The Council may then levy the delinquent charges against the subject real estate as a special assessment, which assessment shall be certified by the City Clerk to the County Clerk of Buffalo County, Nebraska, and the County Clerk shall, thereupon, place the same on the tax rolls for collection in the same manner as other City taxes; provided that the Council shall notify in writing non-occupying owners of premises, or their agents, whenever their tenants or lessees are sixty (60) days delinquent in the payment of water rent. If the owner of said real estate or his/her agent shall notify the Council in writing to discontinue water service to said real estate or the occupants thereof, it shall be the duty of the officer in charge of the Utilities Department to promptly discontinue said service, and rentals for any water furnished to the occupants of said real estate in violation of said notice shall not be a lien thereon. 
(Code 1958, 31.13-2; Code 1980, 34-53) 
10-315 - DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE, NOTICE PROCEDURE 
    The Municipality shall have the right to discontinue services and remove its properties if the charges for such services are not paid within twenty (20) days after the date that the same becomes delinquent. Before any termination, the Utilities Department shall first give notice by first class mail or in person to any domestic subscriber whose service is proposed to be terminated. If notice is given by first class mail, such mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its importance. Service shall not be discontinued for at least seven (7) days, weekends and holidays excluded. As to any subscriber who has previously been identified as a welfare recipient to the Utilities Department by the Department of Social Services, such notice shall be by certified mail and notice of such proposed termination shall be given to the Department of Social Services. 
    The notice shall contain the following information: 
A.  The reason for the proposed disconnection; 
B.  A statement of the intention to disconnect unless the domestic subscriber either pays the bill or reaches an agreement with the Utilities Department regarding payment of the bill; 
C.  The date upon which service will be disconnected if the domestic subscriber does not take appropriate action; 
D.  The name, address, and telephone number of the employee or department to whom the domestic subscriber may address an inquiry or complaint; 
E.  The domestic subscriber's right, prior to the disconnection date, to request a conference regarding any dispute over such proposed disconnection; 
F.  A statement that the Utilities Department may not disconnect service pending the conclusion of the conference; 
G.  A statement to the effect that disconnection may be postponed or prevented upon presentation of a duly licensed physician's certificate which shall certify that the domestic subscriber or resident within such subscriber's household has an existing illness or handicap which would cause such subscriber or resident to suffer an immediate and serious health hazard by the disconnection of the utility's service to that household. Such certificate shall be filed with the Utilities Department within five (5) days of receiving notice under this Section and will prevent the disconnection of the Department's services for a period of thirty (30) days from such filing. Only one (1) postponement of disconnection shall be allowed under this subsection for each incidence of nonpayment of any due account; 
H.  The cost that will be borne by the domestic subscriber for restoration of service; 
I.  A statement that the domestic subscriber may arrange with the Utilities Department for an installment payment plan; 
J.  A statement to the effect that those domestic subscribers who are welfare recipients may qualify for assistance in payment of their utility bill and that they should contact their caseworker in that regard; and 
K.  Any additional information not inconsistent with this Section which has received prior approval from the Governing Body. 
A domestic subscriber may dispute the proposed discontinuance of service by notifying the Utilities Department with a written statement that sets forth the reasons for the dispute and the relief requested. If a statement has been made by the subscriber, a conference shall be held before the utility may discontinue services. 
The procedures adopted by the Council for resolving utility bills, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk, are hereby incorporated by reference in addition to any amendments thereto and are made a part hereof as though set out in full. 
This Section shall not apply to any disconnections or interruptions of services made necessary by the utility for reasons of repair or maintenance or to protect the health or safety of the domestic subscriber or of the general public. 
State Law reference- Neb. Rev. Stat. 70-1601, et seq. 
10-316 - DISCONTINUANCE AND RESUMPTION OF SERVICE 
    Subject to the right to notice and hearing provided herein for domestic subscribers, the Utilities Director is hereby authorized to shut off and disconnect the water service of any consumer after the bill of such consumer shall have become delinquent. When any water service has been shut off or disconnected by reason of delinquency in payment of the bill for such service, a fee in the amount as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be paid upon the turning on or reconnecting of such service by the party making application for the resumption of such service; provided, that the fee shall be as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule if turning on or reconnection is requested to be made on a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday or before or after regular office hours of the City Utilities Department. When water service has been shut off or disconnected for nonpayment of a bill, it shall not be turned on without proper clearance from the Director of Finance and Administration and a payment of the fee prescribed in this Section. 
    No plumber, pipefitter or any other person not in the employ of the City Utilities Department shall turn on water without an order from the Utilities Director. 
(Code 1958, 31.13-3; Ord. No. 5033, 2, 7-25-89; Code 1980, 34-54; Ord. No. 6088, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
10-317 - RATES AND CHARGES 
A.  The following rates shall be levied against each property served directly or indirectly by the water system of the City: 
1.  Residential Units. Each and every consumer of City water used exclusively for residential purposes shall be billed a minimum monthly charge as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. In addition to the minimum monthly charge, each and every consumer of City water used exclusively for residential purposes shall be charged a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per each one hundred (100) cubic feet of water used. 
2.  Multiple Residential Units and Apartment Houses. Each and every consumer of City water used exclusively for multiple residential purposes shall be billed a minimum monthly charge as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per meter. In addition to the minimum monthly charge per meter, each and every consumer of City water used exclusively for multiple residential purposes shall be charged a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per each one hundred (100) cubic feet of water used. 
3.  Commercial and Industrial Units. Each and every consumer of City water used exclusively for commercial or industrial purposes shall be billed a minimum monthly charge based on meter size. The minimum monthly charge for each meter size is set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
In addition to the minimum monthly charge, each and every consumer of City water used exclusively for commercial or industrial purposes shall be charged as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per each one hundred (100) cubic feet of water used. For those units not serviced by a water meter, the charge will be based on the size of water service. No discounts are allowed. 
4.  Manufactured Home Courts. The monthly charge for manufactured home courts will be assessed according to the following schedule: Number of meters multiplied by a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per month plus a fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule per each one hundred (100) cubic feet of water used. 
B.  Connections Outside City Limits. Connections with the City's water system outside the corporate limits of the City shall be made only when permission is granted by the City. 
C.  Delinquency Fee. If the rates or charges billed against each property served by the water system of the City are not paid to the City of Kearney by the due date as indicated on the utility bill, such bill shall become subject to a delinquency fee of five percent (5%) of the total bill and shall be subject to disconnection pursuant to Section 10-315 and Section 10-316 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 3353, 1, 3-10-81; Ord. No. 3557, 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 3595, §1, 3, 5-26-83; Ord. No. 3856, 1, 6-24-86; Ord. No. 3906, 1, 3-10-87; Code 1980, 34-55; Ord. No. 5537, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 5865, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 6599, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 7259, 5-9-2006; Ord. No. 7753, 10-23-2012) 
10-318 - HOOK-UP FEE FOR UNASSESSED PROPERTIES 
    All property owners requesting water service for properties abutting or adjacent to a water main constructed as part of a water main connection district and for which the special benefits have been certified by resolution to the Register of Deeds of Buffalo County shall pay the connection fee in the amount of the benefits. All property owners requesting water service for properties which do not abut a water main and have not been assessed or been included in a water district but want to connect to a water main through a private water service shall pay a hook-up fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule based upon the present costs of laying and assessing a water main to the property in lieu of an assessment and protest right in a properly created district in the future. Where records are incomplete or otherwise unavailable, the City Manager may waive the fee. 
(Ord. No. 4091, 1, 3-28-89; Code 1980, 34-56; Ord. No. 6088, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
10-319 - WASTE WATER FROM AIR CONDITIONING, ETC., SYSTEMS; DISCHARGE INTO STORM SEWER SYSTEM; REQUIRED; CONSTRUCTION OF PIPES, ETC., UNDER STREETS 
    All installed mechanical refrigeration or water cooled air conditioning units or cooling systems, swimming pools and roof drains shall be constructed so that the waste water or condensate from such systems shall be carried to and discharged into the storm sewer system of the City. All processed water must be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. Permission shall be granted upon application made to the Director of Utilities to construct conduits or pipe lines under the public sidewalks and in the streets and alleys in order to provide the owner or operator of such mechanical refrigeration or water cooled air conditioning units or cooling systems direct and proper connections with the storm sewer system of the City. Whenever any street, alley or sidewalk shall be broken or opened, and excavations made for the purpose of laying connections with the storm sewer, the same shall be done at such times and in such places as shall be approved by the City Engineer and in conformity with the ordinances of the City. The surface of any street, alley or sidewalk which shall be opened in providing such storm sewer connections shall be promptly restored to its original surface according to specifications on file in the office of the City Engineer. 
(Code 1958, 31.14; Code 1980, 34-62) 
10-320 - WASTE WATER FROM AIR CONDITIONING, ETC., SYSTEMS; DISCHARGE INTO STREETS, ETC., FOR PURPOSE OF REPAIR, ETC., OF SYSTEM 
    It is expressly provided, however, that should the owner or operator of any such system install a cooling tower to be used in connection therewith, the water circulated and used in such system may be discharged upon any street or alley not to exceed one (1) time per month for the purpose of making necessary major repairs or for the purpose of cleaning such system; provided, however, the discharging thereof shall be done between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) p.m. and six o'clock (6:00) a.m., so that the same will not interfere with the use and enjoyment of any such street, alley or sidewalk by the public. 
(Code 1958, 31.16; Code 1980, 34-64) 
10-321 - WASTE WATER FROM AIR CONDITIONING, ETC., SYSTEMS; USE OF WATER FOR IRRIGATION 
    Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit any person operating a mechanical refrigeration or air conditioning system in the residential district from using the waste water or liquid for the purpose of irrigating lawns, gardens, trees and shrubs; provided, however, in no event shall the waste water or condensate from such units be discharged upon any street, alley, public sidewalk or into a sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1958, 31.17; Code 1980, 34-65) 
10-322 - WASTE WATER FROM COMMERCIAL AIR CONDITIONING, ETC., SYSTEMS; VIOLATION DEEMED MISDEMEANOR; PENALTY 
    Any person who shall discharge the water or condensate from any mechanical refrigeration or water cooled air conditioning units or cooling systems upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or into a sanitary sewer, shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined as provided in Section 1-111 and costs of prosecution are paid. 
(Code 1958, 31.18; Code 1980, 34-66) 
ARTICLE 4. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION 
DIVISION I. - GENERALLY 

10-401 - TITLE 
    This ordinance shall be known as the backflow prevention ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 5515, 12-22-92) 
10-402 - SCOPE AND PURPOSE 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the public water supply system of the City of Kearney from the possibility of contamination by isolating real or potential sources of contamination or pollution which may backflow into the public water supply system. This ordinance provides for the creation and maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the potable water supply system. 
(Ord. No. 5515, 12-22-92) 
10-403 - RESPONSIBILITIES AND ENFORCEMENT 
A.  The Director of Utilities shall be responsible for the implementation of the backflow prevention program as outlined within this ordinance. If, in the judgment of the Director of Utilities, hereinafter known as the Director, or any person designated by him, an approved backflow prevention device is required for the safety of the public water supply system, the Director shall give notice in writing to the consumer to install said device at each recommended location. The Director shall inspect and approve all installations of the required backflow prevention devices. The costs for purchasing, installing and maintaining a backflow prevention device shall be the responsibility and sole expense of the consumer. The installation of backflow prevention devices, except for outlet fixture vacuum breakers, shall be by a licensed plumber. The installation of backflow prevention devices for lawn sprinkler systems may be by installers registered with the City of Kearney. Initial and annual testing of all double check valves, pressure vacuum breakers and reduced pressure zone devices shall be performed by a State of Nebraska Department of Health certified Grade 6 water operator at the expense of the consumer. Pressure vacuum breakers utilized for backflow prevention on lawn sprinkler systems must be tested in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. If deemed necessary by the Director that maintenance or repairs are necessary, the owner shall be contacted and issued an order to make all necessary repairs or maintenance. The owner shall complete all maintenance or repairs within thirty (30) days; if not, the owner shall be considered in violation of the backflow ordinance and will be subject to disconnection of the service as provided in Section 10-411. 
B.  No person shall install or maintain a water service connection containing cross-connections to a public water supply system or a consumer's potable water supply system unless such cross-connections are abated or controlled in accordance with this rule, and as required by the laws and regulations of the Nebraska Department of Health. 
C.  For the purposes of this backflow prevention ordinance, whenever the Director is to make any decision or interpretation, or whenever reference is made to the fact that the Director is to exercise judgment, such decision, interpretation or judgment shall be in accordance with the provisions of this backflow prevention ordinance, and any other applicable provisions of the Kearney City Code, and state and federal law. 
D.  The Director shall have the right to enter a premises served by the public water supply system at all reasonable times for the purpose of making surveys and investigations of water use practices within the premises. In order to inspect a premises, the Director shall give notice setting forth a proposed date and time to the consumer at least ten (10) days in advance. If the consumer cannot make the premises available for inspection at the proposed date and time, the consumer shall contact the Director and arrange for another date and time for the inspection. If the Director and the consumer cannot agree on a date and time, then the Director shall treat the premises as if no appropriate cross-connection survey has been completed, and in such event the consumer shall be required to install an approved backflow prevention device as required in Section 10-405. In the event that the Director determines that an inspection of the premises is necessary, he may obtain an inspection warrant in accordance with the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. 29-830 through 29-835. 
E.  The consumer as defined in these regulations, if requested by the Director, shall designate an individual or individuals, who shall be responsible for contact and communications with the Director in matters relating to system alteration and construction, monitoring and sampling, maintenance, operation, record keeping, and reporting, as required by law and these regulations. Any change in assigned responsibilities or designated individuals shall be promptly reported to the Director. 
F.  It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct or cause to be conducted, periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises as necessary to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections in the consumer's water supply system. The Director shall have the authority to conduct or cause to be conducted periodic surveys and investigations, of a frequency as determined by the Director, of water use practices within a consumer's premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to the consumer's water supply system through which contaminates or pollutants could backflow into the public water supply system. The Director may conduct these surveys to provide information in determining what level of protection will be necessary to protect the public health and safety. 
G.  On request by the Director, the consumer shall furnish the Director information on water use practices within the consumer's premises. If the consumer refuses to submit the proper information or to cooperate in obtaining the proper information, the Director shall treat the premises as if no appropriate cross-connection survey has been completed, and in such event the consumer shall be required to install an approved backflow prevention device as required in Section 10-405. 
(Ord. No. 5515, 12-22-92; Ord. No. 6108, 4-23-96) 
DIVISION II. - DEFINITIONS 

10-404 - Definitions 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance. 
A.  " AIR GAP SEPARATION " means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening of any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the said receptacle. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the receptacle and, in no case less than one inch (1"). 
B.  " ANTISIPHON VACUUM BREAKER " is a device which restricts the backflow of water into a potable water system by a simple check valve. The vacuum is broken by allowing air to enter upstream of the check valve. 
C.  " APPROVED " means that a backflow prevention device or method has been accepted by the authority having jurisdiction as being suitable for the intended use. 
D.  " AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM " means any water supply system available to the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water supplied by such system. These auxiliary water systems may include water from another owner's public water supply system; polluted or contaminated water, process fluids; used water; or other sources of water of which the owner of the public water supply system does not have sanitary control. 
E.  " BACKFLOW " or " BACKSIPHONAGE " means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the water distribution system from any other source other than the intended source of the potable water supply. 
F.  " BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE " means any device, method or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. Devices such as an "Approved Air Gap," "Double Check Valve Assembly," "Antisiphon Vacuum Breaker" or a "Reduced Pressure Principle Device" can be used which have been approved by the authority having jurisdiction. 
G.  " CONSUMER " means the owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or any manner connected to a public water supply system. 
H.  " CONSUMER'S WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM " means any water supply system, located on the consumer's premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water supply system. A household plumbing system is considered to be a consumer's water supply system. A fire suppression system is also considered a consumer's water supply system. 
I.  " CONTAMINATION " means an impairment of the quality of the water by sewage, or waste to a degree which could cause an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through spread of disease by exposure. 
J.  " CROSS-CONNECTION " means any arrangement whereby contamination due to backflow or backsiphonage can occur. 
K.  " DEGREE OF HAZARD " is a term derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to health and the adverse effects upon the potable water system. 
L.  " DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY " means an assembly composed of two single, independently acting, check valves including one hundred percent closing shutoff ball valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve, except where required by the State Fire Marshall, O.S.Y. valves will be allowed. 
M.  " HEALTH HAZARD " means any condition, device, or practice in a water system or its operation that creates, a real or potential danger to the health and well-being of the consumer. 
N.  " INTERCHANGEABLE CONNECTION " means an arrangement or device that will allow alternate but not simultaneous uses of two sources of water. 
O.  " LICENSED PLUMBER " means a person who has obtained the appropriate license from the Mayor/President and Council to perform plumbing related work within the limits of the City's jurisdiction. 
P.  " MANAGER " means the City Manager or authorized representative. 
Q.  " NON-POTABLE WATER" means water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use, or which does not meet the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Health. 
R.  " OWNER " means the person delivering water through a public water supply system. The owner is the City of Kearney operating through the Utilities Department. 
S.  " PERSON " means the state, any political subdivision, public or private corporation, individual, partnership, or other legal entity. When the term he, or his is used, it shall mean any male or female person. 
T.  " PLUMBING HAZARD " means a plumbing type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by air-gap separation or backflow prevention devices. 
U.  " POLLUTION " means the presence in water of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) that degrades the quality of water to a degree which does not necessarily cause an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for any desired use. 
V.  " POLLUTION HAZARD " means a condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply system or the consumer's water supply system. 
W.  " POTABLE WATER " means water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Health. 
X.  " PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER " means a backflow prevention device consisting of a spring loaded check valve, a spring loaded poppet air opening, upstream and downstream resilient shutoff valves and two properly located test cocks. 
Y.  " PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM " means a water supply system designed and intended to provide potable water to a designated consumer. The water supply shall include the water supply source and distribution piping network. The water supply source is defined as any artificial or natural accumulation of water used to supply the potable water system. The distribution piping network includes all piping, pumping and treatment devices used to convey an adequate quality and quantity of potable water to the consumer. 
Z.  " REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE " means a device containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between two check valves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include one hundred percent closing shutoff ball valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. 
AA.  " SERVICE CONNECTION " means the terminal end of a service line from the public water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter. 
BB.  " SYSTEM HAZARD " means a condition posing an actual or potential threat of damage to the physical properties of the public's or the consumer's water supply system. 
CC.  " USED WATER " means any water supplied by the public water supply system to a consumer's water supply system after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water supplier. 
(Ord. No. 5515, 12-22-92) 
DIVISION III. - REGULATIONS 

10-405 - WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED 
(1)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed between the service connection and the point of potential backflow into a consumer's water supply system when in the judgment of the Director a health, plumbing, pollution or system hazard exists or has the potential to exist in the future. 
(2)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed when the following conditions are found by the Director to exist: 
(a)  Premises on which any substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to a public water supply system. This shall include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from a public water supply system which are no longer under the sanitary control of the owner; 
(b)  Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of the Director, are not correctable, or there exist intricate plumbing arrangements which made it impracticable to determine whether or not cross-connections exist. 
(c)  Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being established or re-established; 
(d)  Premises having more than one customer service connection which could constitute a potential cross-connection. 
(3)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water supply system serving the following types of facilities unless the Director determines that no health, pollution, or system hazard to the public water supply system exists: 
(a)  Hospitals, mortuaries, dental clinics, nursing and convalescent homes, medical buildings; 
(b)  Testing laboratories, film laboratories, film development facilities; 
(c)  Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, or stormwater pumping stations; 
(d)  Food or beverage processing plants; 
(e)  Chemical plants; 
(f)  Metal de-greasing, plating industries, machine tool plants, dye and metal processing or productions; 
(g)  Chemical and petroleum processing or storage plants; 
(h)  Car washes, automobile servicing facilities; 
(i)  Lawn irrigation systems, swimming pools and greenhouses; 
(j)  Laundries and dry cleaners; 
(k)  Packing houses; 
(l)  Power plants; 
(m)  Premises having radioactive materials such as laboratories, industries, hospitals; 
(n)  Rendering plants; 
(o)  Premises having water recirculating systems as used for boilers or cooling systems; 
(p)  Veterinary establishments, kennels, feedyards, stables, rodeo grounds, stockyards, pet grooming, salons; 
(q)  Beauty salons, barbershops, massage parlors, health clubs; 
(r)  Fire suppression systems; 
(s)  Multi-storied buildings greater than three (3) stories in height; 
(t)  Schools, universities, colleges; 
(u)  Other commercial or industrial facilities which may constitute potential cross-connection. 
(Ord. No. 5515, 12-22-92; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-17) 
10-406 - TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED 
(1)  The type of protection required under Sections 10-405(1) and 10-405(2) of this Article shall depend on the degree of hazard that exists as follows: 
(a)  An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where a public water supply system may be contaminated with any substance that could cause a system hazard or health hazard; 
(b)  An approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where a public water supply system may be contaminated with any substance that could cause a pollution hazard; 
(c)  An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed at the service connection where there exists a plumbing hazard; 
(d)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-connection survey of the consumer's potable water system, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed at the service connection. 
(2)  An approved "antisiphon vacuum breaker" may be used as a backflow prevention device where it is not subjected to back pressures. This device shall not be used for applications where water flow is expected to be continuous for one (1) or more hours. The device shall be installed ahead of the potential source of contamination on the discharge side of the last control valve. It shall be placed at least six inches (6") above the highest point reached by any water passing through the potential source of contamination. Typically this type of device is used for such equipment as water cooled compressors, or other water cooled equipment. In cases where downstream valves are used, pressure vacuum breakers will be required. 
(Ord. No. 5515, 12-22-92) 
10-407 - BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES 
(1)  Any approved backflow prevention device required by Section 10-405 shall be installed at a location and in a manner approved by the Director. The consumer, at his sole expense, shall obtain and install said approved backflow prevention device(s) within ninety (90) days of notice and as ordered by the Director. 
(2)  Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the Director prior to the effective date of this rule and which are properly maintained shall, except for inspection, testing, and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirements of Section 10-407(1) but only if the Director determines that the devices will satisfactorily protect the public water supply system. One hundred percent closing shut off valves for testing shall be provided on existing backflow prevention devices, if deemed necessary for proper testing by the Director. If deemed necessary by the Director that an existing backflow prevention device requires replacement, it shall be replaced with an approved backflow prevention device. 
(Ord. No. 5515, 12-22-92) 
10-408 - BOOSTER PUMPS 
(1)  No person shall install or maintain a water service connection to any premises where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within such premises, unless such booster pump is equipped with a low pressure cut-off designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) pounds per square inch gauge or less. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the water customer to maintain the low pressure cut-off device in proper working order. The Director may require testing at any time if suspected that a problem exists with the device. 
(Ord. No. 5515, 12-22-92) 
10-409 - YARD HYDRANTS 
(1)  The installation of new or replacement yard hydrants where water is available or accessible for drinking or culinary purposes and which have drip openings below ground surface, is prohibited unless such hydrants are equipped with an approved device to prevent entrance of ground water into chambers connected with the water supply. 
(2)  Yard hydrants or hose bibs which would be used by the consumer to provide water to mix pesticides, fertilizer, or other chemicals, for direct use or aerial application to surface areas shall be equipped with an antisiphon vacuum breaker. 
(3)  All underground lawn and garden sprinkler systems shall be equipped with an approved backflow prevention device. 
(Ord. No. 5515, 12-22-92) 
10-410 - FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM 
(1)  All proposed installations of fire suppressions systems shall be reviewed by the Director to determine the appropriate type of backflow prevention device(s) required. 
(2)  All proposed fire suppression systems requiring an antifreeze solution shall use a pharmaceutical grade antifreeze. The consumer shall provide to the Director a certification identifying the type of pharmaceutical grade antifreeze which shall be used. A double check valve backflow prevention device shall be installed in an approved manner. 
(3)  A double check valve of an approved type shall be installed on all proposed fire suppressions systems not utilizing antifreeze, but this may be done only when there are no other cross-connections. 
(4)  All existing fire suppressions systems shall meet the requirements of subsections (2) or (3) above, whichever applies. An inspection by a certified fire suppression specialist shall be done to determine whether pharmaceutical grade antifeeze(s) have been utilized. This shall be done at the expense of the consumer. If it cannot be certified that only pharmaceutical grade antifreezes have been used, then a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed as approved by the Director. This also shall be done at the expense of the consumer. 
(5)  In the event cross-connections, such as those found in using auxiliary water supply systems or in providing other water additives such as foaming agents are necessary for the proper operation of the fire suppression system, then a reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device shall be installed in an approved manner. 
(Ord. No. 5515, 12-22-92) 
10-411 - VIOLATIONS 
(1)  In order to protect the health and/or safety of consumers or of the general public, the Director shall deny or discontinue, after notice to the consumer thereof, the water service to any premises wherein: 
(a)  Any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not installed or maintained in a manner acceptable to the Director; 
(b)  It is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or by-passed; 
(c)  An unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises; 
(d)  A low pressure cut-off required by Section 10-408 is not installed and maintained in working order; or 
(e)  The Director is denied entry to determine compliance with these regulations. 
(2)  The Director shall immediately deny or discontinue, without notice to the consumer thereof, the water service to any premises wherein a severe cross-connection exists which constitutes an immediate threat to the safety of the public water system. The Director shall notify the consumer within twenty-four (24) hours of said denial or discontinuation of service. 
(3)  Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with these regulations, and to the satisfaction of the Director. 
(Ord. No. 5515, 12-22-92) 
10-412 - APPROVAL STANDARDS 
(1)  Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the Director. The term "Approved Backflow Prevention Device" shall mean a device that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Associations (AWWA) entitled: AWWA 4506-69 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices and by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) entitled: 
No. 1001 Pipe Applied Atmospheric Type Vacuum Breakers - ANSI Approved - 1982 - Revised, 1988 
No. 1011 Hose Connection Vacuum Breakers - ANSI Approved 1982 
No. 1012 Backflow Preventer/Intermediate Atmospheric Vent - 1978 
No. 1013 Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Preventer - Revised 1988 
No. 1015 Double Check Backflow Prevention Assembly - Revised 1988 
No. 1019 Wall Hydrants, Freezeless, Automatic Draining, Anti-Backflow Types - ANSI Approved 1978 
No. 1020 Vacuum Breakers, Anti-siphon, Pressure Type - ANSI Approved 1982 
No. 1024 Dual Check Valve Type Backflow Preventers - ANSI Approved 1984 - Revised 1988 
No. 1035 Laboratory Faucet Vacuum Breakers - ANSI Approved 1984 
No. 1048 Double Check Detector Assembly Backflow Preventer - 1989 
(2)  The Director shall keep a current list of all approved backflow prevention devices. 
(3)  The Director may require a strainer of approved type and size to be installed in conjunction with required backflow prevention devices. The installation of strainers shall preclude the fouling of backflow device(s) due to foreseen and unforeseen circumstances occurring to the water supply system such as water main repairs, water main breaks, fires, periodic cleaning and flushing of mains. These occurrences may cause debris such as scale deposits and sand to flush through the mains causing fouling of backflow device(s). 
(Ord. No. 5515, 12-22-92) 
10-413 - LIABILITY CLAIMS 
    The Director shall be relieved from personal liability. The City shall hold harmless the Director when acting in good faith and without malice, from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to any person or property as a result of any act required or authorized by this title, or by reason of any act or omission of the Director in the discharge of his/her duties hereunder. Any suit brought carrying out the provisions of the tittle shall be defended by the City, or the City's insurance carrier, if any, through final determination of such proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 5515, 12-22-92) 
ARTICLE 5. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

10-501 - CREATION OF STORMWATER UTILITY 
    The City of Kearney, does hereby establish a Stormwater Utility, the purpose of which is to assist the City of Kearney in its responsibility for the operation, construction, maintenance and repair of stormwater drainage system facilities to provide adequate systems of collection, conveyance, detention, treatment and release of stormwater and the reduction of potential hazards to property and life resulting from stormwater runoff, improvement in general health and welfare through reduction of undesirable stormwater conditions and improvements to the water quality in the storm and surface water system and its receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 8127, 2-14-2017, effective April 1, 2017; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-17) 
10-502 - PROGRAM RESPONSIBILITY 
    The City of Kearney shall be empowered to administer the Stormwater Utility and may delegate such duty and responsibility as is necessary to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance within the limits of the budget, directives and storm drainage regulations adopted by the governing body of the City of Kearney for this Utility. 
(Ord. No. 8127, 2-14-2017, effective April 1, 2017; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-17) 
10-503 - OPERATING BUDGET 
    The City of Kearney shall adopt an operating budget for each fiscal year. The operating budget shall set forth, for each fiscal year, the estimated revenues and the estimated costs for the Stormwater Utility. The initial operating budget shall be for the fiscal year commencing on October 1, 2017. 
(Ord. No. 8127, 2-14-2017, effective April 1, 2017; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-17) 
10-504 - SURCHARGE FEE SCHEDULE ESTABLISHED 
A.  There is hereby assessed against all property within the City that is connected to either water or sanitary sewer systems, or both, of the City a monthly stormwater utility surcharge fee. Such surcharge fee is based upon a determination of the use for each property. The owner, occupant and any person who is responsible for the payment of water and/or sewer service to the property, shall all be jointly and severally responsible for the payment of said surcharge fee. Persons responsible for the payment of water and/or sewer service to the property shall include the person responsible for payment for water provided to a master meter that is then distributed to multiple users, whether or not said users are located on the same property as the master meter. The surcharge fee shall be: 
1.  All property devoted to a residential use shall be assessed a monthly surcharge fee as set forth in the City of Kearney's Comprehensive Fee Schedule. The term "residential" shall include single-family homes, mobile homes and mobile home parks, duplexes and apartment units. The term "residential" shall not include rooming or boarding houses, dormitories and similar facilities. The term "living unit" shall mean one or more rooms in a residential building which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use by one (1) family, and which includes cooking space and lawful sanitary facilities reserved for the occupants thereof. 
2.  Property devoted to any use other than residential, as set forth above shall be assessed a monthly surcharge fee as set forth in the City of Kearney's Comprehensive Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 8127, 2-14-2017, effective April 1, 2017; Ord. No. 8131, 3-14-17) 
10-505 - BILLS 
    Bills shall be rendered monthly as provided in Section 10-314 of City Code of the City of Kearney, and shall be collected as a combined utility bill. 
(Ord. No. 8127, 2-14-2017, effective April 1, 2017) 
10-506 - DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY 
    In the event any person, except the United States and the State of Nebraska or any political subdivision thereof, shall fail to pay the surcharge fee when due, water service shall be terminated as provided in Sections 10-315 to 10-316 of the City Code of the City of Kearney. 
(Ord. No. 8127, 2-14-2017, effective April 1, 2017) 
UNIFIED LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF KEARNEY, NEBRASKA 
____________ 
A Part of the Code of the City of Kearney 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: March 12, 2002 
Effective: April 15, 2002 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
OF 
KEARNEY, NEBRASKA 
AT THE TIME OF THE 
ADOPTION OF THE 
UNIFIED LAND 
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE 
  
____________ 
Peter G. Kotsiopulos 
President of the Council 
____________ 
Bruce Blankenship 
Randy Buschkoetter 
Don Kearney 
Jose Zapata 
Council Members 
____________ 
Michael E. Kelley 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Michaelle E. Trembly 
City Clerk 
____________ 
G. Allen Johnson 
City Manager 
Chapter 11 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

11-101 - TITLE 
    This title (including Chapters 11 through 59 inclusive) of the Kearney Municipal Code shall be known as the Unified Land Development Ordinance of the City of Kearney. 
11-102 - JURISDICTION 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall be applicable to all property within the corporate limits of the City of Kearney and its two-mile extra-territorial jurisdiction as provided by Chapter 19, Article 9, Sections 19-901 through 19-929, and Chapter 16, Article 9, Sections 16-901 through 16-904 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, with the exception of those properties owned or acquired by municipal, county, or state government for the advancement of government projects or purposes. 
11-103 - PURPOSE 
    The purposes of the Unified Land Development Ordinance of the City of Kearney are to: 
A.  Serve the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City and its jurisdiction. 
B.  Classify property in a manner that reflects its suitability for specific uses. 
C.  Provide for sound, attractive development within the City and its jurisdiction. 
D.  Encourage compatibility of adjacent land uses. 
E.  Protect environmentally sensitive areas. 
F.  Further the objectives of the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Kearney. 
11-104 - CONSISTENCY WITH COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
    The City of Kearney intends that this Unified Land Development Ordinance and any amendments to it shall be consistent with the City's Comprehensive Development Plan. It is the City's intent to amend this ordinance whenever such action is deemed necessary to keep regulatory provisions in conformance with the Comprehensive Development Plan. 
11-105 - CONFLICTING PROVISIONS 
    The Unified Land Development Ordinance shall be held to provide the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. If any provision of the Unified Land Development Ordinance conflicts with any other provision of the Unified Land Development Ordinance, any other Ordinance of the City of Kearney, or any applicable state or federal law, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
11-106 - RELIEF FROM OTHER PROVISIONS 
    Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a previous approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit issued under any local, state, or federal ordinance or statute. 
11-107 - CITY EXEMPTION 
    The City of Kearney is hereby declared to be exempt from the terms and provisions of this Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
11-108 - SEVERABILITY OF PROVISION 
    Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
11-109 - PUBLICATION 
    This Ordinance shall be published in book or pamphlet form and shall, together with the maps being a part hereof, shall be filed with the City Clerk of the City of Kearney, Nebraska. 
Chapter 12 - DEFINITIONS 

12-101 - PURPOSE 
    Chapter 12 shall be known as the Definitions. The purpose of these provisions is to promote consistency and precision in the interpretation of the Unified Land Development Ordinance. The meaning and construction of words as set forth shall apply throughout the Unified Land Development Ordinance, unless where modified in a specific section or where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. 
12-102 - GENERAL CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE 
    The following general rules of construction apply to the text of the Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
A.  Headings. Section and subsection headings contained herein are provided for illustrative purposes only and shall not be deemed to limit, govern, modify, or otherwise affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any provision of the Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
B.  Illustration. In the case of any real or apparent conflict between the text of the Ordinance and any illustration explaining the text, the text shall apply. 
C.  Shall, Must, and May. "Shall" and "must" are always mandatory. "May" is discretionary. 
D.  Tenses and Numbers. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
E.  Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply. 
2.  "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in any combination. 
3.  "Either ... or" indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination. 
F.  Referenced Agencies. Unless otherwise indicated, all public officials, bodies, and agencies referred to in this Ordinance are those of the City of Kearney. 
12-103 - DEFINITION OF TERMS 
    For the purposes of this Unified Land Development Ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Certain sections contain definitions which are additional to those listed here. Where terms are not specifically defined, their ordinarily accepted meaning or meanings implied by their context shall apply. 
12-104 - A 
A.  ABUTTING: Having lot lines or district boundaries in common. Use interchangeably with adjacent. 
B.  ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure which is incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use or building on the same site. 
C.  ACCESSORY USE: A use which is incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use on the same site. 
D.  ADDITION: Any construction which increases the size of a building or structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area. 
E.  ADT or AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC: The average number of motor vehicles per day that pass over a given point or segment of street. 
F.  AGENT OF OWNER: Any person showing written verification that he/she is acting for, and with the knowledge and consent of, a property owner. 
G.  ALLEY: A public right-of-way, other than a street and twenty (20) feet or less in width which is used as a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
H.  ALTERATION: Any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of spaces, the supporting members, the positioning on a site, or the appearance of a building or structure. 
I.  APARTMENT: A dwelling unit, within a building, designed for and suitable for occupancy by only one family. Apartments are generally located within multi-family residential buildings. 
J.  APPROVING AUTHORITY: The City Council of the City of Kearney or its designee. 
K.  ASCE: The American Society of Civil Engineers. 
L.  ATTACHED: Having one or more walls in common with a principal building or connected to a principal building by an integral architectural element, such as a covered passageway; facade wall extension; or archway. 
12-105 - B 
A.  BASE ZONING DISTRICT: A district established by this Ordinance which prescribes basic regulations governing land use and site development standards. No more than one (1) Base Zoning District shall apply to any individually platted lot or parcel unless the lot or parcel is part of a Planned Unit Development. 
B.  BASEMENT: A level of a building below street level that has at least one-half (1/2) of its height below the surface of adjacent ground. A basement used for independent dwelling or business purposes shall be considered a story for the purposes of height measurement. 
C.  BEGINNING OF CONSTRUCTION: The initial incorporation of labor and materials within the foundation of a building or structure. 
D.  BICYCLE LANE AND PATH: A designated lane on a roadway or an exclusive path separated from a roadway, designed specifically to accommodate the physical requirements of bicycling. Bicycle paths are ordinarily designed to accommodate other forms of pedestrian recreation. 
E.  BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, by streets and the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, or by a combination of the above with a watercourse, lake, railroad, or other significant natural or man-made barrier, and which has been designated as such on a plat for the purposes of legal description of a property. 
F.  BLOCK FACE: The property abutting one (1) side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersection streets, or between the one (1) nearest intersecting street and a major physical barrier, including, but not limited to, railroads, streams, lakes, or the corporate limits of Kearney. 
G.  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: A body, established by the City expressly for the purpose of granting relief from situations of hardship and to hear appeals as provided by this Ordinance and state law. 
H.  BOULEVARD: A public street generally characterized by a wider than normal right-of-way and extensive green space in relation to pavement surface. Boulevards may either include dual street channels separated by a landscaped median; or by a single street channel with wider than normal greenway setbacks behind the curb. 
I.  BUFFERYARD: A landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two (2) adjacent land uses or properties from one (1) another. 
J.  BUILDING: A structure entirely separated from any other structure by space or by walls and having a roof and built to provide shelter, support, or enclosure for persons or property. 
K.  BUILDING COVERAGE: The area of a site covered by buildings or roofed areas, excluding allowed projecting eaves, balconies, and similar features. 
L.  BUILDING ENVELOPE: The three (3) dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot after all zoning and other applicable municipal requirements have been met. 
M.  BUILDING LINE: The outer boundary of a building established by the location of its exterior walls. 
N.  BUILDING OFFICIAL: The City official, designated by the City Manager, who is responsible for the enforcement of the applicable building code and conditional uses. 
O.  BUILDING PERMIT: A document that must be issued by the Building Official prior to erecting, constructing, enlarging, altering, moving, improving, removing, converting, or demolishing any building or structure on a platted lot(s) or a parcel exceeding ten (10) acres in size as regulated by this Ordinance or by the applicable building codes of the City of Kearney. Issuance of a building permit follows review of plans by the Building Official to determine that the proposed use of building or land complies with the provisions of the Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
P.  BUSINESS: Activities that include the exchange or manufacture of goods or services on a site. 
Q.  BUSINESS CENTER: A building containing more than one (1) commercial business, or any group of non-residential buildings within a common development, characterized by shared parking and access. 
12-106 - C 
A.  CARGO CONTAINER: A reusable metal shipping container designed for worldwide surface and air movement and for storage of products. 
B.  CARGO CONTAINER - FARM: A cargo container repurposed for a Controlled Environment Agriculture (CEA) use, such as Hydroponics and/or Aeroponics. 
C.  CARTWAY (or ROAD or STREET CHANNEL ): The actual surface area of a road used to accommodate motor vehicles, including moving traffic lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes, and parking lanes. On a street with curbs, the cartway is measured from back to back of curbs. On streets without curbs, the cartway is measured between the outer edges of the pavement. 
D.  CENTERLINE OFFSET: The distance between the centerline of roads intersecting a common road from the same or opposite sides. 
E.  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: An official certificate issued by the Building Official, or his/her designee, prior to occupancy of a completed building or structure, upon finding of conformance with the applicable building code and this Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
F.  CHANGE OF USE: The replacement of an existing use type by a new use type. 
G.  CHANNEL: The bed or banks of a natural stream or drainageway which convey the constant or intermittent flow of water, including storm run-off. 
H.  CITY: The City of Kearney, Nebraska. 
I.  CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of Kearney, Nebraska. 
J.  CITY PLANNER: The designee of the City Manager responsible for the interpretation, administration, and enforcement of the Kearney Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
K.  COMMON AREA: An area held, designed, and designated for common or cooperative use within a development. 
L.  COMMON DEVELOPMENT: A development proposed and planned as one (1) unified project not separated by a public street or alley. 
M.  COMMON OPEN SPACE: Land within or related to a development that is not individually owned or dedicated for public use, designed and generally intended for the common use of the residents of the development. 
N.  COMPATIBILITY: The degree to which two (2) or more different land use types are able to exist together in close proximity, with no one use having significant negative effects on any other use. 
O.  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The duly adopted Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Kearney. 
P.  CONCEPT PLAN: A preliminary presentation that includes the minimum information necessary, as determined by the City Planner, to be used for the purpose of discussion or classification of a proposed plat prior to formal application. 
Q.  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: An approval of a use with operating and/or physical characteristics different from those of permitted uses in a given zoning district which may, nonetheless, be compatible with those uses under special conditions and with adequate public review. Conditional uses are allowed in a zoning district only at the discretion of and with the explicit permission of the Planning Commission, as provided by Section 59-103 of this Ordinance. 
R.  CONDOMINIUM: An ownership regime whereby the title to each unit of occupancy is held in separate ownership, and the real estate on which the units are located is held in common ownership solely by the owners of the units with each owner having an undivided interest in the common real estate. Condominiums may include residential, commercial, office, or industrial uses. 
S.  CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT: A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, or the preservation of historically or environmentally sensitive features. 
T.  CONSERVATION (or CLUSTER ) Subdivision : Wholly or in majority, a residential subdivision that permits a reduction in lot area, setback, or other site development regulations, provided (1) there is no increase in the overall density permitted for a conventional subdivision in a given zoning district, and (2) the remaining land area is used for common space. 
U.  CONTROLLED ENVIRONMENT AGRICULTURE (CEA) : Any agricultural technology that enables the grower to manipulate the environment to desired growing and/or cultivation conditions. 
V.  COUNTY: Buffalo County, Nebraska. 
W.  COURTYARD: An open, unoccupied space, bounded on two (2) or more sides by the walls of the building. 
X.  CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION: A subdivision which literally meets all nominal standards of the Unified Land Development Ordinance for lot dimensions, setbacks, street frontage, and other site development regulations. 
Y.  CREATIVE (or INNOVATIVE) DEVELOPMENT or SUBDIVISION: A subdivision which, while complying with the Subdivision Chapter, diverges from nominal compliance with site development regulations in the Unified Land Development Ordinance. Creative subdivisions imply a higher level of pre-planning than conventional subdivisions. They may be employed for the purpose of environmental protection or the creation of superior community design. Types of Creative Subdivisions include Conservation Subdivisions and Traditional Neighborhood Districts. 
Z.  CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one (1) outlet and with an opposite end providing for the reversal of traffic. 
AA.  CURB: A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway, intended to define the edge of the cartway and to channel or control drainage. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 8130, 3-14-2017) 
12-107 - D 
A.  DEDICATION: A grant of land to the City or another public agency for a public purpose. 
B.  DENSITY: The amount of development per specific unit of a site. 
C.  DESIGN STANDARDS: Standards that set forth specific improvement requirements. 
D.  DETACHED: Fully separated from any other building or not jointed to another building in such a manner as to constitute an enclosed or covered connection. 
E.  DETENTION BASIN: An artificial or natural water collection facility, designed to collect surface or subsurface water and to control its rate of discharge, in order to prevent a net increase in the rate of water flow that existed prior to a development. 
F.  DEVELOPER: The legal owner(s) or authorized agent of any land included in a proposed development. 
G.  DEVELOPMENT: A planning or construction project involving substantial improvement or change in the character and/or land use of a property. 
H.  DIVIDED STREET: A street with opposing lanes separated by a median strip, center island, or other form of physical barrier, which cannot be crossed except at designated locations. 
I.  DRIVE-IN SERVICES: Uses which involve the sale of products or provision of services to occupants in vehicles. 
J.  DRAINAGE: The removal of surface or ground water from land by drains, grading, or other means. 
K.  DRAINAGE SYSTEM: The system through which water flows from the land. 
L.  DRIVEWAY: A permanently paved, surfaced area providing vehicular access between a street and an off-street parking or loading area. 
M.  DWELLING UNIT: One (1) or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarter, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of one family, as defined in this section, maintaining a household. 
12-108 - E 
A.  EASEMENT: A privilege or right of use granted on, above, under, or across a particular tract of land for a specific purpose by one (1) owner to another owner, public or private agency, or utility. 
B.  ENCLOSED: A roofed or covered space fully surrounded by walls. 
12-109 - F 
A.  FAMILY: One (1) or more persons who are related by blood or marriage, living together and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single kitchen facilities; or a group of non-related persons living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single kitchen facilities on a nonprofit, cost-sharing basis. A group of non-related persons shall consist of not more than three (3) persons in a dwelling unit containing two (2) bedrooms or less or a group of not more than four (4) persons living in a dwelling unit containing three (3) bedrooms or more. The following persons shall be considered related for the purpose of this Ordinance: 
1.  Persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption; 
2.  Persons residing with a family for the purpose of adoption; 
3.  Not more than eight (8) persons under nineteen (19) years of age, residing in a foster house licensed or approved by the State of Nebraska. 
4.  Not more than eight (8) persons nineteen (19) years of age or older residing with a family for the purpose of receiving foster care licensed or approved by the State of Nebraska. 
5.  Person(s) living with a family at the direction of a court. 
B.  FASCIA: A parapet-type wall used as part of the facade of a flat-roofed building and projecting no more than six (6) feet from the immediately adjacent building face. Such a wall shall enclose at least three (3) sides of the projecting flat roof and return to the parapet wall or the building. 
C.  FEDERAL: Pertaining to the Government of the United States of America. 
D.  FINAL APPROVAL: The final official action of the City Council, upon a recommendation by the Planning Commission, permitting the filing of a subdivision with the appropriate County Register of Deeds and the conveyance of individual parcels and lots to subsequent owners. Final approval follows the completion of detailed engineering plans, negotiation of subdivision agreements, posting of required guarantees, and other requirements of this Ordinance. 
E.  FLOOR AREA RATIO: The quotient of gross floor area of all buildings on a site divided by gross site area of the site. 
F.  FRONTAGE: The length of a property line of any one premise abutting and parallel to a public street, private way, or court from which access is permitted. 
12-110 - G 
A.  GARAGE: An accessory building or portion of a main building used primarily for storage of motor vehicles. 
B.  GRADE: The elevation of the finished surface of ground, paving, or sidewalk adjacent to any building line. 
1.  For buildings having walls facing one (1) street only, the grade shall be the elevation of the ground at the center of the wall facing the street. 
2.  For buildings having walls facing more than one (1) street, the grade shall be the average elevation of the grades of all walls facing each street. 
3.  For buildings having no walls facing a street, the grade shall be the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
C.  GROSS FLOOR AREA: The total enclosed area of all floors of a building, measured to the inside surfaces of the exterior walls. This definition excludes the areas of mechanical equipment rooms, elevator shafts, airspaces above atriums, and enclosed off-street parking and loading areas serving a principal use. 
12-111 - H 
A.  HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the established grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, shed, or gambrel roofs. For other cases, height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the established grade to the highest point of a structure as herein defined. Where a building or structure is located on a slope, height shall be measured from the average grade level adjacent to the building or structure. 
B.  HOME BASED BUSINESS/HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory occupational use conducted entirely within a dwelling unit by its inhabitants, which is clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling unit or residential structure and does not change the residential character of its site. 
C.  HYDROPONICS AND/OR AEROPONICS: The propagation of plants using a mechanical system designed to circulate a solution of minerals in water for growing produce. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 8130, 3-14-2017) 
12-112 - I 
A.  IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE: The total horizontal area of all buildings, roofed or covered spaces, paved surface areas, walkways and driveways, and any other site improvements that decrease the ability of the surface of the site to absorb water, expressed as a percent of site area. The surface water area of pools is excluded from this definition. 
12-113 - J 
12-114 - K 
12-115 - L 
A.  LANDSCAPED AREA: The area within the boundaries of a given lot, site or common development consisting primarily of plant material, including but not limited to grass, trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, and other organic plant materials; or grass paver masonry units installed such that the appearance of the area is primarily landscaped. 
1.  PERIMETER LANDSCAPED AREA: Any required landscaped area that adjoins the exterior boundary of a lot, site or common development. 
2.  INTERIOR LANDSCAPED AREA: Any landscaped area within a site exclusive of required perimeter landscaping. 
B.  LANE: An approved private right-of-way which provides access to residential properties and meets at least three (3) of the following conditions: 
1.  Serves twelve (12) or fewer housing units or platted lots. 
2.  Does not function as a local street because of its alignment, design, or location. 
3.  Is completely internal to a development. 
4.  Does not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length. 
C.  LOADING AREA: An off-street area used for the loading or unloading of goods from a vehicle in connection with the use of the site on which such area is located. 
D.  LOT: A platted parcel of property with a separate and distinct number or other identifying designation which has been created, assigned and recorded in the Office of the appropriate County Register of Deeds. Each individual lot is subject to the provisions of a particular base zoning district, and shall have a minimum frontage of twenty (20) feet, except as provided in an approved Planned Development, Conservation Development, or Traditional Neighborhood Development. 
1.  CORNER LOT: A lot located at the junction of at least two (2) streets, private ways or courts or at least two (2) segments of a curved street, private way or court, at which the angle of intersection is no greater than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
2.  DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT: A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on two (2) streets, private ways or courts. Primary access shall be restricted on a double frontage lot to the minor of the two (2) streets or to the front line as determined at time of platting or as defined by this ordinance. (Also known as a Through Lot) 
3.  INTERIOR LOT: A lot other than a corner lot. 
4.  COMMON DEVELOPMENT LOT: When two (2) or more contiguous lots are developed as part of a single development, these lots may be considered a single lot for purposes of this ordinance. 
E.  LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. 
F.  LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance measured between the front and rear lot lines. 
G.  LOT LINE: A property boundary line(s) of record that divides one (1) lot from another lot or a lot from the public or private street right-of-way or easement. 
1.  FRONT LOT LINE: The lot line separating a lot and a public or private street right-of-way or easement. 
a.  For an interior lot, the lot line separating the lot from the right-of-way or easement. 
b.  For a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a public or private street or easement. In instances of equal line dimension, the front lot line shall be determined by the Building Official, or as may be noted on the final plat. 
c.  For a double frontage lot, the lot lines separating the lot from the right-of-way or easement of the more minor street. In cases where each street has the same classification, the front lot line shall be determined by the Building Official at the time of application for the original building permit for the lot, or as may be noted on the final plat. 
2.  REAR LOT LINE: The lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front line. 
3.  SIDE LOT LINE: Any lot line that is neither a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street, private way or court is a street side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
H.  LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance measured between the side lot lines of a lot, at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line. 
12-116 - M 
A.  MAIN: The principal artery of a system of continuous piping which conveys fluids and to which branches may be connected. 
B.  MAJOR SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision not defined and approved as a minor subdivision. 
C.  MANUFACTURED HOME DWELLING: A factory built single-family dwelling structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation, which bears a label certifying that it was manufactured or constructed in compliance with National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 C.F.R. 3280 et seq., promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, or a modular housing unit as defined in Section 71-1557 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes bearing a seal in accordance with the Nebraska Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units Act, and which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a permanent site, does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axels, and which complies with the following architectural and aesthetic standards listed below. For the purpose of any of these regulations, manufactured home shall be considered the same as a single-family detached dwelling. 
1.  Dwelling units built in compliance with the above may be placed in any zoning district where single-family dwelling units are permitted when the following additional requirements are met: 
a.  The home shall have no less than nine hundred (900) feet of floor area. 
b.  The home shall have no less than an eighteen (18) foot exterior width. 
c.  The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two and one-half (21/2) inches for each twelve (12) inches of horizontal run. 
d.  The exterior material shall be of a color, material, and scale comparable with those exiting in residential site-built, single-family construction. 
e.  The home shall have a nonreflective roof material which is or simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile, or rock. 
f.  The home shall have wheels, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus removed. 
g.  Permanent utility connections shall be installed in accordance with local regulations. 
h.  The home shall be installed upon a permanent foundation that is constructed and built in accordance with local regulations. 
2.  Manufactured or mobile homes which do not meet all of the standards in Section 12-116.C.1 above, may be placed in a mobile home park or as permitted by Code, provided the structure is transportable in one (1) or more sections which in the traveling mode are eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, are three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which are built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. 
D.  MINOR SUBDIVISION: A subdivision of land which creates no more than four (4) lots from any single parcel of land; requires no extension of streets, sewers, utilities, or other municipal facilities; no dedication of easements or rights-of-way or annexation; complies with all pre-existing zoning requirements; and has not been subject to a previous administrative or minor subdivision. 
E.  MIXED USE BUILDING: A building or structure that incorporates two (2) or more use types within a single building or structure, provided that each use type is permitted within the individual Base Zoning District in which the building or structure is to be located. 
F.  MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT: A single development which incorporates complementary land use types into a single development. 
G.  MOBILE HOME: A building type designed to be transportable in one (1) or more sections, constructed on a permanent chassis or undercarriage, and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or other use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, but not bearing a seal attesting to the approval and issuance of the Nebraska Department of Health or conformance to the manufactured home procedural and enforcement regulations, as adopted by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; or not otherwise satisfying the definition of Manufactured Home Dwellings. 
H.  MOBILE HOME PARK: A unified development under single ownership, developed, subdivided, planned, and improved for the placement of mobile home units for non-transient use. Mobile Home Parks include common areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry, utility services, storage, and other services; but do not include mobile home sales lots on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the purposes of display, inspection, sale, or storage. 
I.  MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A development subdivided, planned, and improved for the placement of manufactured or mobile home units on permanent foundations on lots for uses by the individual owners of such lots. Mobile Home Subdivisions may include common areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry, utility services, storage, and other services; but do not include mobile home sales lots on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the purpose of display, inspection, sale, or storage. 
J.  MONUMENT: An identification marker established by a registered land surveyor at each section corner, block corner, lot corner, or other point as required by this Ordinance. 
K.  MOVING LANE: Any traffic lane within a cartway where traffic movement is the primary or sole function. 
12-117 - N 
A.  NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT: A building, structure, or improvement which does not comply with the regulations for its zoning district set forth by this Unified Land Development Ordinance but which complied with applicable regulations at the time of construction. 
B.  NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Unified Land Development Ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the Unified Land Development Ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the non-conforming characteristics of the lot. 
C.  NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign that was legally erected prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Unified Land Development Ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of this Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
D.  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Unified Land Development Ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the Unified Land Development Ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the non-conforming characteristics of the structure. 
E.  NONCONFORMING USE: A land use which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Unified Land Development Ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the Unified Land Development Ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the non-conforming characteristics of the land use. 
F.  NONCONFORMING RESIDENTIAL USE: Multiple-family residential uses that are established in zoning districts that do not otherwise permit such uses. Typically, these uses involve the conversion of large single-family structures to multiple-family uses, often in violation to the Unified Land Development Ordinance in operation at the time and/or without benefit of a building permit. Nonconforming residential uses may be recognized as lawful nonconforming uses through a registration process that requires demonstration of continuous multiple-family occupancy since November 14, 1961 and compliance with parking requirements set forth by this Ordinance. The registration process is set forth in Chapter 58 of this Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
G.  NUISANCE: An unreasonable and continuous invasion of the use and enjoyment of a property right which a reasonable person would find annoying, unpleasant, obnoxious, or offensive. 
12-118 - O 
A.  OFF-SITE: Located outside the boundaries of the parcel that is the subject of an application. 
B.  OPEN SPACE: Area included on any site or lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky, except for allowed projections of cornices, overhangs, porches, balconies, or plant materials. 
C.  OUTDOOR STORAGE: The storage of materials, parts, or products that are related to the primary use of a site for a period exceeding three (3) days. 
D.  OVERLAY DISTRICT: A district established by this Ordinance to prescribe special regulations to be applied to a site only in combination with a base district. 
E.  OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of land. 
12-119 - P 
A.  PARKING FACILITY: An area on a lot and/or within a building, including one (1) or more parking spaces, along with provision for access circulation, maneuvering, and landscaping, meeting the requirements of this Unified Land Development Ordinance. Parking facilities include parking lots, private garages, and parking structures. Vehicle storage is a use distinct from parking. Vehicle storage is also governed by applicable provisions of Chapter 49, Off-Street Parking regulations. 
B.  PARKING LANE: A lane located on the sides of streets, designated or allowing on-street parking of motor vehicles. 
C.  PARKING SPACES: An area on a lot and/or within a building, intended for the use of temporary parking of a personal vehicle. This term is used interchangeably with "parking stall". Each parking space must have a means of access to a public street. Tandem parking stalls in single-family detached, single-family attached, and townhome residential uses shall be considered to have a means of access to a public street. 
D.  PAVED: Permanently surfaced with poured concrete, concrete pavers, or asphalt. 
E.  PERFORMANCE BOND: A surety bond or cash deposit posted by a contractor or developer made out to the City in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements. The bond amount shall be that of the contract price and shall be legally sufficient to secure to the City that said improvements will be constructed in accordance with the terms of the contract documents within a period specified by this Ordinance. 
F.  PERMITTED USE: A land use type allowed as a matter of right in a zoning district, subject only to special requirements of this Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
G.  PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of Kearney. 
H.  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A development of land which is under unified control and is planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or programmed series of development stages. The development may include streets, circulation ways, utilities, buildings, open spaces, and other site features and improvements. 
I.  PLAT: A document, usually a map or maps, expressing the designation or division of land into one (1) or more lots or parcels, any one (1) of which is ten (10) acres or less. Plats include preliminary and final plats. 
1.  PRELIMINARY PLAT: A plat indicating the proposed layout of a development and related information, intended for the purpose of preliminary approval by approving authorities but not for filing with the appropriate County Register of Deeds. 
2.  FINAL PLAT: The final map of the subdivision which is presented for Final Approval. The Final Plat contains detailed information and documentation and is designed to be filed with the appropriate County Register of Deeds. 
J.  PORCH, UNENCLOSED: A roofed or unroofed open structure projecting from an exterior wall of a building and having no enclosed features more than thirty (30) inches above its floor other than wire screening and a roof with supporting structure. 
K.  PREMISES: A lot, parcel, tract or plot of land, contiguous and under common ownership or control, together with the buildings and structure thereon. 
L.  PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or structures as distinguished from an accessory use. 
M.  PRIVATE GARAGE: A building for the storage of motor vehicles where no repair service facilities are maintained and where no motor vehicles are kept for rental or sale. 
N.  PROPERTY LINE: The boundary between separate property ownerships, as recorded by the legal description of a parcel and defined by the appropriate County Register of Deeds. In subdivisions, property lines are usually but not in every case coincident with lot lines. 
12-120 - Q 
12-121 - R 
A.  RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle towed or self-propelled on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for temporary dwelling, recreational, or sporting purposes. Recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, travel trailers; campers; motor coach homes; converted buses and trucks, boats, and boat trailers. 
B.  REGULATION: A specific requirement set forth by this Unified Land Development Ordinance which must be followed. 
C.  REMOTE PARKING: A supply of off-street parking at a location not on the site of a given development. 
D.  RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land, generally linear, occupied or intended to be occupied by a system that conveys people, traffic, fluids, utilities, or energy from one (1) point to another. Rights-of-way may include streets and roads including roadway easements, crosswalks, bicycle paths, recreational trails, railroads or fixed guideway transit, electric transmission lines, gas pipelines, water mains, or sewer mains. 
E.  RURAL SUBDIVISIONS: A residential subdivision located more than one-half (1/2) mile past the corporate limits but within the two (2) mile planning jurisdiction of the City; or outside of areas designated for future urban development by the Comprehensive Development Plan. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
12-122 - S 
A.  SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conducts sanitary wastes from a point of origin to a treatment or disposal facility. In developing areas, sanitary sewers normally include interceptor, outfall, local, and lateral sewers. 
1.  INTERCEPTOR: A sanitary sewer that serves as a trunk, collecting sewage generated by a number of individual developments. 
2.  OUTFALL: A sanitary sewer that may be developed to connect an individual subdivision or development to an interceptor sewer. 
3.  LOCAL: A pipe that connects lateral sewers to an outfall or interceptor sewer. 
4.  LATERAL: A private service line connecting buildings to local sewers. 
B.  SEPTIC SYSTEM: An underground system, utilizing a watertight receptacle to receive the discharge of sewage and a soil absorption leachfield, which provides for the decomposition of wastes produced by development on a single lot. 
C.  SCREENING: The method by which a view of one (1) site from another adjacent site is shielded, concealed, or hidden. Screening techniques include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other features as may be permitted by the landscape provisions described in Chapter 48. 
D.  SETBACK: The distance, as required by the minimum setback(s) which establishes the horizontal component(s) of the building envelope. 
E.  SIDEWALK: A paved path provided for pedestrian use, usually located at the side of and detached from a road, but within the right-of-way. 
F.  SIGN: A symbolic, visual device fixed upon a building, vehicle, structure, or parcel of land, which is intended to convey information about a product, business, activity, place, person, institution, candidate, or political idea. 
G.  SITE: The parcel of land to be developed or built upon. A site may encompass a single lot; or a group of lots developed as a common development as provided in Chapter 34, Special Districts and in Chapter 37, Overlay Districts. 
H.  SITE PLAN: A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development features proposed for a specific parcel of land; and any other information that may be reasonably requested by the City in order that an informed decision can be made on the associated request. 
I.  STATE: The State of Nebraska. 
J.  STORM SEWER: A conduit which conducts storm drainage from a development or subdivision, ultimately to a drainageway or stream. 
K.  STORY: The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it; if there is no floor above it, the space between such floor and the next ceiling above it. A half story is a story under a sloped roof, the wall heights of which on at least two (2) opposite, exterior walls are less than four (4) feet. 
L.  STREET: Land dedicated for public use, from right-of-way line to right-of-way, which affords a primary means of access to the abutting property. Streets may be categorized in a hierarchy or conceptual arrangement of streets based on function. The hierarchical approach classifies streets from courts or lanes, which provide private access to a limited number of lots, to arterials, which accommodate large volumes of high-speed, regional traffic. Street types contained within the hierarchy include: 
1.  Court or lane 
2.  Local 
3.  Collector 
4.  Expressway 
5.  Minor Arterial 
6.  Major Arterial 
7.  State Highway 
8.  Federal Highways and Interstate 80 
M.  STREET, ARTERIAL: Street or highways intended to provide for through traffic movement between areas of the City or across the City. Major arterials usually imply relatively high speeds and traffic volumes, and are often subject to control of access to individual properties. Minor arterials are generally intended to provide trips of moderate lengths and imply lower operating speeds and more frequent points of local access than major arterial streets. 
N.  STREET, COLLECTOR: A street connecting neighborhoods within the same communities, designed to carry traffic from local to arterial streets. 
O.  STREET, DESIGNED: A future street designated on the Comprehensive Development Plan to insure traffic carrying capacity between neighborhoods, connections between neighborhoods and major activity centers and accommodation of major through traffic. Such streets may be designated as collectors, arterials or expressways with the tentative location of the street shown on the Transportation Plan included in the City's Comprehensive Development Plan. 
P.  STREET, EXPRESSWAY: A major street with limited access for high traffic speeds and volumes designed to move traffic around the City rather than through it. 
Q.  STREET, INTERSECTING AND PRINCIPAL: In regard to a site, the principal street shall be the street to which the majority of lots on a blockface are oriented; the intersecting street shall be a street other than a principal street. 
R.  STREET, LOCAL: A street which is used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
S.  STREET, MAJOR: A street carrying traffic between neighborhoods, connecting neighborhoods with major activity centers, or accommodating major through traffic. Major streets are designated as collectors, arterials, or expressways by the Comprehensive Development Plan. 
T.  STREET YARD: The area between the building wall and the property line of the street to which the wall is oriented. 
U.  STRUCTURE: Any object constructed or built and attached or anchored permanently or semi-permanently to the ground in such a way as to prevent routine movement. 
V.  SUBDIVISION: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other units of land for title transfer or development, when one (1) of the resultant lots is equal to ten (10) acres or less. 
12-123 - T 
A.  TOWNHOUSE: A dwelling unit having a common wall with or abutting one (1) or more adjacent dwelling units in a townhouse structure, with its own front and rear access to the outside, and neither above nor below any other dwelling unit. 
B.  TOWNHOUSE STRUCTURE: A building formed by at least two (2) and not more than twelve (12) contiguous townhouses with common or abutting walls. 
12-124 - U 
A.  URBAN SUBDIVISION: A residential subdivision generally located within the corporate limits of the City of Kearney or less than one-half (1/2) mile of such corporate limits; or within an area designated for future urban development by the Comprehensive Development Plan. 
B.  USE: The conduct of an activity, or the performance of a function or operation, on a site or in a building or facility. 
C.  UTILITIES: Installations, either above or below ground, necessary for the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, treatments, or storage of water, solid or fluid wastes, storm water, energy media, gas, electronic or electromagnetic signals, or other services which are precedent to development and use of land. 
12-125 - V 
12-126 - W 
12-127 - X 
12-128 - Y 
A.  YARD; REQUIRED: That portion of a lot which lies between a lot line and the corresponding building setback line or the required landscape area. This area shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided for or required by this ordinance. 
1.  FRONT YARD: The space extending the full width of a lot, lying between the front lot line and the front setback line of the main building. For a corner lot, the front yard shall normally be defined as that yard along a street which meets one (1) of the following two (2) criteria: 
a.  The yard along the blockface to which a greater number of structures are oriented; or 
b.  The yard along a street that has the smaller horizontal dimension. 
2.  REAR YARD: The space extending the full width of a lot, lying between the rear lot line and the rear setback line of the main building. 
3.  SIDE YARD: The space extending the depth of a lot from the front to rear lot lines, lying between the side yard setback line of the main building and the interior lot line. 
4.  STREET SIDE YARD: On a corner lot, the space extending from the front yard to the rear yard, between the street side yard setback line of the main building and the street side lot line. 
12-129 - Z 
A.  ZONING DISTRICT: A designated specified land classification, within which all sites are subject to a unified group of use and site development regulations set forth in this Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 03-12-2002; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006) 
Chapter 13 - USE TYPES 

13-101 - PURPOSE 
    Chapter 13 shall be known as the Use Types. The purpose of the Use Types is to establish a classification system for land uses and a consistent set of terms defining uses permitted or conditionally permitted within various zoning districts. The Use Types chapter also provides a procedure for determining the applicable use type of any activity not clearly within any defined use type. 
13-102 - DETERMINATIONS 
A.  Classification of Uses. In the event of any question as to the appropriate use types of any existing or proposed use or activity, the City Planner of the City of Kearney shall have the authority to determine the appropriate use type. A determination of the City Planner may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. In making such determinations, the City Planner and Board of Adjustment shall consider such characteristics or specific requirements of the use in common with those included as examples of use types. Those examples, when included in use type descriptions, are intended to be illustrative, as opposed to exclusive lists. 
B.  Records. The City Planner shall make all such determinations of appropriate use types in writing. The record of the determination shall contain a report explaining the reasons for the determination. 
13-103 - AGRICULTURAL USE TYPES 
    Agricultural use types include the planting, cultivating, harvesting, and storage of grains, hay, or plants commonly grown in Buffalo or Kearney Counties; or the raising and feeding of livestock or poultry. 
A.  Agricultural Market. A limited commercial sales operation that allows the sale of agricultural produce and products made from agricultural produce, homemade crafts, food and drink for consumption on the premises. Related activities may include but are not limited to hayrack rides, horseback rides, petting zoos, corn mazes, hike/bike paths, nature tours and other similar agricultural entertainment and recreation opportunities. 
B.  Horticulture. The growing of horticultural and floricultural specialties, such as flowers, shrubs, or trees intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes. This definition may include accessory retail sales under certain conditions. Typical uses include wholesale plant nurseries and greenhouses. 
C.  Crop Production. The raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops or field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis. This definition may include accessory retail sales under certain conditions. 
D.  Animal Production. The raising of animals for production of animal products, such as eggs or dairy products on an agricultural or commercial basis on a site which is also used for crop production or where grazing of natural vegetation is the major feed source; or the raising of animals for recreational or educational use. Typical uses include grazing, ranching, free ranch dairy farming, and poultry farming. 
E.  Confined Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO). The use of a site of any size for the confined feeding or holding of one thousand (1,000) or more animal units of livestock or poultry, or of a site with a gross density of two (2) or more animal units per acre, within buildings, lots, pens, or other close quarters which are not used for crop production or where grazing of natural vegetation is not the major feed source. Livestock and poultry shall include any animal or fowl which are used primarily for use as food or food products for human consumption, or for laboratory or testing purposes. A CAFO does not include areas which are used for the raising of crops or other vegetation, and upon which livestock are allowed to graze or feed. For the purpose of calculating animal units, the animal unit equivalents for each type of livestock are established as follows: 
Type of Livestock Equivalent Animal Units Per Acre Slaughter and feed cattle 1.00 Mature dairy cattle 1.40 Swine 0.75 Sheep 0.20 Horses 2.00 Turkeys 0.20 Ducks 0.20 Chickens 0.10  
F.  Livestock Sales. The use of a site for the temporary confinement and exchange or sale of livestock. Typical uses include sales barns. 
G.  Urban Farming. The use of property for the cultivation and growing of horticultural crops for commercial use. Typical uses include hydroponics and/or aeroponics. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 8130, 3-14-2017) 
13-104 - RESIDENTIAL USE TYPES 
    Residential use types include uses providing wholly or primarily non-transient living accommodations. They exclude institutional living arrangements providing twenty-four (24) hour skilled nursing or medical care, forced residence, or therapeutic settings. 
A.  Single-Family Residential. The use of a site for one (1) dwelling unit, occupied by one (1) family. Mobile home units, as defined by this Section, are not a single-family residential use type. 
1.  Single-Family Residential (Detached): A single-family residential use in which one (1) dwelling unit is located on a single lot, with no physical or structural connection to any other dwelling unit. 
2.  Single-Family Residential (Attached): A single-family residential use in which one (1) dwelling unit is located on a single lot and is attached by a common vertical wall to only one (1) other adjacent dwelling unit on another single lot. 
B.  Duplex Residential. The use of a legally-described lot for two (2) dwelling units, each occupied by one (1) family within a single building, excluding manufactured or mobile home units, but including modular housing units. 
C.  Two-Family Residential. The use of a site for two (2) dwelling units, each occupied by one (1) family, each in a separate building, excluding a mobile home unit. 
D.  Townhouse Residential. The use of a site for three (3) or more attached dwelling units, each occupied by one (1) family and separated by vertical side walls extending from foundation through roof without openings. Each townhouse unit must have at least two (2) exposed exterior walls. 
E.  Multiple-Family Residential. The use of a site for three (3) or more dwelling units within one (1) building not otherwise defined as townhouse units. 
F.  Downtown Residential. The use of upper levels above street level of a building within the Central Business District of the City of Kearney for single or multiple family residential uses. 
G.  Group Residential. The use of a site for the residence of more than three (3) unrelated persons, not otherwise defined as a family, in which occupants are accommodated in rooms not defined as dwelling units. Group Residential uses are limited to facilities that are officially recognized or operated by a college or university, government agency, or nonprofit organization. Typical uses include fraternity or sorority houses and dormitories not incorporated into a college and university use type. 
H.  Lodging House. The use of a site for the residence of more than three (3) unrelated persons, not otherwise defined as a family, in which occupants are accommodated in rooms not defined as dwelling units. 
I.  Manufactured Home Residential. Use of a site for one (1) manufactured home dwelling, as defined in Section 12-116. 
J.  Mobile Home Park. Use of a site under single ownership for one (1) or more mobile home units. Generally, the land on which mobile homes are placed in a Mobile Home Park is leased from the owner of the facility. 
K.  Mobile Home Subdivision. Division of a tract of land into lots that meet all the requirements of the City of Kearney's Subdivision Chapter for the location of manufactured or mobile homes on permanent foundations. Generally, a lot within a Mobile Home Subdivision is owned by the owner of the mobile home placed upon such lot. 
L.  Retirement Residence. A building or group of buildings which provide residential facilities, provided that seventy-five percent (75%) of the residents are at least sixty (60) years of age, or households headed by a householder of at least sixty (60) years of age. A retirement residence may provide a range of residential building types and may also provide support services to residents, including, but not limited to, food service, general health supervision, medication services, housekeeping services, personal services, recreation facilities, and transportation services. The retirement residence may accommodate food preparation in independent units or meal service in one (1) or more common areas. Retirement residences may include additional health care supervision or nursing care. 
(Ord. No. 8321 , § 1, 2-12-2019) 
13-105 - CIVIC USE TYPES 
    Civic use types include the performance of utility, educational, recreational, cultural, medical, protective, governmental, and other uses which are strongly vested with social importance. 
A.  Administration. Governmental offices providing administrative, clerical or public contact services that deal directly with the citizen, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include federal, state, county, and city offices. 
B.  Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematoria, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery as well as pet cemeteries and pet crematoria. 
C.  Clubs. Uses providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities for a private, nonprofit or noncommercial association, primarily for use by members and guests. 
1.  Clubs (Recreational): Clubs which provide indoor and/or outdoor athletic facilities, with or without social or meeting facilities. Typical uses include country clubs, private or nonprofit community or recreation centers, and private golf courses and driving ranges. 
2.  Clubs (Social): Clubs which provide primarily social or meeting facilities. Typical uses include private social clubs and fraternal organizations excluding restricted adult entertainment business as defined in Section 13-107.BB. 
D.  College and University Facilities. An educational institution of higher learning which offers a course of study designed to culminate in the issuance of a degree certified by a generally recognized accrediting organization. 
E.  Convalescent Services. A use providing bed care and inpatient services for persons requiring regular medical attention but excluding a facility providing surgical or emergency medical services and excluding a facility providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or communicable disease. Typical uses include nursing homes. 
F.  Cultural Services. A library, museum, or similar registered nonprofit organizational use displaying, preserving and exhibiting objects of community and cultural interest in one (1) or more of the arts and sciences. 
G.  Day Care Home Services (Limited). This use type includes all classifications of day care facilities located in the provider's place of residence regulated by the State of Nebraska that operate providing care for not more than eight (8) persons plus two (2) additional school age children during non-school hours; or, providing care for no more than four (4) babies if providing infant care ONLY. This term includes facilities licensed by the State of Nebraska Department of Health & Human Services, Division of Public Health as "Family Child Care Home I." 
H.  Day Care Home Services (General). This use type includes all classifications of day care facilities, located in the residence of the provider or in any other approved location, regulated by the State of Nebraska that operate providing care for not more than twelve (12) persons. A maximum of two (2) providers may be employed, according to license standards. This term includes facilities licensed by the State of Nebraska Department of Health & Human Services, Division of Public Health as "Family Child Care Home II." 
I.  Day Care Centers. This use type includes all classifications of day care facilities, located in the provider's residence or any other approved location, regulated by the State of Nebraska that operate providing care for more than thirteen (13) or more persons. This term includes facilities licensed by the State of Nebraska Department of Health & Human Services, Division of Public Health as "Child Care Center" and/or "Preschool." 
See the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services for Day Care Licensing. 
J.  Detention Facilities. A publicly operated or contracted use providing housing and care for individuals legally confined, designed to isolate those individuals from the community. 
K.  Emergency Residential Services. A facility or use of a building to provide a protective sanctuary for victims of crime or abuse, including emergency housing during crisis intervention for victims of rape, abuse, or physical beatings. 
L.  Group Care Facility. A facility licensed or approved by the State of Nebraska or other appropriate agency, which provides for the care and short or long-term, continuous multi-day occupancy of more than three (3) unrelated persons who require and receive therapy or counseling on site as part of an organized and therapeutic ongoing program for any of the purposes listed below. Such facilities shall exclude those uses defined as group homes. Group Care Facilities include facilities which provide for the: 
1.  Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from, the handicaps of physical disability. 
2.  Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from, the handicaps of emotional or mental disorder; or of mental retardation if such facility has an overnight occupancy of more than eight (8) persons. 
M.  Group Care Facility (Limited). A facility licensed or approved by the State of Nebraska or other appropriate agency, which provides for the care and short or long-term, continuous multi-day occupancy of more than three (3) unrelated persons who require and receive therapy or counseling on site as part of an organized and therapeutic ongoing program for any of the purposes listed below. Such facilities shall exclude those uses defined as group homes. Group Care Facilities include facilities which provide for the: 
1.  Rehabilitation from the effects of drug or alcohol abuse. 
2.  Supervision while under a program alternative to imprisonment, including, but not limited to, pre-release, work-release, and probationary programs. 
N.  Group Home. A facility licensed by the State of Nebraska in which no more than eight (8) persons, not including resident managers or house parents, who are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption reside while receiving therapy, training, or counseling for the purpose of adaptation to living with or rehabilitation from cerebral palsy, autism, or mental retardation. 
O.  Guidance Services. A use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative, or similar services to persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction, or similar condition on a daytime care basis. 
P.  Health Care. A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an outpatient basis including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration and services to outpatients, employees, or visitors. 
Q.  Hospital. A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons primarily on an inpatient basis, including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration, and services to patients, employees, or visitors. 
R.  Maintenance Facilities. A public facility supporting maintenance, repair, vehicular or equipment servicing, material storage, and similar activities including street or sewer yards, equipment service centers, and similar uses having characteristics of commercial services or contracting or industrial activities. 
S.  Park and Recreation Services. Publicly-owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities including publicly-owned community centers, and open spaces. 
T.  Postal Facilities. Postal services, including post offices, bulk mail processing or sorting centers operated by the United States Postal Service. 
U.  Primary Educational Facilities. A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary school level in the branches of learning study required to be taught in schools within the State of Nebraska. 
V.  Public Assembly. Facilities owned and operated by a public agency, charitable nonprofit, or private organization accommodating major public assembly for recreation, sports, amusement, or entertainment purposes. Typical uses include civic or community auditoriums, sports stadiums and arenas, convention facilities, fairgrounds, incidental sales, and exhibition facilities. 
W.  Religious Assembly. A use located in a permanent building and providing regular organized religious worship, administrative offices, fellowship/social hall, and religious education incidental thereto. 
X.  Safety Services. Facilities for conduct of public safety and emergency services including police and fire protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services. 
Y.  Secondary Educational Facilities. A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the junior high or high school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the schools of the State of Nebraska. 
Z.  Utilities. Any above ground structures or facilities, other than lines, poles, and other incidental facilities, used for the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil, energy media, communications, electronic or electromagnetic signals, or other services which are precedent to development and/or use of land. 
(Ord. No. 7835, 9-10-2013, effective January 1, 2014; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016; Ord. No. 8321 , § 2, 2-12-2019) 
13-106 - OFFICE USE TYPES 
    Office use types include uses providing for administration, professional services, and allied activities. These uses often invite public clientele but are more limited in external effects than commercial uses. 
A.  Corporate Offices. Use of a site for administrative, processing, or research offices, which generally does not provide service to clientele from Kearney and the surrounding region. Corporate offices are destinations for commuters drawn from a relatively wide region around Kearney, as well as from the community itself. Typical uses include corporate headquarters offices, telemarketing, or information processing offices. 
B.  General Offices. Use of a site for business, professional, or administrative offices who may invite clients from both local and regional areas. Typical uses include real estate, insurance, management, travel, or other business offices; organization and association offices; or professional offices. 
C.  Financial Services. Provision of financial and banking services to consumers or clients. Walk-in and drive-in services to consumers are provided on site. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions, savings banks, and loan companies. An ATM (Automatic Teller Machine) that is not accompanied on-site by an office of its primary financial institution is considered within the Personal Services Use Type. The Financial Services use type is divided into two (2) categories. Financial Services A includes less than four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area and has no more than two (2) drive-up lanes (including ATM lanes). Financial Services B includes four thousand (4,000) square feet or more of floor area and/or has more than two (2) drive-up lanes. 
D.  Medical Offices. Use of a site for facilities which provide diagnoses and outpatient care on a routine basis, but which does not provide prolonged, in-house medical or surgical care. Medical offices are operated by doctors, dentists, or similar medical practitioners licensed for practice in the State of Nebraska. The Medical Offices use type is divided into two (2) categories. Medical Offices A includes less than three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area. Medical Offices B includes three thousand (3,000) square feet or more of floor area. 
13-107 - COMMERCIAL USE TYPES 
    Commercial uses include the sale, rental, service, and distribution of goods; and the provision of services other than those classified under other use types. 
A.  Agricultural Sales and Service. Establishments or places of business engaged in sale from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers, farm equipment, pesticides and similar goods or in the provision of agriculturally related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. Typical uses include nurseries, hay, farm implement dealerships, feed and grain stores, and tree service firms. 
B.  Automotive and Equipment Services. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in sale and/or service of automobiles, trucks, or heavy equipment. The following are considered automotive and equipment use types: 
1.  Automobile Auction Lots: Sale of motor vehicles through a process of periodic auctions or bid procedures. Automobile auction lots usually include large on-site storage areas of motor vehicles and lack showrooms, auto repair facilities and other structures and facilities which generally characterize new car dealerships. 
2.  Automotive Rental and Sales: Sale or rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include new and used car dealerships; motorcycle dealerships; and boat, trailer, and recreational vehicle dealerships. 
3.  Auto Services Limited: Provision of fuel, lubricants, parts and accessories, and incidental services to motor vehicles; and washing and cleaning and/or the sale of equipment and parts. Typical uses include service stations, car washes, muffler shops, tire sales and installation, wheel and brake shops, and limited service activities. 
4.  Auto Services General: Repair of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing of equipment and parts and other limited auto services. Typical uses include auto repair garages, body and fender repair services, and Auto Services Limited (as listed above). Dismantling and salvage services constitutes an industrial use type, described in Section 13-109, Subsection J. 
5.  Equipment Rental and Sales: Sale or rental of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, mobile homes, and similar heavy equipment, including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include truck dealerships, construction equipment dealerships, and mobile home sales establishments. 
6.  Equipment Repair Services: Repair of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses include truck repair garages, tractor and farm implement repair services, and machine shops, but exclude dismantling, salvage, or body and fender repair services. 
C.  Bed and Breakfast. A lodging service that provides overnight or short-term accommodations to guests or visitors, usually including provision of breakfast. Bed and breakfasts are usually located in large residential structures that have been adapted for this use. For the purpose of this definition, bed and breakfasts are always owned and operated by the resident owner or resident manager of the structure, include no more than eight (8) units, and accommodate each guest or visitor for no more than seven (7) consecutive days during any one (1) month period. 
D.  Business Support Services. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale, rental or repair of equipment, supplies and materials or the provision of services used by office, professional and service establishments to the firms themselves but excluding automotive, construction and farm equipment. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops or hotel equipment and supply firms, messenger and incidental delivery services, custodial or maintenance services, and convenience printing and copying. 
E.  Business or Trade Schools. A use providing education or training in business, commerce, language, or other similar activity or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college or university, or public or private educational facility. 
F.  Campground. Facilities providing camping or parking areas and incidental services for travelers in recreational vehicles, camping cabins or tents, which accommodate each guest or visitor for no more than seven (7) consecutive days during any one (1) month period. A camping cabin is a portable and temporary living quarter only to be used in campgrounds. 
G.  Cocktail Lounge. A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, and similar uses other than a restaurant as that term is defined in this section. 
H.  Commercial Recreation Indoor. Private businesses, or other organizations which may or may not be commercial by structure or by nature, which are primarily engaged in the provision or sponsorship of sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators. Typical uses include theaters, private dance halls, billiard or bowling centers, game arcades, or private skating facilities. 
I.  Commercial Recreation Outdoor. Private businesses or other organizations which may or may not be commercial by structure or by nature, which are primarily engaged in the provision or sponsorship of sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators. Typical uses include golf courses, batting ranges, swimming pools, go cart courses, and paintball ranges or courses. 
J.  Communications Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but excludes those classified as Utilities. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunication service centers, telegraph service offices, or film and sound recording facilities. Broadcast towers, and their minor ancillary ground structures are classified as "Miscellaneous Use Types". 
K.  Construction Sales and Services. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail or wholesale sale, from the premises, of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures other than retail sale of paint, fixtures and hardware. This use type excludes those uses classified under Automotive and Equipment Services. Typical uses include building materials sales, or tool and equipment rental or sales. 
L.  Consumer Services. Establishments which provide services, primarily to individuals and households, but excluding Automotive Use Types. Typical uses include automated banking machines, appliance repair shops, watch or jewelry repair shops, or musical instrument repair shops. 
M.  Convenience Storage. Storage services primarily for personal effects and household goods within enclosed storage areas having individual access but excluding use of such areas as workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing, or commercial activity. Typical uses include mini-warehousing. 
N.  Food Sales. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food or household products for home consumption. Food Sales establishments may include the sale of non-food items. Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy shops. 
1.  Convenience Food Sales: Establishments occupying facilities of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet; and characterized by sales of specialty foods or a limited variety of general items, and the sales of fuel for motor vehicles constituting four (4) pumps or less. 
2.  Limited Food Sales: Establishments occupying facilities of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet; and characterized by sales of specialty foods or a limited variety of general items, but excluding the accessory sale of fuel for motor vehicles. Typical uses include delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, candy shops, and small grocery stores. 
3.  General Food Sales: Establishments selling a wide variety of food commodities and related items, using facilities larger than ten thousand (10,000) but less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet. Typical uses include grocery stores and locker plants. 
4.  Supermarkets: Establishments selling a wide variety of food commodities, related items, and often providing a variety of non-food goods and services, using facilities larger than forty thousand (40,000) square feet. Typical uses include large grocery stores. 
O.  Fuel Sales. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of fuel, constituting five (5) or more fuel pumps, and including the sale of food or household products for home consumption. 
P.  Funeral Services. Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the human dead for burial, and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral homes, crematoriums or mortuaries. 
Q.  Furniture and Appliance Stores. Establishments engaged in primarily selling furniture and/or appliances and exceeding ten thousand (10,000) square feet of retail space. 
R.  Gaming Facilities. Establishments engaged in the lawful, on-site operation of games of chance that involve the risk of money for financial gain by patrons. Gaming facilities shall include the accessory sale of liquor and food, pursuant to regulations of the City of Kearney and/or the State of Nebraska. 
S.  Kennels. Boarding and care services for dogs, cats and similar small mammals or large birds; or any premises on which more than four (4) animals included under this definition over four (4) months of age are kept and maintained. Typical uses include boarding kennels, ostrich raising facilities; pet motels, or dog training centers. 
T.  Laundry Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, cleaning or dyeing services other than those classified as Personal Services. Typical uses include bulk laundry and cleaning plans, diaper services, or linen supply services. 
U.  Liquor Sales. Establishments or places of business engaged in retail sale for off-premise consumption of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include liquor stores, bottle shops, or any licensed sales of liquor, beer or wine for off-site consumption. 
V.  Lodging. Lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board, but not meeting the classification criteria of Bed and Breakfasts. Typical uses include hotels, apartment hotels, and motels. 
W.  Personal Improvement Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvements and similar services of a nonprofessional nature. Typical uses include driving schools, health or physical fitness studios, music schools, reducing salons, dance studios, handicraft and hobby instruction, but excluding instructional vehicle driving ranges. 
X.  Personal Services. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of services of a personal nature. Typical uses include beauty and barber shops; seamstress, tailor, or shoe repair shops; photography studios; television or electronics repair; or dry cleaning stations serving individuals and households. Personal Services include establishments providing for the administration of massage or massage therapy carried out by persons licensed by the State of Nebraska when performing massage services as a part of the profession or trade for which licensed or persons performing massage services under the direction of a person so licensed; or persons performing massage services or therapy pursuant to the written direction of a licensed physician. 
Y.  Pet Services. Retail sales, incidental pet health services, and grooming and boarding, when totally within a building, of dogs, cats, birds, fish, and similar small animals customarily used as household pets. Typical uses include pet stores, small animal clinics, dog bathing and clipping salons, and pet grooming shops, but exclude uses for livestock and large animals. 
Z.  Research Services. Establishments primarily engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature. Typical uses include electronics research laboratories, space research and development firms, testing laboratories, or pharmaceutical research labs. 
AA.  Restaurants. A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages; including the sale of alcoholic beverages when conducted as a secondary feature of the use. 
1.  Restaurant (Drive-in or Fast Food): An establishment which principally supplies food and beverages in disposable containers and is characterized by high automobile accessibility and on-site accommodations, self-service, and short stays by customers. 
2.  Restaurant (General): An establishment characterized by table service to customers and/or accommodation to walk-in clientele, as opposed to Drive-in or Fast Food Restaurants. Typical uses include cafes, coffee shops, and restaurants. 
BB.  Restricted (or Adult Entertainment) Businesses. Any business activity which offers the opportunity to view specified sexual activities or view and touch specified anatomical areas in a manner that lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. This category includes the sale or viewing of visual or print materials that meet this criteria if the sale of such material constitutes more than twenty percent (20%) of the sales or retail floor area of the establishment. For the purposes of this definition, specified anatomical areas include the following if less than opaquely covered: human genitals, the pubic region, pubic hair, or the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. Specified sexual activities include any of the following conditions: 
1.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
2.  Acts or representations of acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse with humans or animals, oral sex, or flagellation. 
3.  Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast. 
4.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities set forth in 1 through 3 above. 
Typical uses include retail services or stores which are distinguished by an emphasis on activities or materials that emphasize primarily sexual content in their inventory and marketing practices; businesses which offer live performances characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas; and adult theaters. Businesses may be classified as adult entertainment businesses without regard to service of alcoholic beverages. 
CC.  Retail Services. Sale or rental with incidental service of commonly used goods and merchandise for personal or household use but excludes those classified more specifically by these use type classifications. Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores, or establishments providing the following products or services: 
Household cleaning and maintenance products; drugs, cards, stationery, notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics, and specialty items; flowers, plants, hobby materials, toys, and handcrafted items; apparel jewelry, fabrics and like items; cameras, photograph services, household electronic equipment, records, sporting equipment, kitchen utensils, home furnishing and appliances, art supplies and framing, arts and antiques, paint and wallpaper, hardware, carpeting and floor covering; interior decorating services; office supplies; mail order or catalog sales; bicycles; and automotive parts and accessories (excluding service and installation). 
Furniture and appliance stores providing for sales and repair of large furniture and appliance items. 
General Retail Services include: 
1.  Limited Retail Services: Establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities of three thousand (3,000) square feet or less. Typical establishments provide for specialty retailing or retailing oriented to Kearney and its surrounding vicinity. 
2.  Medium Retail Services: Establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities between three thousand one (3,001) and ten thousand (10,000) square feet in a single establishment or multi-tenant facility. Typical establishments provide for specialty retailing or general purpose retailing oriented to Kearney and its surrounding vicinity. 
3.  Large Retail Services: Establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities between ten thousand one (10,001) and forty thousand (40,000) square feet in a single establishment or multi-tenant facility. Typical establishments provide for specialty retailing or general purpose retailing oriented to Kearney and its surrounding vicinity. 
4.  Mass Retail Services: Establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities over forty thousand (40,000) square feet in a single establishment or multi-tenant facility. Typical establishments provide for general purpose retailing oriented to Kearney and the surrounding region. 
DD.  Stables and/or Riding Academies. The buildings, pens and pasture areas used for the boarding and feeding of horses, llamas, or other equine not owned by the occupants of the premises. This use includes instruction in riding, jumping, and showing or the riding of horses/equine for hire. 
EE.  Surplus Sales. Businesses engaged in the sale, including sale by auction, of used items or new items which are primarily composed of factory surplus or discontinued items. Surplus sales uses sometimes include regular outdoor display of merchandise. Typical uses include flea markets, auction houses, factory outlets, or merchandise liquidators. 
FF.  Trade Services. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of services that are not retail or primarily dedicated to walk-in clientele. These services often involve services to construction or building trades and may involve a small amount of screened, outdoor storage in appropriate zoning districts. Typical uses include shops or operating bases for plumbers, electricians, or HVAC (heating, ventilating, and air conditioning) contractors. 
GG.  Travel Centers. Facilities that provide for the sale of fuel, provisions, supplies to motorists, including operators of over-the-road trucks, in which less than thirty percent (30%) of the total site area is devoted to the servicing, accommodation, parking, or storage of over-the-road trucks. The calculation of these areas includes, but is not limited to, fuel islands for diesel fuel, truck washing facilities, truck parking areas, and associated maneuvering areas. Travel centers include a mix of uses, including food sales, general retail services, auto and equipment services, and restaurants, and are typically located along or near interstate highways or other principal state and federal designated highway routes. 
HH.  Truck Stops. Facilities that provide for the sale of fuel, provisions, supplies to motorists, including operators of over-the-road trucks, in which thirty percent (30%) or more of the total site area is devoted to the servicing, accommodation, parking, or storage of over-the-road trucks. The calculation of these areas includes, but is not limited to, fuel islands for diesel fuel, truck washing facilities, truck parking areas, and associated maneuvering areas. Travel centers include a mix of uses, including food sales, general retail services, auto and equipment services, and restaurants, and are typically located along or near interstate highways or other principal state and federal designated highway routes. 
II.  Vehicle Storage (Short-term). Short-term storage of operating or non-operating vehicles for a period of no more than twenty-one (21) days. Typical uses include storage of private parking tow-a-ways or impound yards but exclude dismantling or salvage. Long-term storage beyond twenty-one (21) days constitutes an Industrial Use Type. 
JJ.  Veterinary Services (General). Veterinary services and hospitals for small animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, and dog and cat hospitals. 
KK.  Veterinary Services (Large Animal). Veterinary services and hospitals for large animals such as cows, bulls, horses, and other livestock. Typical uses include veterinary hospitals for livestock and large animals. 
(Ord. No. 6963, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7835, 9-10-2013, effective January 1, 2014; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
13-108 - PARKING USE TYPES 
A.  Off-Street Parking. Parking use types include surface parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within a privately or publicly owned off-street parking facility. 
B.  Parking Structure. The use of a site for a multi-level building which provides for the parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis, other than as an accessory to a principal use on the same site. 
13-109 - INDUSTRIAL USE TYPES 
    Industrial use types include the on-site extraction or production of goods by nonagricultural methods, and the storage and distribution of products. 
A.  Agricultural Industry. Establishments which include the storage, manufacture, sale, or distribution of agricultural supplies or products that create major external effects, including substantial truck or rail traffic and/or significant potential for hazard. Typical uses include grain elevators, storage of agricultural chemicals such as anhydrous ammonia. Agricultural industries do not include retailers of farm equipment or other, generally non-hazardous agricultural supplies. 
B.  Construction Yards. Establishments housing facilities of businesses primarily engaged in construction activities, including incidental storage of materials and equipment on lots other than construction sites. Typical uses are building contractor's yards. 
C.  Custom Manufacturing. Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing, within enclosed structures, involving: 
1.  The use of hand tools, or 
2.  The use of domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding two (2) horsepower, or 
3.  A single kiln not exceeding eight (8) KW or equivalent. 
This category also includes the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those goods produced on site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, custom jewelry manufacturing, candle making shops. 
D.  Light Industry. Establishments engaged in the manufacture or processing of finished products from previously prepared materials, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution. These establishments are characterized by having no major external environmental effects across property lines and include no unscreened or unenclosed outdoor storage. Typical uses include commercial bakeries, dressed beef processing plants, soft drink bottling, apparel assembly from fabrics, electronics, manufacturing, print shops and publishing houses. 
E.  General Industry. Enterprises engaged in the processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or fabrication of materials and products from prepared materials or from raw materials without noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across property lines. 
F.  Heavy Industry. Enterprises involved in the basic processing and manufacturing of products, predominately from raw materials, with noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across property lines; or a use or process engaged in the storage of or processes involving potentially or actually hazardous, explosive, flammable, radioactive, or other commonly recognized hazardous materials. 
G.  Recycling Collection. Any site which is used in whole or part for the receiving or collection of any post-consumer, non-durable goods including, but not limited to, glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, aluminum, tin, or other recyclable commodities. 
H.  Recycling Processing. Any site which is used for the processing of any post-consumer, non-durable goods including, but not limited to, glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, aluminum, tin, or other recyclable commodities. 
I.  Resource Extraction. A use involving on-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources, excluding site grading for a specific construction project or preparation of a site for subsequent development. Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, mining, and removal of dirt for off-site use. 
J.  Salvage Services. Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their original forms. Typical uses include automotive wrecking yards, junkyards, or paper salvage yards. 
K.  Vehicle Storage (Long-term). Long-term storage of operating or non-operating vehicles for a period exceeding twenty-one (21) days. Typical uses include storage of private parking tow-a-ways or impound yards but exclude dismantling or salvage. Long-term storage of twenty-one (21) days or less constitutes a Commercial Use Type. 
L.  Warehousing (Enclosed). Uses including storage, distribution, and handling of goods and materials within enclosed structures. Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, and van and storage companies. 
M.  Warehousing (Open). Uses including open air storage, distribution, and handling of goods and materials. Typical uses include monument yards, grain elevators, and open storage. 
(Ord. No. 7153, 4-12-2005; Ord. No. 8034, 9-8-2015) 
13-110 - TRANSPORTATION USE TYPES 
    Transportation use types include the use of land for the purpose of providing facilities supporting the movement of passengers and freight from one (1) point to another. 
A.  Aviation Facilities. Landing fields, aircraft parking and service facilities, and related facilities for operation, service, fueling, repair, storage, charter, sales, and rental of aircraft, and including activities directly associated with the operation and maintenance of airport facilities and the provision of safety and security. 
B.  Railroad Facility. Railroad yards, and equipment servicing facilities. 
C.  Transportation Terminal. Facility for loading, unloading, and interchange of passengers, baggage, and incidental freight or package express, including bus terminals, railroad stations, public transit facilities. 
D.  Truck Terminal. A facility for the receipt, transfer, short term storage, and dispatching of goods transported by truck including freight or package express. 
E.  Driving Range. Outdoor facility or course for the purpose of vehicle driving instruction including automobiles and/or large truck (CDL) instruction. 
(Ord. No. 7835, 9-10-2013, effective January 1, 2014) 
13-111 - MISCELLANEOUS USE TYPES 
A.  Alternative Energy Production Devices. The use of a site for the production of energy utilizing methods that do not involve the oxidation, combustion, or fission of primary materials. Typical uses include solar collector fields, geothermal energy installations, or water-powered mills or generating facilities. 
B.  Amateur Radio Tower. A structure(s) for the transmission or broadcasting of electromagnetic signals by F.C.C. licensed amateur radio operators. 
C.  Communications Tower. A structure(s) for the transmission or broadcasting of radio, television, radar, or microwaves, ordinarily exceeding the maximum height permitted in its zoning district. Typical uses include broadcasting towers and cellular communications towers. 
D.  Construction Batch Plant. A temporary demountable facility used for the manufacturing of cement, concrete, asphalt, or other paving materials intended for specific construction projects. 
E.  Landfill (Non-putrescible Solid Waste Disposal). The use of a site as a depository for solid wastes that do not readily undergo chemical or biological breakdown under conditions normally associated with land disposal operations. Typical disposal material would include ashes, concrete, paving wastes, rock, brick, lumber, roofing materials and ceramic tile. 
F.  Landfill (Putrescible and Non-putrescible Solid Waste Disposal). The use of a site as a depository for any solid waste except hazardous and toxic waste as defined by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency and/or the State of Nebraska. Typical disposal material would include non-putrescible wastes; and putrescible wastes such as vegetation, tree parts, agricultural wastes (garbage) and manure. 
G.  Therapeutic Riding. The use of horses or other hoofed animals for the purpose of therapy programs for clinical treatment of persons with disabilities. 
H.  Large Wind Energy Conversion System (LWECS). Any device which converts wind energy to a form of usable energy, including wind charges, windmills, or wind turbines, but excluding Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems. LWECS typically are associated with large scale "wind farms" and are only permitted in conjunction with a PD, Planned Development Overlay District in zoning districts AG, BP, M-1, and M-2. 
I.  Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems (SWECS). A device which converts wind energy to a form of usable energy, which has a main rotor shaft set horizontally or vertically, a wind turbine with the main components located at the base of the turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics. SWECS are typically designed for urban use with a near-silent turbine, smaller and quieter than a LWECS. SWECS are intended to reduce on-site consumption of traditional electric utility power. 
(Ord. No. 7835, 9-10-2013, effective January 1, 2014; Ord. No. 7870, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 8034, 9-8-2015) 
Chapter 14 - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

14-101 - PURPOSE 
    Zoning Districts are established in the Zoning Regulations to promote compatible land use patterns and to establish site development regulations appropriate to the purposes and specific nature of each district. 
14-102 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
    The following base districts and overlay districts are hereby established. 
BASE ZONING 
DISTRICTS DISTRICT NAMES AG Agricultural District RR-1 Rural Residential District (Rural Standards) RR-2 Rural Residential District (Intermediate Standards) R-1 Urban Residential Single-Family District (Low Density) R-2 Urban Residential Mixed-Density District R-3 Urban Residential Multi-Family District (Medium Density) R-4 Urban Residential Multi-Family District (High Density) RM Mobile Home Residential District UC Mixed Use Urban Corridor District C-O Office District C-1 Limited Commercial District C-2 Community Commercial District CBD Kearney Center Mixed Use District C-3 General Commercial District BP Business Park District M-1 Limited Industrial District M-2 General Industrial District SPECIAL DISTRICTS MU Mixed Use District BASE ZONING 
DISTRICTS OVERLAY DISTRICTS PD Planned Development Overlay District TND Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District RC Rural Conservation Development Overlay District ND Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District ND-1 Pioneer Park Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District FP/FW Floodplain Overlay District AV Aviation Overlay District W Wellhead Protection Overlay District  
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006) 
14-103 - APPLICATION OF DISTRICTS 
    A base district designation shall apply to each lot or site within the City and its planning jurisdiction. A site must be in one (1) base district. 
    Overlay districts may be applied to any lot or site or any portion thereof, in addition to a base district designation. Special districts may stand alone as a base district. 
14-104 - HIERARCHY 
    References in the Unified Land Development Ordinance to less intensive or more intensively urbanized districts shall be deemed to refer to those agricultural, residential, commercial, and industrial base zoning districts established in Section 14-102, and shall represent a progression from the "AG, Agricultural District" as the least intensively urbanized to the "M-2, General Industrial District" as the most intensively urbanized. 
14-105 - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
    For each Zoning District, permitted uses are set forth in Table 14-1, the Use Matrix. Individual sections describe the purpose and specific development regulations for each zoning district. Supplemental Regulations may affect specific land uses or development regulations in each zoning district. The applicable Supplemental Regulations are noted in the Use Matrix 
14-106 - ZONING MAP 
A.  Adoption of Zoning Map. Boundaries of zoning districts established by these Zoning Regulations shall be shown on the Zoning Map maintained by the GIS Coordinator. This map shall bear the signature of the Mayor attested by the City Clerk under the certification that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to by this Ordinance. This map, together with all legends, references, symbols, boundaries, and other information, shall be and is hereby adopted as a part of, and concurrent with, these Regulations. Three (3) copies of said Zoning Map shall be on file with the City Clerk and shall be readily accessible to the public at Kearney City Hall. 
B.  Changes to the Zoning Map. The Zoning Map shall be kept continuously current to reflect all changes authorized and approved by the City Council as to regulations, restrictions and boundaries of zoning districts created or amended by law, and the GIS Coordinator shall be charged with the duty of maintaining the Official Zoning Map in such a manner as to reflect all lawful changes authorized or approved by the Kearney City Council. The GIS Coordinator shall make available to the public upon request versions of the Official Zoning Map reduced in size and certified by the Development Coordinator to be current as of the date shown on the map, reflecting all lawfully authorized changes to the Official Zoning Map as of that date. 
C.  New Official Zoning Maps. The City Council may from time to time adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map, in the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged or destroyed; or for purposes of clarity due to a number of boundary changes, or to correct drafting errors or omissions; provided, however, that any such adoption shall not have the effect of amending the original Unified Land Development Ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof. 
(Ord. No. 7835, 9-10-2013, effective January 1, 2014) 
14-107 - INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 
    The following rules shall apply in determining the boundaries of any zoning district shown on the Zoning Map. 
A.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be considered the district boundaries. 
B.  Where district boundaries are indicated as within street or alley, railroad, streams or creeks, or other identifiable rights-of-way, the centerline of such rights-of-way shall be deemed the district boundary. 
C.  Where a district boundary divides a property, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the Zoning Map. 
D.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following corporate limits, such corporate limits shall be considered the district boundaries. 
E.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following section lines, quarter section lines, or quarter-quarter section lines, such lines shall be considered the district boundaries. 
F.  Boundaries not capable of being determined as set forth in Section 14-107A through E shall be as dimensioned on the official Zoning Map or if not dimensioned shall be determined by the scale shown on the map. 
14-108 - VACATION OF STREETS AND ALLEYS 
    Whenever a public street or alley is vacated, the zoning district adjoining each side of such right-of-way shall be extended out to the former centerline. 
14-109 - ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY 
    All unimproved or agricultural territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City shall be considered as lying in the "AG, Agricultural District" until such classification shall be changed as provided by this ordinance. Any improved property that is annexed into the City shall be zoned according to the zoning district that most nearly describes either its present use or the use proposed by Kearney's Comprehensive Development Plan. This zoning shall be established by the Planning Commission and the City Council at the time of annexation. 
14-110 - REQUIRED CONFORMANCE 
    Except as specified in this chapter, no building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used, which does not comply with all of the district regulations established by this title for the district in which the building or land is located. 
14-111 - REQUIRED FRONTAGE 
    Except as provided in Chapter 47 of this title, no lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for residence purposes unless such lot abuts for at least twenty (20) feet on at least one (1) public street, or unless it has an exclusive unobstructed private easement of access or right-of-way of at least twenty (20) feet wide to a street; and there shall be not more than one (1) single-family dwelling for such frontage or easement, except that a common easement of access at least fifty (50) feet wide may be provided for two (2) or more such single-family dwellings or for one (1) or more two (2)-family or multiple dwellings. 
14-112 - USE MATRIX: LEVELS OF PERMITTED USES 
    Within zoning districts in Kearney, different uses are permitted with different conditions. These are displayed in Table 14-1, the Use Matrix. Levels of permission include: 
A.  Uses Which Are Permitted By Right. These uses are permitted subject to issuance of a building permit by the Building Official, subject only to compliance with all regulations of this Ordinance. Uses permitted by right might be subject to supplemental regulations contained in this Ordinance. These uses are indicated in the Use Matrix by a "P" in the applicable cell. 
B.  Conditional Uses. These uses are subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission and City Council, following the procedure set forth in Section 59-103. These uses are indicated in the Use Matrix by a "C" in the applicable cell. 
C.  Planned Development. These uses are subject to a Planned Development Overlay District which may require additional conditions above the Site Development Regulations for the district. Subject to approval by Planning Commission and City Council, following the procedure set forth in Chapter 38. These uses are indicated by a "PD" in the applicable cell. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7835, 9-10-2013, effective January 1, 2014) 
14-113 - GUIDE TO SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATORS 
    The regulators set forth in the tables in Chapters 15 through 46 establish the limits and requirements for most development in the City of Kearney and its extra-territorial jurisdiction. This section is intended to provide guidance for applying the regulators contained in these tables. 
A.  Site Area Per Housing Unit. This indicates the gross land area per unit within a residential development. For example, a forty (40) lot subdivision on a ten (10) acre [four hundred thirty-five thousand, six hundred (435,600) square foot tract] will have a site area per unit of ten thousand eight hundred ninety (10,890) square feet. Site area per unit, which measures gross density, may differ from minimum lot size. In conservation development, the site area per unit will be larger than minimum lot size, permitting the clustering of lots in exchange for common open space. In multi-family development, the site area per unit will usually be smaller than minimum lot size, because the lot is the legal parcel on which a multiple-unit building is built. 
B.  Minimum Lot Area. This indicates the minimum size of a legally described and recorded parcel upon which development can take place. As noted above, minimum lot area and site area per unit may not be the same. 
C.  Minimum Lot Width. This is the required minimum distance connecting at points along opposite side lot lines, measured at the required front yard setback. For example, the lot width of an irregular lot in a district requiring a twenty-five (25)-foot front yard setback is determined by: 
1.  Locating the points along each side lot line at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet back from the front property line. 
2.  Drawing a line connecting these two (2) points. 
3.  Measuring the length of this line. The length is the lot width. 
D.  Minimum Yards. These define the required setbacks of buildings from front, side, and rear property lines. While the yard requirements apply to a majority of development, the Ordinance provides for a number of exceptions. Some of these include: 
1.  Planned Developments. Front yard setbacks can be varied within Planned Developments, which are reviewed and approved by the City Council after a recommendation from the Planning Commission. 
2.  Major Streets. The Director of Public Works may require greater than normal setbacks along segments of the City's major street system, as defined in the Comprehensive Development Plan. A map displaying these components and noting setback exceptions is included in the Transportation Section of the Comprehensive Development Plan. 
3.  Flexibility Provided by Supplemental Development Regulations. Chapter 47 establishes supplemental regulations, many of which provide flexibility or variations in setback regulations for specific contexts. 
4.  Maximum Setbacks. Some specific zoning districts provide maximum as well as minimum setbacks. These setbacks establish "build-to" lines which may be necessary to protect the appearance and character of special urban districts. 
E.  Maximum Height. Height normally measures the vertical distance from the established grade to the highest point of a building. However, as established by the definition of height, the point of measurement may vary for different types of buildings and roof slopes. Height measurement for Small and Large Wind Energy Conversion Systems shall include the height of the tower plus any part of the rotor or turbine that projects above the top of the tower to its highest point. 
F.  Maximum Building Coverage. This measures the percentage of a site that may be covered by the footprint of buildings. Thus, a twenty thousand (20,000) square foot building on a forty thousand (40,000) square foot site has a building coverage of fifty percent (50%). This is a method of regulating the scale of buildings in an area. 
G.  Maximum Impervious Coverage. This measures the percentage of a site that may be covered by buildings and other surfaces and development features which prevent the penetration of water into the ground (such as driveways, porches, parking lots, and other features). Limits on impervious coverage help control the velocity and quantity of storm water runoff and provide for groundwater recharge. 
H.  Floor Area Ratio. Just as site area per unit controls the density of residential development, floor area ration (FAR) controls the density of non-residential development. FAR is the ratio of gross floor area of a building to total site area. Thus, in an area with a maximum permitted FAR of 1.0, a forty thousand (40,000) square foot building may be located on a forty thousand (40,000) square foot site. Naturally, because of coverage ratios, landscaping, and parking requirements, such a building will be multi-story. 
I.  Maximum Amount of Total Parking in Street Yard. This controls the maximum amount of parking that can be located in the area between a building facade and the street. When applied in certain zoning districts, it is intended to reduce the number of cars seen from the street, encourage site planning which locates parking in rear and side yards, and produce a stronger relationship between buildings and streets. For example, a project with one hundred (100) parking stalls and a fifty percent (50%) limit on the amount of parking located in street yards must locate fifty (50) of its stalls in rear or side yards without street exposure. 
J.  Project Size Requiring Planned Development District. Some projects are so large in relative scale or impact that they require specific project review through the Planned Development District process, set forth in Chapter 38. This regulator establishes the threshold size for projects which must go through this specific project approval process. For example, in some districts, a project that includes a site of four (4) acres and over or a planned building area in excess of forty thousand (40,000) square feet must be developed as a Planned District. 
K.  Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Rights-of-Way. This establishes the depth of landscaping that must be provided on private property adjacent and in from the right-of-way line. Thus, if the required minimum depth is fifteen (15) feet, a project must landscape the first fifteen (15) feet of its site back from the right-of-way line. All landscaping must be done in accordance with Chapter 48, establishing landscaping standards. 
L.  Minimum Bufferyard Requirements. This establishes the depth of a bufferyard that must be provided by intensive land uses adjacent to primarily residential land uses in residential zoning districts. All landscaping must be done in accordance with Chapter 48, establishing landscaping standards. 
M.  Supplemental Use Regulations. Certain permitted uses require satisfaction of specific requirements in order to function successfully in their urban or rural contexts. These supplemental requirements are set forth in Chapter 46. These requirements are cross-referenced in the "Supplementary Regulations" column of the Use Matrix. 
Table 14-1 
Use Matrix: 
Agricultural and Residential Types 
Use Types AG RR-1 RR-2 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RM UC C-O Agricultural Uses Agricultural Market C C C Horticulture P Crop Production P Animal Production P P P Confined Animal Feeding Operations Livestock Sales PD Urban Farming C Urban Farming with a Cargo Container - Farm C Residential Uses Single-Family Detached P P P P P P P P P P Single-Family Attached P P P P P Duplex P P P P P P Two-Family Townhouse P P P P P Multiple-Family P P P P Downtown Residential Group Residential P PD Lodging House Manufactured Housing Residential P P P P P P P P P Mobile Home Park P Mobile Home Subdivision P Retirement Residential PD PD PD  
P - Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations 
PD - Planned Development Required 
C - Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 
Blank - Use not permitted in zoning district 
Table 14-1 
Use Matrix: 
Agricultural and Residential Types - continued 
Use Types C-1 C-2 CBD C-3 BP M-1 M-2 Supplemental Regulations Agricultural Uses Agricultural Market Horticulture 46-102A Crop Production Animal Production 46-102B Confined Animal Feeding Operations Livestock Sales Urban Farming C C C C C 46-102E Urban Farming with a Cargo Container- Farm C C 46-102E Residential Uses Single-Family Detached P P P P Single-Family Attached C Duplex P P P P Two-Family Townhouse P P P P Multiple-Family P P P P Downtown Residential P 46-103A Group Residential PD PD PD PD 46-103B Lodging House PD 46-103B Manufactured Housing Residential Mobile Home Park 46-103C Mobile Home Subdivision 46-103D Retirement Residential PD PD 46-103E  
P - Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations 
PD - Planned Development Required 
C - Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 
Blank - Use not permitted in zoning district 
Table 14-1 
Use Matrix: 
Civic Use Types 
Use Types AG RR-1 RR-2 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RM UC C-O Civic Uses Administration P P P Cemetery P PD PD PD PD PD PD Clubs (Recreational) P PD P P Clubs (Social) P P P College/University PD PD PD Convalescent Services P P C C C P P P P P Cultural Services P P P P P P P P P P Day Care Home Services (Limited) P P P P P P P P P Day Care Home Services (General) P P P P P C C C P Day Care Centers P P P C C C C C P Detention Facilities C Emergency Residential P P P P P P P P P P Group Care Facility PD PD PD PD Group Care Facility (Limited) Group Home C P P P P P P P P P Guidance Services C P C P P Health Care C P C P P Hospitals C C P Maintenance Facility C C Park and Recreation P P P P P P P P P P Postal Facilities C C P P Primary Education P P P P P P P P P P Public Assembly C C Religious Assembly P P P P P P P P P P Safety Services P P P P P P P P P P Secondary Education C C C C C C P C P P Utilities P C C C C C C C C C  
P - Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations 
PD - Planned Development Required 
C - Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 
Blank - Use not permitted in zoning district 
Table 14-1 - continued 
Use Matrix: 
Civic Use Types - continued 
Use Types C-1 C-2 CBD C-3 BP M-1 M-2 Supplemental Regulations Civic Uses Administration P P P P P P P Cemetery Clubs (Recreational) P P P P C P P 46-104A Clubs (Social) P P P P P P P 46-104A College/University P P P P P P Convalescent Services P P C Cultural Services P P P P P P P Day Care Home Services (Limited) P P P P P P P 46-104C Day Care Home Services (General) P P P P P C C 46-104C Day Care Centers P P P P C C 46-104C Detention Facilities C C C C Emergency Residential P P P P Group Care Facility PD PD PD PD 46-104B Group Care Facility (Limited) PD PD PD Group Home P P P P 46-104B Guidance Services P P P P P P P Health Care P P P P P P P Hospitals C P P P P C C Maintenance Facility P P P P P P Park and Recreation P P P P P P P Postal Facilities P P P P P P P Primary Education P C C C Public Assembly C P P P C P P Religious Assembly P P P P P P C 46-104D Safety Services P P P P P P P Secondary Education C P C P C C Utilities C C C C C P P  
P - Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations 
PD - Planned Development Required 
C - Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 
Blank - Use not permitted in zoning district 
Table 14-1 - continued 
Use Matrix: 
Office Use Types 
Use Types AG RR-1 RR-2 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RM UC C-O Office Uses Corporate Offices PD PD General Offices P P Financial Services A P P Financial Services B P P Medical Offices A P P Medical Offices B P P  
Table 14-1 - continued 
Use Matrix: 
Office Use Types - continued 
Use Types C-1 C-2 CBD C-3 BP M-1 M-2 Supplemental Regulations Office Uses Corporate Offices PD PD PD PD General Offices P P P P P Financial Services A P P P P P Financial Services B P P PD P P P P Medical Offices A P P P P P Medical Offices B P P PD P P  
P - Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations 
PD - Planned Development Required 
C - Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 
Blank - Use not permitted in zoning district 
Table 14-1 - continued 
Use Matrix: 
Commercial Use Types 
Use Types AG RR-1 RR-2 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RM UC C-O Commercial Uses Ag Sales/Service Auto Auction Lots Auto Rental/Sales Auto Services Limited Body Repair Auto Services General Equip Rental/Sales Equipment Repair Bed and Breakfast P P P P P PD PD P Business Support Services P Business/Trade School PD Campground PD Cocktail Lounge P Commercial Rec (Indoor) Commercial Rec (Outdoor) Communication Service P Construction Sale/Service Consumer Service P P Convenience Storage Food Sales (Convenience) Food Sales (Limited) P P Food Sales (General) Food Sales (Super markets)  
P - Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations 
PD - Planned Development Required 
C - Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 
Blank - Use not permitted in zoning district 
Table 14-1 - continued Use Matrix: 
Commercial Use Types - continued 
Use Types C-1 C-2 CBD C-3 BP M-1 M-2 Supplemental Regulations Commercial Uses Ag Sales/Service P P P Auto Auction Lots P P Auto Rental/Sales P P P PD PD 46-105C Auto Services Limited P P P P P P 46-105A, 46-105B Auto Services General P P P 46-105A Equip Rental/Sales P P P 46-105C Equipment Repair PD P P 46-105A Bed and Breakfast P P P P 46-105D Business Support Services P P P P P P P Business/Trade School PD PD PD P P Campground PD 46-105E Cocktail Lounge P P P P P P Commercial Rec (Indoor) P P P P P P Commercial Rec (Outdoor) PD P P P Communication Service P P P P P P Construction Sale/Service PD P P P P 46-105F Consumer Service P P P P P P P Convenience Storage P P P P 46-105G Food Sales (Convenience) P P P P P P P 49-109 Food Sales (Limited) P P P P P Food Sales (General) P P P P P Food Sales (Super markets) P P  
P - Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations 
PD - Planned Development Required 
C - Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 
Blank - Use not permitted in zoning district 
Table 14-1 - continued 
Use Matrix: 
Commercial Use Types - continued 
Use Types AG RR-1 RR-2 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RM UC C-O Commercial Uses Fuel Sales Funeral Service P Furniture/Appliance Stores Gaming Facilities Kennels P Laundry Services Liquor Sales Lodging Personal Improvement P P Personal Services P P Pet Services P P Research Services Restaurants (Drive-in) Restaurants (General) P P Restricted Business Retail Services (Limited) P P Retail Services (Medium) PD PD Retail Services (Large) Retail Services (Mass) Stables P Surplus Sales Trade Services Travel Centers Truck Stops Vehicle Storage (Short-term) Veterinary Services (General) P P P Veterinary Services (Large Animal) P  
P - Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations 
PD - Planned Development Required 
C - Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 
Blank - Use not permitted in zoning district 
Table 14-1 - continued 
Use Matrix: 
Commercial Use Types - continued 
Use Types C-1 C-2 CBD C-3 BP M-1 M-2 Supplemental Regulations Commercial Uses Fuel Sales P p P P P 49-109 Funeral Service P P P p P Furniture/Appliance Stores P PD p Gaming Facilities P P p Kennels p P P 46-105H Laundry Services P p P P P Liquor Sales P P p P Lodging P PD p P Personal Improvement P P P p P P P Personal Services P P P p P P P Pet Services P P P p P P Research Services PD P P p P P P Restaurants (Drive-in) P p Restaurants (General) P P P p P Restricted Adult Entertainment Business PD PD 46-105J Retail Services (Limited) P P P p P Retail Services (Medium) P P p 28-102 Retail Services (Large) C P PD p Retail Services (Mass) P p Stables Surplus Sales PD PD PD PD Trade Services P P P P Travel Centers PD PD P P 46-105A Truck Stops PD PD 46-105A Vehicle Storage (Short-term) P P Veterinary Services (General) P P P P P P P Veterinary Services (Large Animal) P P  
P - Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations 
PD - Planned Development Required 
C - Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 
Blank - Use not permitted in zoning district 
Table 14-1 - continued 
Use Matrix: 
Parking and Transportation Use Types 
Use Types AG RR-1 RR-2 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RM UC C-O Parking Uses Off-Street Parking Parking Structure PD Transportation Uses Aviation Driving Range Railroad Facilities Truck Terminal Transportation Terminal  
Table 14-1 - continued 
Use Matrix: 
Parking and Transportation Use Types - continued 
Use Types C-1 C-2 CBD C-3 BP M-1 M-2 Supplemental Regulations Parking Uses Off-Street Parking PD P P P P Parking Structure PD PD PD PD PD PD Transportation Uses Aviation P P Driving Range P P P Railroad Facilities P P Truck Terminal PD P P Transportation Terminal PD PD P P P  
P - Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations 
PD - Planned Development Required 
C - Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 
Blank - Use not permitted in zoning district 
Table 14-1 - continued 
Use Matrix: 
Industrial Use Types 
Use Types AG RR-1 RR-2 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RM UC C-O Industrial Uses Agricultural Industry C Construction Yards Custom Manufacturing C Light Industry General Industry Heavy Industry Recycling Collection Recycling Processing Resource Extraction C Salvage Services Vehicle Storage (Long-term) Warehousing (Enclosed) Warehousing (Open) Miscellaneous Uses Alternative Energy Production Devices P Amateur Radio Tower P P P P P P P P P P Communications Tower C C C C C C C Construction Batch Plant C Landfill (Non-Putrescrible) Landfill (Putrescible) Therapeutic Riding P LWECS PD SWECS P P P P P P P P P P  
P - Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations 
PD - Planned Development Required 
C - Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 
Blank - Use not permitted in zoning district 
Table 14-1 - continued 
Use Matrix: 
Industrial Use Types - continued 
Use Types C-1 C-2 CBD C-3 BP M-1 M-2 Supplemental Regulations Industrial Uses Agricultural Industry C P Construction Yards P P Custom Manufacturing C P P P P P Light Industry C P P General Industry P P Heavy Industry C Recycling Collection C C P P P Recycling Processing P P Resource Extraction C 46-107A Salvage Services C 46-107C Vehicle Storage (Long-term) C P P 46-107C Warehousing (Enclosed) C C P P P Warehousing (Open) C P Miscellaneous Uses Alternative Energy Production Devices P P P Amateur Radio Tower P P C P P P P Communications Tower C C C C C P P 46-110 Construction Batch Plant C C 46-107B Landfill (Non-Putrescrible) PD 46-111A Landfill (Putrescible) 46-111A Therapeutic Riding C C 46-107D LWECS PD PD PD 46-111B SWECS P P P P P P 46-111C  
P - Permitted by right or by right subject to supplemental regulations 
PD - Planned Development Required 
C - Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 
Blank - Use not permitted in zoning district 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7153, 4-12-2005; Ord. No. 7506, 3-10-2009; Ord. No. 7835, 9-10-2013, effective January 1, 2014; Ord. No. 7870, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 7910, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 8034, 9-8-2015; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016; Ord. No. 8096, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 8130, 3-14-2017; Ord. No. 8164, 7-11-2017; Ord. No. 8285 , § 1, 9-11-2018; Ord. No. 8321 , § 4, 2-12-2019) 
Chapter 15 - DISTRICT AG, AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 

15-101 - PURPOSE 
    This district provides for and preserves the agricultural and rural use of land, while accommodating extremely low density residential development generally associated with agricultural uses. This district is designed to maintain permanent and comprehensive agricultural uses within the Kearney extra-territorial jurisdiction. It recognizes that major agriculture has industrial aspects and negative effects on nearby neighborhoods that often create conflicts between agricultural and residential uses. In addition, land included in the Urban Reserve in the Comprehensive Development Plan should be retained in the AG District to prevent premature or inappropriate development. 
15-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator 1-Family Units Other Permitted Uses Minimum Lot Area* 10 acres 20 acres Minimum Lot Width (feet) 225 500 Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard 50 50  Side Yard 25 50  Street Side Yard 50 50  Rear Yard 50 100 Maximum Height (feet) 35 45  
* Note: Special provisions for land contained in Wellhead Protection Area Zones, see Chapter 45. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 03-12-2002; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 8321 , § 5, 2-12-2019) 
Chapter 16 - DISTRICT RR-1, RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RURAL STANDARDS) 

16-101 - PURPOSE 
    The RR-1 District provides for the rural residential use of land, accommodating agriculture and low density residential environments. It is designed for permanent development of relatively remote areas that are beyond the reach of Kearney's foreseeable urban development pattern. RR-1 Districts do not permit comprehensive agriculture, and are intended for areas where farming is not a primary, permanent land use. Subdivisions in RR-1 Districts generally will be developed to rural standards, with gravel roads, surface drainage, and individual water and wastewater management systems. In parts of the Kearney jurisdiction with distinctive landforms, conservation development design is required to maintain the character of the land. These areas are designated by the RC, Rural Conservation Development Overlay District and are subject to special standards and planning procedures set forth in Chapter 40 of the Unified Land Development Ordinance. These standards encourage the preservation of important open space resources without reducing the density permitted the developer or property owner. 
(Ord. No. 8321 , § 5, 2-12-2019) 
16-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator 1-Family Units Other Permitted Uses Minimum Lot Area 3 acres 3 acres Minimum Lot Width (feet) Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard 50 50  Side Yard 25 25  Street Side Yard 50 50  Rear Yard 50 50 Maximum Height (feet) 35 35  
* Note: Special provisions shall be applied to land contained in Wellhead Protection Zones, see Chapter 45. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 8164, 7-11-2017; Ord. No. 8321 , § 7, 2-12-2019) 
Chapter 18 - DISTRICT RR-2, RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (INTERMEDIATE STANDARDS) 

18-101 - PURPOSE 
    The RR-2 District provides for the low-density residential use of land, accommodating limited agriculture as an interim use, low density residential environments, and compatible civic uses. It is designed for residential subdivisions areas surrounding Kearney's corporate limits. Because of their proximity to the City, subdivisions in RR-2 Districts may be required to meet City standards for infrastructure development, with gravel or paved roads and surface drainage. They may be provided with City or individual water supply and will use either community or individual wastewater systems. Subdivision design should generally be capable of transitioning to higher densities, if urban services become available in the future. In parts of the Kearney jurisdiction with distinctive landforms, conservation development design is required to maintain the character of the land. These areas are designated by the RC, Rural Conservation Development Overlay District and are subject to special standards and planning procedures set forth in Chapter 40 of the Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 8321 , § 8, 2-12-2019) 
18-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator 1-Family Units Other Permitted Uses Minimum Lot Area 1.75 acres* 3.0 acres Minimum Lot Width (feet) 100 100 Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard 40 40  Side Yard 15 15  Street Side Yard 40 40  Rear Yard 30 30 Maximum Height (feet) 35 35 Maximum Building Coverage 20% 20% Maximum Impervious Coverage 30% 30%  
 * Note: Special provisions shall be applied to land contained in Wellhead Protection Zones, see Chapter 45. 
 ;hg;* Any proposed subdivision with lots smaller than three (3) acres and having individual well and septic systems is subject to review and compliance by Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality prior to platting. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 8164, 7-11-2017; Ord. No. 8321 , § 9, 2-12-2019) 
Chapter 19 - DISTRICT R-1, URBAN RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT (LOW DENSITY) 

19-101 - PURPOSE 
    The R-1 District is intended to provide for residential development, with gross densities generally below four (4) units per acre. These areas are characterized by single-family dwellings on relatively large lots with supporting community facilities and urban services, including City water and sanitary sewer service. The R-1 District may also be used as a "holding zone" prior to subdivision for areas designated in the Comprehensive Development Plan for residential development. The use of the R-1 District for development using wells and individual septic systems is prohibited. Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
19-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator 1-Family Units Other Permitted Uses Site Area per Housing Unit  Lots with Sanitary Sewer 7,500 square feet Minimum Lot Area  Lots with Sanitary Sewer 7,500 square feet 1.0 acres Minimum Lot Width (feet) 65 100 Minimum Corner Lot Width (feet) 75 100 Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard 25 25  Side Yard Greater of 7 feet OR 10% of lot width up to 15 feet 15  Street Side Yard 25 25  Street Side Yard Adjacent to I-80 50 50  Rear Yard Lesser of 20% of lot depth OR 30 feet 30  Rear Yard - Irregular Lot A rear yard of 25 feet shall be maintained parallel to the building and rear lot line Rear Yard Adjacent to I-80 50 50 Maximum Height (feet) 35 35 Maximum Building Coverage 35% 30% Maximum Impervious Coverage 45% 40% Floor Area Ratio NA NA Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) NA NA Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way Line (feet) 20 25 Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to I-80 50 50  
Note 1: Zero (0) Lot Line Development 
Within a common development, one (1) interior side yard may be equal to zero (0) for single-family detached residential use if: 
1.  The side yard opposite to the zero (0) yard must equal at least twice the normal required minimum side yard. 
2.  The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development; or not otherwise designated for zero (0) lot line use. 
3.  An easement for maintenance of the zero (0) lot line façade is prepared and recorded by the developer with the appropriate County Register of Deeds, with a copy of the recorded easement provided to the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016; Ord. No. 8164, 7-11-2017) 
Chapter 20 - DISTRICT R-2, URBAN RESIDENTIAL MIXED-DENSITY DISTRICT 

20-101 - PURPOSE 
    The R-2 District is intended to provide for moderate density residential development, with gross densities generally between six (6) and twelve (12) units per acre. These developments are characterized by single-family dwellings on moderately-sized lots along with low-density multi-unit residential structures such as duplexes and townhouses. It provides regulations to encourage innovative forms of housing development. It adapts to both established and developing neighborhoods, as well as transitions between single-family and multi-family areas. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 03-12-2002) 
20-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator 1-Family Detached 1-Family Attached Duplex 
(Note 4 & 5) Town-house 
(Note 1) Other Permitted Uses Site Area per Housing Unit (square feet)  In Conventional Development 6,000 6,000 3,000 3,000  In Planned Developments 5,000 5,000 3,000 2,500 Minimum Lot Area  In Conventional Development 6,000 6,000 6,000 3,000 6,000  In Planned Developments 4,000 4,000 6,000 2,500 6,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet)  In Conventional Development 70 70 70 35 70  In Planned Developments 45 45 30 25 60 Minimum Yards (feet) (Note 3)  Front Yard 25 25 25 25 25  Side Yard (Note 2) 7 7 7 7 10  Street Side Yard 25 25 25 25 25  Street Side Yard Adjacent to I-80 50 50 50 50 50  Rear Yard 25 25 25 25 25 Rear Yard Adjacent to I-80 50 50 50 50 50 Maximum Height (feet) 35 35 35 35 35 Maximum Building Coverage 45% 45% 45% 45% 45% Maximum Impervious Coverage 55% 55% 55% 55% 55% Floor Area Ratio NA NA NA NA 0.50 Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA NA NA 50% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) NA NA NA NA NA Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way Line (feet) 20 20 20 20 25 Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to I-80 50 50 50 50 50  
Note 1: Townhouse Development 
No more than four (4) units may be attached in a single townhouse structure within an R-2 District. 
Note 2: Zero (0) Lot Line Development 
Within a common development, one (1) interior side yard may be equal to zero (0) for single-family detached residential use if: 
1.  The side yard opposite to the zero (0) yard must equal at least twice the normal required minimum side yard. 
2.  The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development; or not otherwise designated for zero (0) lot line use. 
3.  An easement for maintenance of the zero (0) lot line façade is prepared and recorded by the developer with the appropriate County Register of Deeds, with a copy of the recorded easement provided to the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a building permit. 
Note 3: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned districts. However, the setback from the front facade of a garage to any public or private street right-of-way (including the boundary of sidewalks) must be at least twenty (20) feet. 
Note 4: Duplex Development 
1.  Projects developed with a private road require Planned Development. 
2.  A home owner's association agreement shall be filed at the Register of Deeds office which defines responsibility on behalf of all common use areas associated with the development when applicable. 
Note 5: Minor Subdivisions for Duplex Development 
Two-family residential lots of record may be subdivided provided the following improvements are in place for the resulting parcels. 
1.  The subdivided parcels shall have a minimum lot area of no less than three (3,000) square feet of area with a minimum lot width of thirty (30) feet. 
2.  A one (1) hour fire-resistant wall, separating the resulting units, shall be continuous from the foundation to the upper floor ceiling with a wall or draft stop assembly constructed through the attic to the roof sheathing. 
3.  Off-street parking for each resulting unit shall be provided on the same resulting lot as the unit. Parking spaces shall be based on the number of bedrooms in each resulting unit. 
4.  Public water and sewer shall be independent to each resulting unit. The separate unit sewers shall connect to the public sewer in the public right-of-way. A separate water tap shall be provided for each unit. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 03-12-2002; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 7375, 9-11-2007) 
Chapter 21 - DISTRICT R-3, URBAN RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT (MEDIUM-DENSITY) 

21-101 - PURPOSE 
    The R-3 District is intended to provide for low and medium density multi-family residential development, with gross densities generally between twelve (12) and eighteen (18) units per acre. These developments often are characterized by low-rise buildings in multiple structure configurations, with an emphasis on open space, convenient parking, and, in many cases, common community facilities such as clubhouses and swimming pools. This district is also appropriate for larger townhouse complexes, while still accommodating lower density forms of development. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002) 
21-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator 1-Family Detached 1-Family Attached Duplex 
(Note 4) Townhouse 
(Note 1) Multi-Family Other Permitted Uses Site Area per Housing Unit (sq ft)  In Conventional Development 6,000 6,000 3,000 3,000 3,000  In Planned Developments 5,000 5,000 3,000 2,500 2,500 Minimum Lot Area  In Conventional Development 6,000 6,000 6,000 3,000 10,000 6,000  In Planned Developments 4,000 4,000 6,000 2,500 1 acre 6,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet)  In Conventional Development 60 60 65 25 100 60  In Planned Developments 45 45 30 20 150 60 Minimum Yards (feet) (Note 3)  Front Yard 25 25 25 25 30 25  Side Yard (Notes 1 and 2) 7 7 7 15 25 10  Street Side Yard 25 25 25 25 25 25  Street Side Yard Adjacent to I-80 50 50 50 50 50 50  Rear Yard 25 25 25 25 25 25  Rear Yard Adjacent to I-80 50 50 50 50 50 50 Maximum Height (feet) 35 35 35 35 45 35 Maximum Building Coverage 55% 55% 55% 55% 55% 45% Minimum street-facing facades utilizing a masonry material, including brick, split-faced concrete masonry units, building stone, or simulated building stone 35% 35% 35% Minimum off-set of building for every 100 feet of horizontal distance for building articulation (Note 1) 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet Maximum Impervious Coverage 65% 65% 65% 65% 65% 55% Floor Area Ratio NA NA NA NA 0.50 0.50 Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA NA NA 50% 50% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) NA NA NA 36 units 36 units NA Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way Line (feet) 20 20 20 20 20 25 Minimum Bufferyard Adjacent to Residential Uses in R-1 and R-2 Districts (Note 1) NA NA NA NA 20 The lesser of 20 feet or 10% of the average of the sides perpendicular to the bufferyard Minimum Bufferyard Adjacent to I-80 50 50 50 50 50 50  
Note 1: Townhouse Development 
No more than six (6) units may be attached in a single townhouse structure within an R-3 District. 
1.  The common wall between any two townhouse units may be zero (0) provided such wall is built in accordance with the current edition of the International Residential Code. 
2.  A minimum thirty (30) feet of separation shall be maintained between any two (2) adjacent structures containing townhouse units. Such open area may be managed as common space by a homeowners association. 
3.  Thirty-five (35) percent of building façades, facing front yards and street side yards on a private drive, shall utilize a masonry material, including brick, split-faced concrete masonry units, building stone, or simulated building stone. Rear yards and interior yards abutting private drives do not require the enhanced materials. 
4.  No more than two (2) connected units may have the same front yard. 
5.  A minimum landscaped bufferyard of twenty (20) feet shall be provided adjacent to Residential Uses in R-1 Districts. 
6.  Projects developed with a private road require Planned Development standards. 
7.  A homeowners association agreement shall be filed at the Register of Deeds office which defines responsibility for all common use areas associated with the development. 
Note 2: Zero (0) Lot Line Development 
Within a common development, one (1) interior side yard may be equal to zero (0) for single-family detached residential use if: 
1.  The side yard opposite to the zero (0) yard must equal at least twice the normal required minimum side yard. 
2.  The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development; or not otherwise designated for zero (0) lot line use. 
3.  An easement for maintenance of the zero (0) lot line façade is prepared and recorded by the developer with the appropriate County Register of Deeds, with a copy of the recorded easement provided to the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a building permit. 
Note 3: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned districts. However, the setback from the front facade of a garage to any public or private street right-of-way, including the boundary of sidewalks, must be at least twenty (20) feet. 
Note 4: Minor Subdivisions for Duplex Development - See Chapter 20 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 7383, 10-9-2007; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
21-103 - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
A.  See Section 47-105 "Accessory Buildings" of Chapter 47 "Supplemental Development Regulations" for additional accessory building requirements. 
B.  Group residential uses, including fraternity and sorority houses, must provide at least four hundred (400) square feet of site area per resident. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 8232 , § 1, 4-24-2018) 
Chapter 22 - DISTRICT R-4, URBAN RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT (HIGH-DENSITY) 

22-101 - PURPOSE 
    The R-4 District is intended to provide for medium and high-density multi-family residential development, with gross densities generally above eighteen (18) units per acre. These developments may be in single or multiple structure configurations. The District's regulations are designed to provide for good quality living environments that provide adequate light and open space for high-density settings. The District is appropriate for high-rise apartment development or for adaptive reuse of existing buildings outside of the Kearney Center area. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002) 
22-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator 1-Family Detached 1-Family Attached Duplex 
(Note 4) Townhouse 
(Note 1) Multi-Family Other Permitted Uses Site Area per Housing Unit (sq ft)  In Conventional Development 6,000 6,000 3,000 3,000 3,000  In Planned Developments 5,000 5,000 3,000 2,500 2,500 Minimum Lot Area  In Conventional Development 6,000 6,000 6,000 3,000 10,000 6,000  In Planned Developments 4,000 4,000 6,000 2,500 1 acre 6,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet)  In Conventional Development 60 60 65 25 100 60  In Planned Developments 45 45 30 20 150 60 Minimum Yards (feet) (Note 3)  Front Yard 25 25 25 25 30 25  Side Yard (Notes 1 and 2) 7 7 7 15 25 10  Street Side Yard 25 25 25 25 25 25  Street Side Yard Adjacent to I-80 50 50 50 50 50 50  Rear Yard 25 25 25 25 25 25  Rear Yard Adjacent to I-80 50 50 50 50 50 50 Maximum Height (feet) 35 35 35 35 45 35 Maximum Building Coverage 55% 55% 55% 55% 55% 45% Minimum street-facing facades utilizing a masonry material, including brick, split-faced concrete masonry units, building stone, or simulated building stone 35% 35% 35% Minimum off-set of building for every 100 feet of horizontal distance for building articulation (Note 1) 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet Maximum Impervious Coverage 65% 65% 65% 65% 65% 55% Floor Area Ratio NA NA NA NA 0.50 0.50 Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA NA NA 50% 50% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) NA NA NA 36 units 36 units NA Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way Line (feet) 20 20 20 20 20 25 Minimum Bufferyard Adjacent to Residential Uses in R-1 and R-2 Districts (Note 1) NA NA NA NA 20 The lesser of 20 feet or 10% of the average of the sides perpendicular to the bufferyard Minimum Bufferyard Adjacent to I-80 50 50 50 50 50 50  
Note 1: Townhouse Development 
No more than eight (8) units may be attached in a single townhouse structure within an R-3 District. 
1.  The common wall between any two (2) townhouse units may be zero (0) provided such wall is built in accordance with the current edition of the International Residential Code. 
2.  A minimum thirty (30) feet of separation shall be maintained between any two (2) adjacent structures containing townhouse units. Such open area shall be managed as common space by a homeowners association. 
3.  Thirty-five (35) percent of building façades, facing front yards and street side yards on a private drive, shall utilize a masonry material, including brick, split-faced concrete masonry units, building stone, or simulated building stone. Rear yards and interior yards abutting private drives do not require the enhanced materials. 
4.  No more than two (2) connected units may have the same front yard. 
5.  A minimum landscaped bufferyard of twenty (20) feet shall be provided adjacent to Residential Uses in R-1 Districts. 
6.  Projects developed with a private road require Planned Development standards. 
7.  A homeowners association agreement shall be filed at the Register of Deeds office which defines responsibility for all common use areas associated with the development. 
Note 2: Zero (0) Lot Line Development 
Within a common development, one (1) interior side yard may be equal to zero (0) for single-family detached residential use if: 
1.  The side yard opposite to the zero (0) yard must equal at least twice the normal required minimum side yard. 
2.  The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development; or not otherwise designated for zero (0) lot line use. 
3.  An easement for maintenance of the zero (0) lot line façade is prepared and recorded by the developer with the appropriate County Register of Deeds, with a copy of the recorded easement provided to the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a building permit. 
Note 3: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned districts. However, the setback from the front facade of a garage to any public or private street right-of-way, including the boundary of sidewalks, must be at least twenty (20) feet. 
Note 4: Minor Subdivisions for Duplex Development - See Chapter 20 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 7383, 10-9-2007; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
22-103 - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Group residential uses, including fraternity and sorority houses, must provide at least four hundred (400) square feet of site area per resident. 
B.  See 47-105 B for additional accessory building requirements. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 8232 , § 2, 4-24-2018) 
Chapter 23 - DISTRICT RM, MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

23-101 - PURPOSE 
    The RM District recognizes that mobile home development, properly planned, can provide important opportunities for affordable housing. It provides opportunities for mobile home development within planned parks or subdivisions, along with the supporting services necessary to create quality residential neighborhoods. 
23-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator 1-Family Duplex Townhouse Mobile Home Park 
(Note 4) Other Permitted Uses Site Area per Housing Unit (square feet)  In Conventional Development 6,000 3,000 3,000 NA  In Planned Developments 5,000 3,000 2,500 4,000 Minimum Lot Area  In Conventional Development 6,000 6,000 3,000 6,000  In Planned Developments 4,000 6,000 2,500 3 acres 6,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet)  In Conventional Development 60 75 35 NA 60  In Planned Developments 45 65 25 150 60 Minimum Yards (feet) (Note 3)  Front Yard 25 25 25 50 25  Side Yard (Note 2) 7 7 7 50 10  Street Side Yard 15 15 15 50 15  Rear Yard 25 25 25 50 25 Maximum Height (feet) 35 35 35 35 35 Maximum Building Coverage 45% 45% 45% 45% 45% Maximum Impervious Coverage 60% 60% 60% 60% 60% Floor Area Ratio NA NA NA NA 0.50 Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA NA NA 50% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) NA NA NA NA NA Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way Line (feet) 20 20 20 20 25  
Note 1: Townhouse Development 
No more than four (4) units may be attached in a single townhouse structure within an RM District. 
Note 2: Zero (0) Lot Line Development 
Within a common development, one (1) interior side yard may be equal to zero (0) for single-family detached residential use if: 
1.  The side yard opposite to the zero (0) yard must equal at least twice the normal required minimum side yard. 
2.  The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development; or not otherwise designated for zero (0) lot line use. 
3.  An easement for maintenance of the zero (0) lot line façade is prepared and recorded by the developer with the appropriate County Register of Deeds, with a copy of the recorded easement provided to the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a building permit. 
Note 3: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned districts. However, the setback from the front facade of a garage to any public or private street right-of-way (including the boundary of sidewalks) must be at least twenty (20) feet. 
Note 4: Mobile Home Parks and Subdivisions 
Complete development standards for Mobile Home Parks and Subdivisions are set forth in Section 46-103. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
Chapter 24 - DISTRICT UC, MIXED USE URBAN CORRIDOR DISTRICT 

24-101 - PURPOSE 
    This District recognizes the mixed use character of major urban corridors, including traditional arterials such as 2nd Avenue and emerging mixed use corridors. These corridors sometimes accommodate a combination of residential, commercial, and office uses. Design standards maintain their character as important urban streets. Some uses in the UC District will require development above normal standards in order to assure compatibility with surrounding uses. 
24-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator 1-Family Detached 1-Family Attached Duplex Townhouse Multi-Family Other Permitted Uses Site Area per Housing Unit (sq. ft.) 6,000 5,000 4,000 3,000 2,000 Minimum Lot Area 6,000 5,000 8,000 3,000 10,000 6,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) 65 50 75 30 100 75 Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard 30 30 30 30 30 30  Side Yard 7 15 7 15 25 10  Street Side Yard 25 25 25 25 25 25  Rear Yard 25 25 25 25 25 25  Rear Yard Adjacent to I-80 50 50 50 50 50 50 Maximum Height (feet) 35 35 35 35 35 35 Maximum Building Coverage 50% 50% 50% 55% 55% 55% Minimum street-facing facades utilizing a masonry material, including brick, split-faced concrete masonry units, building stone, or simulated building stone 15% 35% 35% 35% Minimum off-set of building for every 100 feet of horizontal distance for building articulation 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet Maximum Impervious Coverage 70% 70% 70% 70% 70% 80% Floor Area Ratio NA NA NA NA 1.0 1.0 Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA NA NA 50% 50% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) NA NA 12 units 24 units NA Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way Line (feet) 20 20 20 20 20 10 Minimum Bufferyard to be provided by multifamily and non-residential uses adjacent to other non-multifamily residential uses NA NA NA NA 20 The lesser of 20 feet or 10% of the average of the sides perpendicular to the bufferyard Minimum Bufferyard Adjacent to I-80 50 50 50 50 50 50  
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
Chapter 25 - DISTRICT C-O, OFFICE DISTRICT 

25-101 - PURPOSE 
    The C-O District is intended to provide office locations that serve neighborhood or community needs. The District allows for substantial office development, and permits very selective commercial uses which support office development and are part of a mixed use workplace environment. Site development regulations are designed to ensure compatibility with adjacent or nearby residential development. C-O Districts are most appropriately found along major or minor arterials, at the edge of residential areas, or in districts such as medical centers where supporting office development is necessary and appropriate. The C-O District permits multi-family development, providing housing in compatible densities to support office use. 
25-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator Permitted Residential Uses 
(See Chapter 21) Other Permitted Uses Site Area per Housing Unit (sq. ft.) NA Minimum Lot Area 6,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) 75 Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard (Note 1) 25  Side Yard 7  Street Side Yard 25  Street Side Yard Adjacent to I-80 50  Rear Yard 25  Rear Yard Adjacent to I-80 50 Maximum Height (feet) 45 Maximum Building Coverage 55% Minimum street-facing facades utilizing a masonry material, including brick, split-faced concrete masonry units, building stone, or simulated building stone 35% Minimum off-set of building for every 100 feet of horizontal distance for building articulation 5 feet Maximum Impervious Coverage 80% Floor Area Ratio (Note 2) 1.0 Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard 75% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) Site of 4 acres or building area of 40,000 square feet Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way Line (feet) 10 Minimum Bufferyard to be provided by multifamily and non-residential uses adjacent to other non-multifamily residential uses The lesser of 20 feet or 10% of the average of the sides perpendicular to the bufferyard Minimum Bufferyard Adjacent to I-80 50  
Note 1: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned districts. However, the setback from the front facade of a garage to any public or private street right-of-way, including the boundary of sidewalks, must be at least twenty (20) feet. 
Note 2: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase the maximum Floor Area Ratio for a development in a planned district. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord, No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
Chapter 26 - DISTRICT C-1, LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

26-101 - PURPOSE 
    This District provides for neighborhood shopping facilities serving the needs of residents of a surrounding residential area. Allowed commercial and office uses are generally compatible with nearby residential areas in scale and intensity. Site development regulations are intended to ensure compatibility in size, scale, and site characteristics with these residential environments. C-1 Districts are generally most appropriate at intersections of collector and/or arterial streets, at the edge of residential areas, in planned commercial areas in newly developing residential districts, or at other locations where local commercial services are required. The special C-1 Neighborhood Center District includes special standards that ensure a pedestrian orientation. 
26-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS FOR REGULAR C-1 DISTRICTS 
Regulator Permitted Residential Uses 
(See Chapter 21) All Other Permitted Uses Site Area per Housing Unit (sq. ft.) NA Minimum Lot Area 10,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) 65 Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard (Note 1) 25  Side Yard 7  Street Side Yard 25  Street Side Yard Adjacent to I-80 50  Rear Yard Less of 15% of lot depth OR 20 feet  Rear Yard Adjacent to I-80 Maximum Height (feet) 45 Maximum Building Coverage 55% Maximum Impervious Coverage 80% Floor Area Ratio (Note 2) 0.5 Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard 75% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) Site of 2 acres OR building area of 20,000 square feet Minimum street-facing facades utilizing a masonry material, including brick, split-faced concrete masonry units, building stone, or simulated building stone 35% Minimum off-set of building for every 100 feet of horizontal distance for building articulation 5 feet Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way Line (feet) 10 Minimum Bufferyard to be Provided Adjacent to residential uses or vacant land in RR-1 through R-4 and RM zoning districts The lesser of 20 feet or 10% of the average of the sides perpendicular to the bufferyard Minimum Bufferyard Adjacent to I-80 50  
Note 1: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned districts. However, the setback from the front facade of a garage to any public or private street right-of-way, including the boundary of sidewalks, must be at least twenty (20) feet. 
Note 2: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase the maximum Floor Area Ratio for a development in a planned district. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
26-103 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 
A.  No building facade facing a street shall have the appearance of a rear facade. Architectural details, including materials, textures, patterns, colors, and design features used on the front facade shall be incorporated into all facades facing public streets and easily visible to the public. 
B.  All service and loading areas shall be entirely screened from view. 
C.  All buildings and developments shall include a direct, clear, and safe pedestrian connection from adjacent public sidewalks to the entrances of buildings within the development. 
26-104 - C-1(N) NEIGHBORHOOD CENTER DISTRICTS 
    The C-1(N) Neighborhood Center District provides special regulations which adapt to or encourage the development of small-scale, neighborhood-oriented mixed use districts. C-1(N) Districts are pedestrian-oriented, and encourage pedestrian linkages between residential and nonresidential uses. C-1(N) Districts should be integrated into surrounding residential or civic areas, and counter the separation of land uses common to most contemporary development. The C-1(N) District is appropriately applied to small-scale business districts near the University of Nebraska at Kearney, within neighborhoods, or in new developments following Traditional Neighborhood Design principles. It is not appropriately used for conventional commercial strip development, although it can be used along commercial corridors to encourage innovative, mixed use projects that must integrate commercial, office, and TND residential components as required in Chapter 39. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
26-105 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS FOR C-1(N) DISTRICTS 
Regulator 1-Family Duplex Townhouse Multi-Family Other Permitted Uses Site Area per Housing Unit (sq. ft.) 4,000 3,000 2,000 2,000 NA Minimum Lot Area 4,000 6,000 6,000 6,000 4,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) 40 50 25 50 40 Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard (Range) (Note 1) 0-20 0-20 0-20 0-20 0-20  Side Yard 5 5 10 5 0  Street Side Yard 15 15 15 15 15  Rear Yard 20 20 20 20 0 Maximum Height (feet) 35 35 35 45 45 Maximum Building Coverage 50% 50% 60% 60% 70% Maximum Impervious Coverage 65% 65% 80% 80% 90% Floor Area Ratio NA NA NA NA 2.0 Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA NA 0% 0% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) All projects All projects All projects All projects All projects Minimum street-facing facades utilizing a masonry material, including brick, split-faced concrete masonry units, building stone, or simulated building stone 35% Minimum off-set of building for every 100 feet of horizontal distance for building articulation 5 feet Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way Line (feet) Entire front yard Entire front yard Entire front yard Entire front yard Entire front yard  
Note 1: Front Yard setbacks 
Front yard setback indicated is a range between minimum and maximum setbacks. Actual setback will be determined by project design as part of the Planned Development approval. In existing C-1(N) areas, setback will be consistent with existing buildings in the district. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
26-106 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS IN C-1(N) DISTRICTS 
A.  Buildings shall be designed to create the appearance of multiple-tenants, storefronts, and entrances. 
B.  Buildings shall be oriented to the surrounding street. Street orientation includes a consistent building setback, entrances and windows facing the street, and parking areas located to the rear or side of buildings. 
C.  No building facade facing a street shall have the appearance of a rear facade. Architectural details, including materials, textures, patterns, colors, and design features used on the front facade shall be incorporated into all facades facing public streets and easily visible to the public. 
D.  All service and loading areas shall be entirely screened from view. 
E.  All buildings and developments shall include a direct, clear, and safe pedestrian connection from adjacent public sidewalks to the entrances of buildings within the development. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
26-107 - SUPPLEMENTAL DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFFICE AND COMMERCIAL USES IN THE C-1 DISTRICTS 
    In order to maintain the character of neighborhood commercial development, the following design standards shall apply to any office or commercial use developed within the C-1 District: 
A.  No single building shall have a building coverage area that exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
B.  No street-facing facade may have a continuous length of fifty (50) feet or over without an offset in the building elevation equal to a dimension of at least five (5) feet. 
C.  Window area on each street-facing facade shall be equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of that facade. 
D.  Exterior materials shall be brick, stone, wood clapboard, or other exterior materials typical of exterior building materials in common use in Kearney's residential districts or town center business district. 
E.  The dominant roof form shall be a pitched or gabled roof with a minimum roof slope equal to one (1) foot of vertical height to every three (3) feet of horizontal distance. Permitted roof materials may include asphalt shingles, slate or simulated slate shingles, standing seam metal, or other similar roof materials. 
F.  Each site design shall provide a clear and safe method of pedestrian circulation along the street right-of-way and between the street right-of-way and a principal customer entrance of the business. 
(Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
Chapter 27 - DISTRICT C-2, COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

27-101 - PURPOSE 
    This District provides for commercial facilities that serve the needs of markets ranging from several neighborhoods to the overall region. While allowed commercial and office uses are generally compatible with nearby residential areas, traffic and operating characteristics may have more negative effects on residential neighborhoods than those permitted in the C-1 District. C-2 Districts are appropriate at major intersections, at the junction of several neighborhoods, or at substantial commercial subcenters. 
27-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator Permitted Residential Uses 
(See Chapter 22) Permitted Uses Minimum Lot Area 10,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) 65 Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard (Note 1) 25  Side Yard 0  Street Side Yard 25  Street Side Yard Adjacent to I-80 50  Rear Yard 15  Rear Yard Adjacent to I-80 50 Maximum Height (feet) 45 Maximum Building Coverage 60% Maximum Impervious Coverage 80% Floor Area Ratio (Note 2) 1.0 Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard 80% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) 4 acres OR 40,000 square feet of building area Minimum street-facing facades utilizing a masonry material, including brick, split-faced concrete masonry units, building stone, or simulated building stone 35% Minimum off-set of building for every 100 feet of horizontal distance for building articulation 5 feet Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way Line (feet) 10 Minimum Bufferyard to be Provided Adjacent to residential uses or vacant land in RR-1 through R-4 and RM zoning districts The lesser of 20 feet or 10% of the average of the sides perpendicular to the bufferyard Minimum Bufferyard Adjacent to I-80 50  
Note 1: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned districts. Along arterials designated in the City's Comprehensive Development Plan, the Director of Public Works may require a deeper front-yard setback. 
Note 2: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase the maximum Floor Area Ratio for a development in a planned district. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
27-103 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 
A.  No building facade facing a street shall have the appearance of a rear facade. Architectural details, including materials, textures, patterns, colors, and design features used on the front facade shall be incorporated into all facades facing public streets and easily visible to the public. 
B.  All services and loading areas shall be entirely screened from view. 
C.  All buildings and developments shall include a direct, clear, and safe pedestrian connection from adjacent public sidewalks to the entrances of buildings within the development. 
(Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006) 
Chapter 28 - DISTRICT CBD, KEARNEY CENTER MIXED USE DISTRICT 

28-101 - PURPOSE 
    This District provides appropriate development regulations for Kearney Center, the City's central business district. The grouping of uses is designed to strengthen the town center's role as a center for trade, service, and civic life. Mixed uses are allowed and encouraged within the CBD District. 
28-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator Permitted Residential Uses All Other Permitted Uses Site Area per Housing Unit (sq. ft.) 325 650 Minimum Lot Area 3,250 3,250 Minimum Lot Width (feet) No requirement No requirement Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard 0 0  Side Yard 0 0  Street Side Yard 0 0  Rear Yard 0 0 Maximum Yards (feet)  Front Yard 0 0  Side Yard 0 0  Street Side Yard 0 0  Rear Yard 60 60 Maximum Height (feet) 120 120 Maximum Building Coverage 100% 100% Maximum Impervious Coverage 100% 100% Floor Area Ratio (Note 1) NA 6.0 Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard NA 50% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) >4 bedrooms >10,000 Minimum street-facing facades utilizing a masonry material, including brick, split-faced concrete masonry units, building stone, or stone veneer 75% 75% Minimum off-set of building for every 50 feet of horizontal distance for building articulation 5 feet 5 feet Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way Line (feet) 0 0  
Note 1: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase or decrease the maximum Floor Area Ratio for a development in a planned district. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7910, 7-8-2014) 
28-103 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 
A.  No building facade facing a street shall have the appearance of a rear facade. Architectural details, including materials, textures, patterns, colors, and design features used on the front facade shall be incorporated into all facades facing public streets and easily visible to the public. 
B.  All street facing building facades shall have a minimum transparency of sixty-five (65) percent on the storefront or ground floor, and a minimum transparency of forty (40) percent on upper floors. Windows and doors contributing to transparency minimum on the storefront or ground floor shall not be reflective, smoky, or heavily tinted. 
C.  Simulated building stone is not an acceptable masonry material for street facing facades. Stone veneer made from natural stone or manufactured stone is acceptable. Stone veneer uses a lightweight concrete mix molded and formed into different shapes and styles, which are then painted or stained to make the material resemble real stone. The names artificial stones, stacked stone veneer, manufactured stone, and flexible stone veneer are also used for stone veneer. Stone veneer requires Portland cement mortar as a bonding agent. 
D.  All buildings and developments shall include a direct, clear, and safe pedestrian connection from adjacent public sidewalks to the entrances of buildings within the development. 
E.  Mechanical equipment shall not be visible from the street. 
F.  Roofs shall be flat, or slope concealed from street view by parapet cap, cornice, or other measure. 
G.  Windows, balconies and architectural features. Where the vertical clearance above grade to projecting windows, balconies or architectural features is more than 8 feet, 1 inch of encroachment is permitted for each additional 1 inch of clearance above 8 feet, but the maximum encroachment shall be 4 feet. 
1.  The encroachment is limited to street right-of-way. 
2.  Approval is subject to a license agreement. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7910, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 8212, 1-9-2018) 
Chapter 29 - DISTRICT C-3, GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

29-101 - PURPOSE 
    This District accommodates a variety of commercial uses, some of which have significant traffic or visual effect. This District may include commercial uses that are oriented to services, including automotive services, rather than retail activities. These uses may create land use conflicts with adjacent residential areas, requiring provision of adequate buffering. This District is most appropriately located along major arterial streets or in areas that can be adequately buffered from residential districts. 
29-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator Permitted Residential Uses (See Chapter 22) Permitted Uses Minimum Lot Area 6,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) 65 Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard (Note 1) 25  Side Yard 0  Street Side Yard 25  Street Side Yard Adjacent to I-80 50  Rear Yard 0  Rear Yard Adjacent to I-80 50 Maximum Height (feet) 45 Maximum Building Coverage 70% Maximum Impervious Coverage 90% Floor Area Ratio (Note 2) 1.0 Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard 100% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) 6 acres OR 60,000 square feet of building area Minimum street-facing facades utilizing a masonry material, including brick, split-faced concrete masonry units, building stone, or simulated building stone 35% Minimum off-set of building for every 100 feet of horizontal distance for building articulation 5 feet Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way Line (feet) 10 Minimum Bufferyard to be Provided Adjacent to residential uses or vacant land in RR-1 through R-4, and RM zoning districts The lesser of 20 feet or 10% of the average of the sides perpendicular to the bufferyard Minimum Bufferyard Adjacent to I-80 50  
Note 1: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned districts. Along arterials designated in the City's Comprehensive Development Plan, the Director of Public Works may require a deeper front-yard setback. 
Note 2: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase the maximum Floor Area Ratio for a development in a planned district. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
Chapter 30 - DISTRICT BP, BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT 

30-101 - PURPOSE 
    This District is designed to promote the development of planned business parks that accommodate corporate offices, research facilities, and structures which can combine office, distribution, and limited industrial uses. These facilities serve a more regional audience, but may provide services to local residents. They are characterized by extensive landscaping, abundant parking facilities, and good visual and pedestrian relationships among buildings. 
30-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator Permitted Uses Minimum District Size (square feet) 5 acres Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 20,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) 100 Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard (Note 1) 30  Side Yard 10  Street Side Yard 25  Street Side Yard Adjacent to I-80 50  Rear Yard 30  Rear Yard Adjacent to I-80 50 Maximum Height (feet) 60 Maximum Building Coverage 50% Maximum Impervious Coverage 80% Floor Area Ratio (Note 2) 2.0 Maximum Amount of Total Parking located in street yard 50% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) All projects Minimum street-facing facades utilizing a masonry material, including brick, split-faced concrete masonry units, building stone, or simulated building stone 35% Minimum off-set of building for every 100 feet of horizontal distance for building articulation 5 feet Minimum Depth of Landscaping adjacent to street right-of-way line (feet) 10 Minimum Bufferyard to be provided adjacent to residential uses or vacant land in RR-1 through R-4 and RM zoning districts The lesser of 20 feet or 10% of the average of the sides perpendicular to the bufferyard Minimum Bufferyard Adjacent to I-80 50  
Note 1: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned districts. Along arterials designated in the City's Comprehensive Development Plan, the Director of Public Works may require a deeper front-yard setback. 
Note 2: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase the maximum Floor Area Ratio for a development in a planned district. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016; Ord. No. 8164, 7-11-2017) 
Chapter 31 - DISTRICT M-1, LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

31-101 - PURPOSE 
    This District is intended to reserve sites appropriate for the location of industrial uses with relatively limited environmental effects. This District is designed to provide appropriate space and regulations to encourage good quality industrial development, while assuring that facilities are served with adequate parking and loading facilities. 
31-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator Permitted Uses Minimum District Size (square feet) 6,000 Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 6,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) 100 Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard (Note 1) 25; 50 along state and federal highways  Side Yard 0  Street Side Yard 25  Rear Yard 0 Maximum Height (feet) 45 Maximum Building Coverage 70% Maximum Impervious Coverage 90% Floor Area Ratio (Note 2) 1.0 Maximum Amount of Total Parking located in street yard 100% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) 20 acres Minimum Depth of Landscaping adjacent to street right-of-way line (feet) 10 Minimum Bufferyard to be provided adjacent to residential uses or vacant land in RR-1 through R-4, RM, UC, C-O, C-1, and C-1(N) zoning districts The lesser of 20 feet or 10% of the average of the sides perpendicular to the bufferyard  
Note 1: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned districts. Along arterials designated in the City's Comprehensive Development Plan, the Director of Public Works may require a deeper front-yard setback. 
Note 2: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase the maximum Floor Area Ratio for a development in a planned district. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
31-103 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
A.  Uses in the M-1 Districts: Performance Standards. The following performance standards apply to all industrial uses permitted within an M-1, Limited Industrial District: 
1.  Physical Appearance: All operations shall be carried on within an enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in operable condition may be stored outside. Normal daily inorganic wastes may be stored outside in containers, provided that such containers are not visible from the street. 
2.  Fire Hazard: No operation shall involve the use of highly flammable gases, corrosive materials, strong acids or bases, liquids, or inherent fire hazards. This prohibition shall not apply to the normal use of heating or motor fuels and welding gases when handled in accordance with the regulations of Buffalo County and the City of Kearney. 
3.  Maximum Permitted Sound Levels Adjacent to Residential Zoning Districts: No operation in the M-1 District shall generate sound levels in excess of those specified in Table 46-2 at the boundary of a residential district. All noises shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable because of intermittence, beat frequency, or shrillness. 
4.  Sewage and Wastes: No operation shall discharge into a sewer, drainage way, or the ground any material, which is radioactive, poisonous, detrimental to normal sewer plant operation, or corrosive to sewer pipes and installations. 
5.  Air Contaminants: No material may be discharged into the air from any source in such quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of people or to the public in general; or to endanger the health, comfort, or safety of any considerable number of people or to the public in general; or to damage other businesses, vegetation, or property. 
6.  Odor: The emission of odors determined by the Public Works Department to be obnoxious to most people shall be prohibited. Such odors shall be measured at the property line of the operation. 
7.  Gases: No release of noxious or poisonous gases shall be permitted except as provided in this section. Measurements shall not exceed five (5) parts per million for sulfur dioxide or carbon monoxide or one (1) part per million for hydrogen sulfide taken at the property line of the operation. 
8.  Vibration: All machines shall be mounted to minimize vibration. No measurable vibration shall occur at the property line of the operation, which exceeds a displacement of 0.003 inch. 
9.  Glare and Heat: All glare generated by a use shall be shielded or directed so as not to be visible at the property line of the operation. No heat may be generated from an operation that raises the air temperature at the property line of the operation by more than five (5) degrees Fahrenheit above the ambient air temperature. 
10.  Storage of Chemical Products: Any above or below ground storage of liquid petroleum products or chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature shall comply with all requirements set forth by State of Nebraska Fire Marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 8096, 9-13-2016) 
Chapter 32 - DISTRICT M-2, GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

32-101 - PURPOSE 
    This District is intended to accommodate a wide variety of industrial uses, some of which may have significant external effects. These uses may have operating characteristics that create conflicts with lower-intensity surrounding land uses. This District provides the reservation of land for these activities and includes buffering requirements to reduce incompatibility. 
32-102 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator Permitted Uses Minimum District Size (square feet) 6,000 Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 6,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) 60 Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard (Note 1) 25; 50 along state and federal highways  Side Yard 0  Street Side Yard 25  Rear Yard 0 Maximum Height (feet) 45 Maximum Building Coverage 70% Maximum Impervious Coverage 90% Floor Area Ratio (Note 2) 1.0 Maximum Amount of Total Parking located in street yard 100% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) 20 acres Minimum Depth of Landscaping adjacent to street right-of-way line (feet) 10 Minimum Bufferyard to be provided adjacent to residential uses or vacant land in RR-1 through R-4, RM, UC, C-O, C-1, and C-1(N) zoning districts The lesser of 20 feet or 10% of the average of the sides perpendicular to the bufferyard  
Note 1: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum setbacks in planned districts. Along arterials designated in the City's Comprehensive Development Plan, the Director of Public Works may require a deeper front-yard setback. 
Note 2: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Districts 
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase the maximum Floor Area Ratio for a development in a planned district. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
32-103 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
A.  Uses in the M-2 Districts: Performance Standards. The following performance standards apply to all industrial uses permitted within an M-2, General Industrial District: 
1.  Sewage and Wastes: No operation shall discharge into a sewer, drainage way, or the ground any material, which is radioactive, poisonous, detrimental to normal sewer plant operation, or corrosive to sewer pipes and installations. 
2.  Air Contaminants: No material may be discharged into the air from any source in such quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of people or to the public in general; or to endanger the health, comfort, or safety of any considerable number of people or to the public in general; or to damage other businesses, vegetation, or property. 
3.  Odor: The emission of odors determined by the Public Works Department to be obnoxious to most people shall be prohibited. Such odors shall be measured at the property line of the operation. 
4.  Gases: No release of noxious or poisonous gases shall be permitted except as provided in this section. Measurements shall not exceed five (5) parts per million for sulfur dioxide or carbon monoxide or one (1) part per million for hydrogen sulfide taken at the property line of the operation. 
5.  Vibration: All machines shall be mounted to minimize vibration. No measurable vibration shall occur at the property line of the operation, as set forth in Table 46-2. 
6.  Glare and Heat: All glare generated by a use shall be shielded or directed so as not to be visible at the property line of the operation. No heat may be generated from an operation that raises the air temperature at the property line of the operation by more than five (5) degrees Fahrenheit above the ambient air temperature. 
7.  Storage of Chemical Products: Any above or below ground storage of liquid petroleum products or chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature shall comply with all requirements set forth by State of Nebraska Fire Marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 8096, 9-13-2016) 
Chapter 33 - ENHANCED STANDARDS FOR HIGH IMPACT USES IN SENSITIVE SETTINGS 

33-101 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
33-102 - APPLICATION 
    The Enhanced Standards system applies to all uses indicated by the Ps or Cs designators in Table 14-1, the Use Matrix. 
33-103 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
Chapter 34 - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 

34-101 - PURPOSE 
    Special Districts are established as base districts for innovative developments or unique development areas. They are designed to encourage innovative design of mixed use projects, to capitalize on the special characteristics and visibility of unique areas in the City, and to integrate special projects into the surrounding environment. 
34-102 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
    The following special districts are hereby established. 
Special Districts MU Mixed Use District  
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006) 
Chapter 35 - DISTRICT ICMU, INTERSTATE CORRIDOR MIXED USE DISTRICT 
    Sections 35-101 through 35-105, including Tables 35-1, 35-2, 35-3, 35-3.1, 35-3.2, 35-3.3, and Table 35-4 are deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006) 
Chapter 36 - DISTRICT MU, MIXED USE DISTRICT 

36-101 - PURPOSE 
    District MU, Mixed Use District is intended to accommodate projects which combine several compatible land uses into an integrated development. The MU District may also be used to pre-designate parts of the City which are appropriate for a mixture of residential, commercial, office, and accessory uses. This District permits mixing residential areas with workplaces and services. Development in the MU District must accommodate transportation systems, pedestrian and bicycle movement, and surrounding environments. 
36-102 - PERMITTED USES 
    Each ordinance establishing an MU District establishes the use types permitted within its boundaries. 
36-103 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
A.  The minimum area of any MU District is two (2) acres. 
B.  Prior to the issuance of any building permits or other authorization, all projects in the MU District shall receive approval by the City Council, following a recommendation by the Planning Commission. This approval may be granted for a specific plan for the development of an MU District in lieu of a plan for individual projects, provided that any subsequent developments are consistent with the specific plan. 
C.  Procedures and requirements for applications and approval of MU Districts are the same as those for PD, Planned Development Districts, set forth in Chapter 38. 
36-104 - ADOPTION OF DISTRICT 
A.  The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate each Mixed Use District application. The City may impose reasonable conditions, as deemed necessary, to ensure that a Mixed Use Development shall be compatible with adjacent land uses, will not overburden public services and facilities, and will not be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare. 
B.  The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon each application. 
C.  The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to MU District applications. 
D.  The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council for final action. 
E.  The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon any Ordinance establishing an MU, Mixed Use District. Proper notice shall mean the same notice established for any other zoning amendment. 
F.  An ordinance adopting a Mixed Use District shall require a favorable simple majority of the City Council for approval. 
G.  Upon approval by the City Council, the Development Plan shall become a part of the ordinance creating or amending the MU District. All approved plans shall be filed with the Planning Clerk. 
36-105 - AMENDMENTS 
    The City Planner is authorized, at his/her discretion, to approve amendments to an approved development plan provided that: 
A.  A written request is filed with the City Planner, along with information specifying the exact nature of the proposed amendment. 
B.  The amendment is consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The amendment does not alter the approved site regulations of the development plan and does not materially alter other aspects of the plan, including traffic circulation, mixture of use types, and physical design; or does not increase density floor area ratios. 
D.  Any amendment not conforming to these provisions shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for action. 
Chapter 37 - OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

37-101 - PURPOSE 
    Overlay Districts are used in combination with Base Districts to modify or expand Base District regulations. They adapt to the special needs of areas of the City and further allow Kearney's Unified Land Development Ordinance to evolve as the planning and development needs and trends of specific areas also change. The Overlay Districts are designed to achieve the following objectives: 
A.  To recognize special conditions in specific parts of the City which require specific regulation. 
B.  To provide for the protection of special features in the natural and built environment of the City. 
C.  To allow for change and adaptability to different needs and trends in land development. 
D.  To encourage comprehensive neighborhood and environmental planning in the City, and to protect the integrity of vital City services, such as the water supply and airport operation. 
E.  To provide flexibility in development and to encourage innovative design through comprehensively planned projects. 
37-102 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
    The following Overlay Districts are hereby established. 
Overlay Districts PD Planned Development District TND Traditional Neighborhood Development District C Rural Conservation Development Overlay District ND Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District ND-1 Pioneer Park Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District FP/FW Floodplain/Floodway Overlay District AV Aviation Overlay District W Wellhead Protection Overlay District  
Chapter 38 - DISTRICT PD, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

38-101 - PURPOSE 
    District PD, Planned Development District is intended to provide flexibility in the design of planned projects; to encourage innovation in project design that incorporates open space and other amenities; and to insure compatibility of developments with the surrounding urban environment. 
    District PD, Planned Development District is intended to promote developments which will be advantageous to the City of Kearney and its urban form by permitting project design that will surpass the quality of development resulting from application of the regulations of conventional zoning districts. 
    While the PD District may appear to deviate from a literal interpretation of the land development regulations, it is not intended to encourage deviations from the City's Comprehensive Development Plan or overall development objectives. The PD District shall not be used to secure approval for projects that do not conform to the City's Comprehensive Development Plan. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
38-102 - PD-1, PD-2 AND PRE-EXISTING PD DISTRICTS 
    In order to permit maximum applicability of the PD District, PD-1 and PD-2 Districts are hereby created. 
A.  The PD-1 (General PD) District is intended to accommodate large, comprehensively planned developments which are likely to develop over a relatively long period of time. The PD-1 District creates special guidelines and regulations to ensure that development over time conforms to an established master plan. The PD-1 District also may establish the preliminary plat for those projects which require platting. 
B.  The PD-2 (Specific PD) District is intended to accommodate projects for which the specific design of individual buildings and elements may be determined. Several PD-2 Districts may be incorporated into a single larger PD-1 District, provided that such projects are consistent with the overall design and development standards of the PD-1 District. The PD-2 District may also establish the final plat for those projects that require platting. 
C.  Some projects approved as planned districts under zoning regulations in effect before the adoption of this Unified Land Development Ordinance are designated as Pre-existing PD Overlay Districts on the City's zoning map. These projects are subject to the terms of their original approval by the City of Kearney or the requirements of their previous zoning districts, including submission and approval of detailed plans by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
38-103 - CRITERIA FOR USE 
    The PD, Planned Development District is generally intended for use in the following urban contexts. 
A.  Vacant Land. Areas of substantial open space where the structure of conventional zoning may artificially limit or constrain good urban design, may restrict the achievement of the City's development objectives, or may not be appropriate to changes in technology or demand consistent with the best interests of the City of Kearney. 
B.  Community Development Areas. Areas of the City which are in need of rehabilitation or redevelopment, including areas which may be deficient in public facilities or services. In these situations, the PD District may encourage private investment by recognizing the need for flexibility that conventional zoning regulations do not provide. 
C.  Neighborhood Contexts. Areas in which sensitive project design is critical to maintain and protect the value of surrounding residential neighborhoods and other sensitive or vulnerable urban settings. 
D.  Large Projects. Projects which have substantial effects on their urban and rural surroundings because of their size and scale. 
E.  Large areas that may be zoned prior to development by the Planning Commission and City Council consistent with the Comprehensive Development Plan, but which require individual project approval as development occurs. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
38-104 - PERMITTED LAND USES 
    A Planned Development may include residential, office, commercial, industrial, or public land uses, subject to the requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
38-105 - PD-1 (GENERAL PD) DISTRICT: APPLICATION PROCEDURES 
A.  Minimum Size: The minimum size of a PD-1 District shall be three (3) acres. 
B.  Pre-application Concept Plan: Prior to filing an application for approval of a PD-1 District, the applicant shall meet with the City Planner for the purpose of submitting a pre-application concept plan. This plan shall illustrate the conceptual overall plan for the district and shall include at a minimum the information required in Table 38-1. 
C.  The City Planner shall review and comment on the proposed concept plan and shall provide the applicant with written comments within thirty (30) days of submission of the concept plan. 
D.  The review of the concept plan shall include consideration of the following criteria: 
1.  Land use intensity and density. 
2.  Ability to provide a positive environment for intended uses, including schematic building configurations, arrangements, and general landscaping and site design. 
3.  Use of open space. 
4.  Impact on the surrounding natural and built environment. 
5.  Adequacy of on- and off-site transportation and utility systems to serve the proposed project. 
6.  Consistency with the City of Kearney's Comprehensive Development Plan. 
E.  Following review of the pre-application concept plan, the applicant may proceed with filing a formal application for approval of a PD-1 District. This plan shall illustrate the development master plan for the district and shall include at a minimum the information required in Table 38-1. 
F.  A PD-1 District application shall include a Development Agreement establishing the development regulations for the district unless initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council. The Development Agreement shall specify the following regulations: 
1.  Location and quantities of various land uses. 
2.  Maximum floor area ratios and residential densities. 
3.  Maximum building and impervious coverage. 
4.  Front, side, and rear yard setbacks. 
5.  Maximum heights of proposed structures. 
6.  Design standards applicable to the project. 
7.  Incorporation of graphic development plans and drawings into the site development regulations. 
8.  A filing fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be paid. 
G.  The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate each PD-1 District application. The Planning Commission and City Council may impose reasonable conditions, as deemed necessary, to ensure that a PD District shall be compatible with adjacent land uses, will not overburden public services and facilities and will not be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare. 
H.  The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon each application. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to PD-1 District applications. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council for final action. 
I.  The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon any Ordinance establishing a PD-1 District. Proper notice shall mean the same notice established for any other zoning amendment. 
J.  In their respective reviews of the PD-1 application, the Planning Commission and City Council shall base decisions on findings of fact as set forth in the criteria presented in Table 38-2. 
K.  Upon approval by the City Council, the Development Plan and Agreement shall become a part of the Ordinance creating or amending the PD District. All approved plans shall be filed with the Planning Clerk. 
L.  Issuance of Building Permits: The City shall not issue a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or other permit for a building, structure, or use within a PD-1 District unless it is in compliance with the approved Development Plan or any approved amendments. 
M.  Changes or Modifications to Development Plans. The City Planner is authorized at his/her discretion to approve amendments to an approved development plan, provided that: 
1.  A written request is filed with the City Planner, along with information specifying the exact nature of the proposed amendment. 
2.  The amendment is consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  The amendment does not alter the approved site regulations of the development plan and does not materially alter other aspects of the plan, including traffic circulation, land uses or land use intensity, mixture of use types, and physical design. 
4.  Any amendment not conforming to these provisions shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for action. 
N.  Termination of PD-1 District: If no substantial development has taken place in a Planned Development District for three (3) years following approval of the District, the Planning Commission may reconsider the zoning of the property and may, on its own motion, initiate an application for rezoning the property. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
38-106 - PLANNING COMMISSION OR CITY COUNCIL INITIATED PD-1 DISTRICTS 
    In some situations, the Planning Commission and/or City Council may initiate or approve a rezoning of an area to a PD-1 District without submission of a detailed development plan. This action establishes the land uses permitted in an area consistent with the Comprehensive Development Plan, but requires subsequent approval of specific projects through the normal PD-1 or PD-2 submission or approval procedures. An application for creation of such a PD-1 District shall contain the following: 
A.  A statement describing the special characteristics of the district and the reason for its creation. 
B.  A map indicating the boundaries of the proposed district. 
C.  A generalized area development plan for the proposed district, including: 
1.  A land use component, identifying proposed uses and the extent and location of each use. 
2.  A transportation element, identifying any relevant vehicular, pedestrian, or bicycle transportation improvements necessary to the ultimate development of the area. 
3.  A utility service statement, identifying any necessary utility or infrastructure improvements necessary to the ultimate development of the area. 
4.  An urban design element, if applicable, describing design frameworks, building scale and relationships, siting, landscape design, and other guidelines relating to the specific physical or urban environment of the proposed district. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
38-107 - PD-2 (SPECIFIC PD) DISTRICT: APPLICATION PROCEDURES 
A.  Minimum Size: A PD-2 District may be established on a site of any size. 
B.  Pre-application Concept Plan: Prior to filing an application for approval of a PD-2 District, the applicant shall meet with the City Planner for the purpose of submitting a pre-application concept plan. This plan shall illustrate the conceptual overall plan for the district and shall include at a minimum the information required in Table 38-1. 
C.  The City Planner shall review and comment on the proposed concept plan and shall provide the applicant with written comments within thirty (30) days of submission of the concept plan. At the option of the applicant or the City Planner, the concept plan may be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and comment at its earliest, practical meeting. A filing fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be paid. 
D.  The review of the concept plan shall include consideration of the following criteria: 
1.  If located within a Pre-existing PD-1 District, consistency with the terms and conditions of such District. 
2.  Land use intensity and density. 
3.  Ability to provide a positive environment for intended uses, including schematic building configurations, arrangements, and general landscaping and site design. 
4.  Use of open space. 
5.  Impact on the surrounding natural and built environment. 
6.  Adequacy of on- and off-site transportation systems to serve the proposed project. 
7.  Architectural quality and compatibility of the proposed project with the scale and appearance of surrounding areas. 
8.  Consistency with the City of Kearney's Comprehensive Development Plan. 
E.  Following review of the pre-application concept plan, the applicant may proceed with filing a formal application for approval of a PD-2 District. This plan shall illustrate the development master plan for the district and shall include at a minimum the information required in Table 38-1. 
F.  The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate each PD-2 District application. For PD-2 applications within a pre-existing PD-1 District, the review shall be limited to: 
1.  An evaluation of consistency with the land uses, development standards, and other requirements and regulations of the PD-1 District. 
2.  Detailed components of the project which were not included in the development standards previously established under the PD-1 District. 
    The Planning Commission and City Council may impose reasonable conditions, as deemed necessary, to ensure that a PD District shall be compatible with adjacent land uses, will not overburden public services and facilities and will not be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare. 
G.  The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon each application. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to PD-2 District applications. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council for final action. 
H.  The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon any Ordinance establishing a PD-2, Planned Development District. Proper notice shall mean the same notice established for any other zoning amendment. 
I.  In their respective reviews of the PD-2 application, the Planning Commission and City Council shall base decisions on findings of fact as set forth in the criteria presented in Table 38-2. 
J.  Upon approval by the City Council, the Development Plan and Agreement shall become a part of the Ordinance creating or amending the PD-2 District. All approved plans shall be filed with the Planning Clerk. 
K.  Issuance of Building Permits: The City shall not issue a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or other permit for a building, structure, or use within a PD-2 District unless it is in compliance with the approved Development Plan or any approved amendments. 
L.  Changes or Modifications to Development Plans in the PD-2 District. The City Planner is authorized at his/her discretion to approve amendments to an approved development plan, provided that: 
1.  Changes in the alignment and location of structures do not exceed ten (10) feet in any direction. 
2.  The floor area of any single building is not changed by more than five percent (5%). 
3.  All changes are within the allowable floor area ratios established by the project, are consistent with the adopted PD plan, and have been approved in writing by any applicable property owners association established within the boundaries of the project. 
4.  Any amendment not conforming to these provisions shall be considered tantamount to a new application and shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council according to the procedures for new applications established in this section. 
M.  Termination of PD-2 District: If no substantial development has taken place in a Planned Development District for three (3) years following approval of the district, the Planning Commission may reconsider the zoning of the property and may, on its own motion, initiate an application for rezoning the property. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
Table 38-1 
PD, Planned Development District Application Requirements 
Application Requirement PD-1 
Concept 
Plan PD-1 
Application PD-2 
Concept 
Plan PD-2 
Application Location, size, legal description of site ¦ ¦ Existing topography at 2-foot intervals ¦ ¦ Location and description of major site features, including tree masses, drainageways, wetlands, soils ¦ ¦ A map showing land uses within 200 feet of the boundary of the site ¦ ¦ Location of 100-Year Floodplains ¦ ¦ Generalized land use plan ¦ ¦ Proposed types and densities of development ¦ ¦ Generalized internal and external transportation and circulation system, including pedestrian and bicycle system ¦ ¦ General location and size of buildings or building footprints ¦ ¦ Statistical summary of the project, including gross and net site area, number of housing units by type, gross floor area of other uses, total amount of parking, and building and impervious surface coverage ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Site master plan, including general envelops of buildings, parking, open space, and other site features ¦ Description and location of all use types included in the project, including maximum floor areas devoted to each use ¦ ¦ Location and design of vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation systems, including relationship to external transportation system ¦ ¦ Schematic location and development standards for open space, including conceptual landscape plan ¦ Grading plan at 1-foot contours, including erosion control plans ¦ ¦ Building design standards, including height, materials, sections, and other information required to describe the project ¦ ¦ Location of existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers, storm water facilities, and water, gas, and electrical distribution systems ¦ ¦ General locations and sizes of signs and street graphics ¦ Location of structures, driveways or access points within a 100 foot radius of the project ¦ ¦ Proposed site development regulations, including maximum FAR or other density regulators, building and impervious coverage, setbacks, maximum heights, and other design standards specific to the project ¦ Detailed site plan, displaying specific location or building envelope limits for all major site structures; location of open spaces; parking facilities; and vehicular circulation ¦ Exterior building elevations and floor plans ¦ Detailed open space and landscape plan ¦ Utility plans for all proposed utility improvements ¦ Location, size, style, and lighting of signage, including directional and signage control ¦ Location and design of proposed site lighting ¦ Proposed public and private ownership boundaries, including proposed private lots and common ownership areas ¦ ¦ Preliminary plat if applicable ¦ Final plat if applicable ¦ Schedule indicating proposed phasing and scheduling of development ¦ ¦ Deed restrictions, covenants, agreements, association bylaws, and other documents controlling the use of property, type of construction, or development or activities of future residents If required If required Appropriate bonds to ensure construction of public improvements ¦ ¦ Application Checklist on a form provided by the City of Kearney ¦ ¦  
General Notes: 
1.  All items required for submittal of a concept plan shall be a part of the application for approval of the PD, Planned Development District. 
2.  Plans submitted in support of an application shall be submitted in five (5) sets of a scale large enough to illustrate the project successfully, most typically in a scale ranging from one (1) inch to twenty (20) feet to one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet. In addition, one (1) reduced set in 8.5 inch to 11 inch format shall also be submitted. 
¦ Application items required at specific stage 
Blank Items do not apply 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
Table 38-2 
Review Criteria and Standards for Findings of Fact 
Applies to Land Use Compatibility Criteria for Findings of Fact PD-1 PD-2 Development Density Site area per unit or floor area ratio should be similar to surrounding uses if not separated by major natural or artificial features. ¦ ¦ Land Use Plan Consistency with the land use plan of the City of Kearney. ¦ ¦ Height and Scale Height and Bulk Development should minimize differences in height and building size from surrounding structures. Differences should be justified by urban design considerations. ¦ ¦ Setbacks Development should respect pre-existing setbacks in its urban context. Variations should be justified by site or operating characteristics. ¦ ¦ Building Coverage Building coverage should be similar to that of surrounding development if possible. Higher coverage should be mitigated by landscaping or site amenities. ¦ ¦ Site Development Environment Project should maximize conservation of existing environmental features, including natural vegetation, tree cover, and drainage patterns. ¦ ¦ Parking and Internal Circulation Parking should serve all structures with minimal conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles. ¦ ¦ All structures must be accessible to public safety vehicles. ¦ ¦ Development must have access to adjacent public streets and ways. Internal circulation should minimize conflicts and congestion at public access points. ¦ ¦ Open Space Open spaces should contribute to the quality of the overall project and should provide supporting amenities for residential development. Open spaces should contribute to the design of the project and, when appropriate, provide locations for project-related activities. ¦ ¦  
Applies to Site Development Criteria for Findings of Fact PD-1 PD-2 Landscaping Landscaping should be integral to the development, providing street landscaping, breaks in uninterrupted paved areas, and buffering where required by surrounding land uses. Project design should preserve features of environmental importance to the greatest degree possible. These features include mature trees and woodlands, wetlands, steep slopes, waterways and bodies of water. ¦ ¦ Streetscape Projects should relate to surrounding public streets and contribute to the quality of the street environment. ¦ ¦ Building Design Architectural Quality Architectural design and building materials should be compatible with surrounding areas or reflect the specific design objectives of a new development area. ¦ Transportation Traffic Capacity Project should not reduce the existing level of traffic service on adjacent streets. Compensating improvements should be included to mitigate impact on street system operations. ¦ ¦ Street Network and Continuity Project should maintain the continuity of Kearney's street network or should provide opportunities for local traffic flow away from major arterials. ¦ ¦ Alternative Modes Project should make appropriate accommodations for access by public transportation, bicycles, and pedestrians. ¦ ¦  
Applies to Public Facilities Criteria for Findings of Fact PD-1 PD-2 Utility Service Project is adequately served by public utilities and infrastructure. ¦ ¦ Storm Drainage Project should handle storm water adequately to prevent overloading of public storm water management system. Project should not inhibit development of other properties or create adverse effects on other sites. Development should not increase probability of erosion, flooding, landslides, or other run-off related effects. ¦ ¦ Project should maximize preservation and enhancement of natural drainage features on site and should facilitate storm water storage techniques consistent with the policies of the City. Public Safety Project can be adequately served with police and fire protection. ¦ ¦ Comprehensive Plan Consistency with Development Objectives Project must be consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan, including applicable special area or specific plans. Project design should be consistent with the development standards and objectives of these plans. ¦ ¦  
¦ Application items required at specific stage 
Blank Items do not apply 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
Chapter 39 - DISTRICT TND, TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGN DISTRICT 

39-101 - PURPOSE 
    District TND, Traditional Neighborhood Design District is intended to encourage innovative mixed use residential environments that reflect the planning and development patterns in place when Kearney was initially developed. The TND District produces environments which manage automobiles but maintain a scale and set of linkages that promote pedestrian travel and civic space. These theories of urban design have been classified as "New Urbanism" although they transport the patterns of development of traditional Kearney into new settings. The TND District regulations included in this section are intended to capture the essence of this design technique, while avoiding excessive requirements that will discourage the use of the concept. The Kearney regulations are intended to capture the general concept and vision of traditional neighborhood design, without being so prescriptive as to inhibit the use of the concept or discourage design flexibility. 
39-102 - SIZE 
    The minimum size of a TND District shall be ten (10) acres and the maximum size shall be one hundred sixty (160) acres. 
39-103 - APPLICATION AND APPROVAL 
A.  The application and adoption process shall be the same as those established by PD, Planned Development Districts. 
B.  All applications for a TND Subdivision must be accompanied by a TND Development Plan, in addition to other documents required by this Ordinance. This plan shall illustrate the distribution of land uses throughout the subdivision; the location and design of public spaces, streets and alleys; the location and nature of special design features; architectural controls; and other information necessary to communicate the concept of the TND Subdivision. The TND Subdivision Plan shall be a part of the approved subdivision. Subsequent building and development permits shall be issued by the City only in consistency with the TND Development Plan. 
C.  Articles of incorporation and/or covenants for a homeowners' association or other provision assuring maintenance or operation of all common spaces shall be submitted with the TND District application. 
39-104 - PERMITTED LAND USES 
A.  Mixed Land Uses. 
1.  Retail, service, civic, office, and various types of residential land uses may be combined within a TND District development, notwithstanding the use regulations of the underlying zoning district. The distribution and location of land uses shall be consistent with the TND District Plan submitted for the subdivision. 
2.  The gross floor area of commercial area permitted within a TND District shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet per one hundred (100) people projected to live in the development. For the purpose of calculating projected population, the following factors shall be used: 
Single-Family Detached: ..... 3.5 people per unit 
Single-Family Attached: ..... 2.75 people per unit 
Townhouses: ..... 2.5 people per unit 
Multi-family: ..... 2.0 people per unit 
3.  Parks and public open spaces shall make up at least ten percent (10%) of the total area of the TND District development. 
39-105 - DENSITY 
A.  The average site area per unit of a TND District shall be established by the underlying zoning district. However, the density of individual parts of the TND District may exceed the average density. 
B.  Overall density permitted by the underlying zoning district of the TND District may be increased as follows for specific amenities: 
1.  Ten percent (10%) for the provision of a centrally located town square of at least one (1) acre for each twenty-five (25) acres of developed area; 
2.  Ten percent (10%) for the provision of approved ornamental lighting throughout the TND Subdivision; and 
3.  Ten percent (10%) for the development of a central community boulevard. Cumulative density bonuses shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the density permitted by the underlying zoning district. 
39-106 - LOT DIMENSIONS AND SETBACKS 
A.  Lot Dimensions. 
    Individual lot size dimensions, including minimum width, may be reduced to eighty percent (80%) of the requirement of the underlying zoning district. Any savings on lot size shall be devoted to public space, including, but not limited to, town squares, small parks, greenways, and community facilities. 
B.  Lot Setbacks. 
1.  Lot setbacks may be varied from those otherwise specified for the zoning district. Typically, the front-yard setback should respect a build-to line that is not less than five (5) feet nor greater than twenty (20) feet. Different setbacks may be incorporated as part of the TND District approval. Setback limits must be established on the preliminary and final plat. 
2.  The distance across a street from building face to building face shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet except along a community street or boulevard. 
3.  The setback from any garage entrance to any circulation way, including an alley, must be at least twenty (20) feet unless the project design makes other specific provisions for dedicated off-street parking. Garage access from the rear of lots by way of an alley is encouraged. 
39-107 - STREET SYSTEM DESIGN 
A.  Street Continuity. All streets within a TND District connect to other streets within the district, forming a continuous network. All streets and alleys shall terminate at other streets within the TND District and shall connect to other streets on the edge of the district. 
B.  Street and Block Characteristics. 
1.  The design of the street system shall create an open network that creates blocks with a length of no more than six hundred sixty (660) feet. 
2.  Street loops and cul-de-sacs may be included as part of the street system design. However, no street with a single point of access onto a connecting street should be longer than two hundred (200) feet. 
3.  Street or right-of-way widths may be varied for local streets within TND Subdivisions as provided in Chapter 55, Circulation System Design. 
C.  Pedestrian System. Each project within a TND District shall include a complete pedestrian system, providing access to all residential lots or sites and major activity centers within the project. In addition, each project shall provide direct access to any public multi-use recreational trails that run through or are adjacent to the project site. 
D.  Community Streets and Boulevards. Community streets and boulevards are streets that are designed as central open space features within a TND development. The incorporation of these facilities within a TND District is strongly encouraged and receives a density bonus, as provided in Section 39-105. Characteristics of such a street include: 
1.  Alignment that generally runs more than fifty percent (50%) of the longest dimension of the development. 
2.  Orientation to a main activity center in the development, including parks and neighborhood greens, civic facilities, commercial activity centers, or designed landmarks. 
3.  Extensive street landscaping and parallel sidewalks and trails. 
4.  Thematic lighting and street furniture. 
5.  A street section which incorporates a median or wide sidewalk setbacks. A median's width should be equal to one (1) times the width of either individual street channel. If the road channel is undivided, the distance between sidewalk and curb should be equal to at least fifty percent (50%) of the curb-to-curb width. 
Chapter 40 - DISTRICT RC, RURAL CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT 

40-101 - PURPOSE 
    District RC, Rural Conservation Development Overlay District is intended to require development design standards and techniques in sensitive environmental areas around Kearney that preserve unique landforms and the character of land. Kearney's location at the junction of several environments produces special environments, which include the rolling hills north and west of the City and the wetlands and fertile soils of the Platte River valley. The techniques of the RC District require that the natural landforms determine the design and character of new residential development in these sensitive areas. Areas of environmental sensitivity and potential application of the RC Overlay District are established in the City's Comprehensive Development Plan. 
40-102 - PROCESS 
    Subdivisions in an RC Overlay District generally follow the approval procedures outlined in Chapter 53, establishing the process for preliminary and final plat approval. Projects which do not require subdivision follow approval procedures appropriate to the specific project, including conditional use permits, zoning amendments, site plan review, or other applicable measures. The requirements and standards included in this section are in addition to those established procedures. 
40-103 - PERMITTED LAND USES 
    Land uses permitted in an RC District are the same as those permitted in the underlying base district. 
40-104 - PERMITTED YIELD 
    Developments in RC Overlay Districts are permitted the same density on developable area as would be allowed to conventional residential development in the underlying zoning district. Yield in housing units (Y) is calculated by the formula: 
Y=.90(TA - UA) 
_______ 
SA 
    where: 
TA = Total parcel area 
UA = Undevelopable areas, defined as the sum of wetlands designated by the National Wetlands Survey, Water of the United States, slopes exceeding twenty percent (20%), floodways, and soils subject to slumping, as indicated on the medium intensity maps contained in the county soil survey published by the USDA Soil Conservation Service, is subtracted from the total parcel area. 
.90 = An allowance for the typical percentage of land available after deducting the area of public streets and rights-of-way serving a low-density residential development. 
SA = Minimum site area per unit required by the underlying zoning district. 
40-105 - MINIMUM PERCENTAGE OF OPEN SPACE 
A.  The minimum percentage of land that shall be designated as permanent open space, not to be further subdivided, and protected through a conservation easement held by the City of Kearney, Buffalo County, a Homeowners Association, or a recognized land trust or conservancy, shall be a minimum of thirty-five percent (35%) of the Net Developable Area, defined as .90(TA-UA) 
B.  The above areas shall generally be designated as undivided open space, to facilitate easement monitoring and enforcement, and to promote appropriate management by a single entity according to approved land management standards. 
C.  All undivided open space and any lot capable of further subdivision shall be restricted from further subdivision through a permanent conservation easement, in a form acceptable to the City and duly recorded in the appropriate County Register of Deeds Office. 
D.  The required open space may be used, without restriction, for underground drainage fields for individual or community septic systems, and for "spray fields" for spray irrigation proposed in a "land treatment" sewage disposal system. However, "mound" systems protruding above grade and aerated sewage treatment ponds shall be limited to no more than ten percent (10%) of the required minimum open space. 
E.  Storm water management ponds or basins may be included as part of the minimum required open space, as may land within the rights-of-way for underground pipelines. However, land within the rights-of-way of high tension power lines shall not be included as comprising part of the minimum required open space. 
40-106 - CONSERVATION AREAS AS OPEN SPACE 
A.  The location of open space shall be consistent with the policies contained in the City of Kearney's Comprehensive Development Plan, and with the recommendations contained in this section and Section 40-111 entitled "Evaluation Criteria". 
B.  Open space shall be comprised of two (2) types of land; "Primary Conservation Areas" and "Secondary Conservation Areas". All lands within both Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas shall be protected by a permanent conservation easement prohibiting future development, and setting other standards safeguarding the site's special resources from negative changes. 
1.  Primary Conservation Areas. This category consists of wetlands designated by the National Wetlands Survey, Water of the United States, slopes exceeding twenty percent (20%), floodways, and soils subject to slumping, as indicated on the medium intensity maps contained in the county soil survey published by the USDA Soil Conservation Service. 
2.  Secondary Conservation Areas. Secondary Conservation Areas comprise at least 35 percent (35%) of the Net Developable Area and shall be designated and permanently protected. Full density credit shall be allowed for land in this category that would otherwise be buildable under local, state, and federal regulations, so that their development potential is not reduced by this designation. Such density credit may be applied to other unconstrained parts of the site. Secondary Conservation Areas are determined by specific project design and typically include all or some of the following kinds of resources: 
(a)  A one hundred (100) foot deep greenway buffer along all water bodies and watercourses, and a fifty (50) foot greenway buffer alongside wetlands soils classified as "very poorly drained" in the medium intensity county soil survey of the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. These areas must be conserved as Secondary Conservation Areas but are considered as Developable Areas for the purpose of calculating yield. 
(b)  One hundred (100) year floodplains. 
(c)  Woodlands, individual specimen trees, or small stands of significant trees. 
(d)  Aquifer recharge areas and areas with highly permeable ("excessively drained") soil. 
(e)  Significant wildlife habitat areas. 
(f)  Class I and Class II farmlands. 
(g)  Historic, archaeological or cultural features listed (or eligible to be listed) on the National Register of Historic Places or the Historic Resources Surveys of the Nebraska State Historical Society. 
(h)  Slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%). 
(i)  Ridgelines and view corridors. 
(j)  Land with soils that do not support residential development. 
40-107 - LOCATION STANDARDS FOR OPEN SPACE 
A.  Access to Residential Lots. Undivided open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within a conservation subdivision. To achieve this, the majority of house lots should abut undivided open space in order to provide direct views and access. Safe and convenient pedestrian access to the open space from all lots not adjoining the open space shall be provided (except in the case of farmland, or other resource areas vulnerable to trampling damage or human disturbance). Where the undivided open space is designated as separate, noncontiguous parcels, no parcel shall consist of less than three (3) acres in area nor have a length-to-width ratio in excess of 4:1, except such areas that are specifically designed as village greens, ballfields, upland buffers to wetlands, water bodies or watercourses, or trail links. 
B.  Interconnection of Open Spaces. Protected open spaces in each new subdivision are encouraged to adjoin each other, ultimately forming an interconnected network of Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas across the county. The only elements of the network that would necessarily be open to the public are those lands that have been required to be dedicated for public use and typically configured in a linear fashion as an element of Kearney's long-range open space network through the Comprehensive Development Plan. 
40-108 - SPECIAL PROCESSES FOR CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENTS 
    The review and approval process for subdivisions in the RC Overlay District is the same as that for conventional subdivisions, as set forth in Chapter 53. Additional provisions and approval processes are set forth in this section. 
A.  Existing Features Plan. 
1.  Plans analyzing each site's special features are required for all proposed subdivisions. The Existing Features Plan shall include at a minimum: 
(a)  A contour map based at least upon topographical maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey; 
(b)  The location of severely constraining elements such as steep slopes [over twenty-five percent (25%)], wetlands, watercourses, intermittent streams and one hundred (100) year floodplains, and all rights-of-way and easements; 
(c)  Soil boundaries as shown on USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service medium-intensity maps; and 
(d)  The location of significant features such as woodlands, tree lines, open fields or meadows, scenic views into or out from property, watershed divides and drainage ways, fences or stone walls, rock outcrops, and existing structures, roads, tracks and trails. 
2.  The Existing Features Plan shall identify both Primary Conservation Areas and Secondary Conservation Areas, as described in Section 40-106. The Existing Features Plan shall form the basis for the Conceptual Preliminary Plan, which shall show the tentative location of houses, streets, lot lines, and greenway lands in new subdivisions, according to the four (4) step design process described in Section 40-108.B. 
B.  Conceptual Preliminary Plan. A sketch plan or a Conceptual Preliminary Plan shall be submitted for all proposed subdivisions to the City Planner before submission of a formal preliminary plat application. A Conceptual Preliminary Plan presents a conceptual layout for greenway and open lands, house sites, and street alignments. Each Conceptual Preliminary Plan shall follow a four (4) step design process, as described below. Applicants shall be prepared to demonstrate to the City Planner that these four (4) design steps were followed in the preparation of the plan. 
1.  Step One: Designating the Open Space. During the first step, all potential conservation areas (both primary and secondary as defined above) are identified, using the Existing Features Plan. 
2.  Step Two: Location of House Sites. During the second step, potential house sites are located. Subdivision applicants shall identify tentative house sites on the Conceptual Preliminary Plan and proposed house sites on the detailed Final Plan. House sites should generally be located not closer than one hundred (100) feet from Primary Conservation Areas, but may be situated within fifty (50) feet of Secondary Conservation Areas, in order to enjoy views of the latter without negatively affecting the former. 
3.  Step Three: Street and Lot Layout. The third step consists of aligning proposed streets to provide vehicular access to each house in the most reasonable and economical way. When lots and access streets are laid out, they shall be located in a way that avoids or at least minimizes adverse impacts on both the Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas. To the greatest extent practicable, wetland crossings and streets traversing existing slopes over fifteen percent (15%) shall be strongly discouraged. Street connections shall generally be encouraged to minimize the number of new cul-de-sacs to be maintained by the County and to facilitate easy access to and from homes in different parts of the property (and on adjoining parcels). Where cul-de-sacs are necessary, those serving six (6) or fewer homes may be designed with "hammerheads" facilitating three (3) point turns. In TND Districts, the location of house sites follows the location of streets and squares. 
4.  Step Four: Lot Lines. The fourth step is simply to draw in the lot line (where applicable). These are generally drawn midway between house locations and may include L-shaped "flag lots" meeting the City's minimum standards for the same. 
5.  Review and Comments. The City Planner and the Director of Public Works shall return written comments on the Conceptual Preliminary Plan to the applicant within thirty (30) days of submittal. These comments should recommend changes to be made prior to submittal of a Preliminary Plat application. 
40-109 - OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE OF COMMON OPEN SPACE 
    Developments in the RC Overlay District shall provide for ownership and maintenance of common open space. Common open space within a development shall be owned, administered, and maintained by any of the following methods, either individually or in combination, and subject to approval by the City. 
A.  Offer of Dedication. The City of Kearney, Buffalo County, or the Natural Resources District shall have the first and last offer of dedication of undivided open space in the event said land is to be conveyed. Dedication shall take the form of a fee simple ownership. The City or other public agency may, but shall not be required to, accept undivided open space provided: 
1.  Such land is accessible to the residents of the county; 
2.  There is no cost of acquisition other than any costs incidental to the transfer of ownership such as title insurance; and 
3.  The county agrees to and has access to maintain such lands. 
Alternatively, a public agency may accept an easement, subject to the above conditions. 
B.  Homeowners Association. The undivided open space and associated facilities may be held in common ownership by a homeowners' association. The association shall be formed and operated under the following provisions: 
1.  The developer shall provide a description of the association, including its bylaws and methods for maintaining the open space. 
2.  The association shall be organized by the developer and shall be operated with financial assistance from the developer, before the sale of any lots within the development. 
3.  Membership in the association is automatic (mandatory) for all purchasers of homes therein and their successors. The conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from developer to homeowners shall be identified. 
4.  The association shall be responsible for maintenance of insurance and taxes on undivided open space, enforceable by liens placed by the county on the association. The association may place liens on the homes or house lots of its members who fail to pay their association dues in a timely manner. Such liens may require the imposition of penalty interest charges. 
5.  The members of the association shall share equitably the costs of maintaining and developing such undivided open space. Shares shall be defined within the association bylaws. 
6.  In the event of a proposed transfer, within the methods here permitted, of undivided open space, land by the homeowners' association, or of the assumption of maintenance of undivided open space land by a public agency, notice of such action shall be given to all property owners within the development. 
7.  The homeowners' association may lease open space lands to any other qualified person, or corporation, for operation and maintenance of open space lands. 
C.  Condominiums. The undivided open space and associated facilities may be controlled through the use of condominium agreements. Such agreements shall be in conformance with state statutes. All undivided open space land shall be held as a "common element". 
D.  Transfer of Easements to a Private Conservation Organization. An owner may transfer easements to a private, nonprofit organization, among whose purposes it is to conserve open space and/or natural resources, provided that: 
1.  The organization is acceptable to the City, and is a bona fide conservation organization with perpetual existence; 
2.  The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper reverter or retransfer in the event that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its functions; and 
3.  A maintenance agreement acceptable to the owner is entered into by the developer and the organization. 
40-110 - MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 
A.  Financial Responsibility. The ultimate owner of the open space (typically a homeowners' association) shall be responsible for raising all monies required for operations, maintenance, or physical improvements to the open space through annual dues, special assessments, etc. The homeowners' association shall be authorized under its bylaws to place liens on the property of residents who fall delinquent in payment of such dues or assessments. 
B.  Maintenance Enforcement. 
1.  In the event that the association or any successor organization shall, at any time after establishment of a development containing undivided open space, fail to maintain the undivided open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the development plan, the City may serve written notice upon the owner of record, setting forth the manner in which the owner of record has failed to maintain the undivided open space in reasonable condition. 
2.  Failure to adequately maintain the undivided open space in reasonable order and condition constitutes a violation of this ordinance. 
3.  Should any bill or bills for maintenance of undivided open space by the City or County be unpaid, a late fee of fifteen percent (15%) shall be added to such bills and a lien shall be filed against the premises in the same manner as other municipal claims. 
40-111 - EVALUATION CRITERIA 
    In evaluating the layout of lots and open space, the following criteria will be considered by the Planning Commission and City Council as indicating design appropriate to the site's natural, historic, and cultural features, and meeting the purpose of this ordinance: 
A.  Protection of floodplains, wetlands, and steep slopes from clearing, grading, filling, or construction except as may be approved for essential infrastructure or active or passive recreation amenities. 
B.  Preservation and maintenance of woodlands, existing fields, pastures, meadows, and orchards, and sufficient buffer areas to minimize conflicts between residential and agricultural uses. 
C.  Maintenance of buffers at least one hundred (100) feet in depth adjacent to wetlands and surface waters, including creeks, streams, springs, lakes and ponds. 
D.  Design around existing tree lines between fields or meadows, and minimal impacts on large woodlands [greater than five (5) acres], especially those containing many mature trees or a significant wildlife habitat. 
E.  Maintenance of scenic views. 
F.  Avoidance of new construction on prominent hilltops or ridges, by taking advantage of lower topographic features. 
G.  Protection of wildlife habitat areas of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
H.  Design around and preserved sites of historic, archaeological, or cultural value, including stone walls, barn foundations, cellar holes, earthworks, and burial grounds. 
I.  Protection of rural character and improves public safety and vehicular carrying capacity by avoiding development fronting directly onto existing public roads. 
J.  Landscaping of common areas, if appropriate. 
K.  Provision of active or passive recreational areas in suitable locations that offer convenient access by residents and adequate screening from nearby house lots. 
L.  Inclusion of a pedestrian circulation system providing access between properties, activities, or special features within the neighborhood open space system. All roadside footpaths should connect with off-road trails. 
M.  Provision of open space that is reasonably contiguous, avoiding fragmented open spaces. 
Chapter 41 - DISTRICT ND, NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT 

41-101 - PURPOSE 
    District ND, Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District enables the adoption of special performance and development standards in combination with site development regulations of a base district for areas of special historical or architectural significance within the City of Kearney. This District recognizes the importance of historically and architecturally significant districts to the character of Kearney and provides for their conservation. In many ways, the ND Overlay District applies standards and procedures to existing neighborhoods that are similar to those applied to new development in PD Districts. 
41-102 - APPLICATION AND USE 
    The ND Overlay District provides an opportunity to establish and apply special development controls and standards for areas in Kearney with special physical or design characteristics. Examples of these standards may include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Variations or substitutions of development regulations, including revised minimum and maximum setbacks, lot sizes, heights, and other regulations, based on the unique characteristics of the neighborhood. 
B.  Requirements for building design, materials, features, and orientations. 
C.  Special requirements or permissions for signage. 
D.  Limitations on maximum size and scale of buildings. 
E.  Limitations on location of parking, driveways, and other features that have an impact on the fabric of a traditional neighborhood. 
41-103 - MINIMUM SIZE 
    The minimum contiguous size of an ND Overlay District shall be five (5) acres. 
41-104 - PROCEDURE FOR ADOPTION 
A.  Proposal. The creation of an ND Overlay District may be initiated by the Planning Commission, the City Council, or by petition of the owner or owners of fifty-one percent (51%) of the property area within the proposed district. 
B.  Requirements for Application. An application for the creation of an ND Overlay District must include: 
1.  A statement describing the proposed district's special historical or architectural characteristics and stating the reasons for proposal of the district. 
2.  A map indicating the boundaries of the proposed ND Overlay District, specifying the base district(s) included within these boundaries. 
3.  An inventory of the land uses, buildings or historically important sites located within the boundaries of the proposed district. 
4.  A future land use plan for the district. 
5.  Supplemental site development regulations, design criteria, and performance standards that apply to the proposed district. 
41-105 - ADOPTION OF DISTRICT 
A.  The Planning Commission, and City Council shall review and evaluate each ND Overlay District application. 
B.  The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon each application. 
C.  The Planning Commission may recommend amendments, modifications, or rejections to ND District applications. 
D.  The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council for final action. 
E.  The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon any Ordinance establishing an ND Overlay District. 
F.  The Ordinance adopting the ND Overlay District shall include a statement of purpose, a description of district boundaries, and a list of supplemental site development regulations and performance standards. 
G.  Upon approval by the City Council, each ND Overlay District shall be shown on the Zoning Map, identified sequentially by order of enactment and referenced to the enacting Ordinance. 
H.  Any protest against an ND Overlay District shall be made and filed as provided by Nebraska statutes, and amendments thereto. 
41-106 - BUILDING PERMITS 
    Building or other development permits issued by the City in an ND Overlay District shall be consistent with this Chapter and shall follow all procedures for review that are established by the City. 
Chapter 42 - DISTRICT ND-1, PIONEER PARK NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT 

42-101 - PURPOSE 
    This District is intended to conserve Kearney's historic Pioneer Park neighborhood. This neighborhood contains some of Kearney's most historic houses in a central city location. As a result, it has become a focus for neighborhood revitalization efforts. However, its location near the University of Nebraska at Kearney and Kearney Center put significant housing pressures on the area, and have led to the conversion of many of these historic houses to multi-family units. The resulting densities have stressed the area's street system because of inadequate off-street parking. The ND-1 District is intended to strike a balance between the interests of owner-occupants, investor-owners, and people seeking housing in the district. 
42-102 - PERMITTED USES AND RELATIONSHIP TO BASE DISTRICTS 
    Except as otherwise indicated in this section, regulations, including permitted uses, required landscaping, parking, and signage shall be those of the underlying base district. 
42-103 - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Regulator 1-Family 
Detached 1-Family Attached Duplex Townhouse Multi-Family Other Permitted Uses Site Area per Housing Unit (sq. ft.) 6,000 5,000 4,000 3,000 3,000 Minimum Lot Area 6,000 5,000 8,000 3,000 10,000 6,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet) 65 50 75 30 100 75 Minimum Yards (feet)  Front Yard Note 1 Note 1 Note 1 Note 1 25 25  Side Yard (Note 3) 7 15 7 15 15 10  Street Side Yard 15 15 15 15 25 15  Rear Yard 15 15 15 15 25 15 Maximum Height (feet) 35 35 35 35 35 35 Maximum Building Coverage 55% 55% 55% 55% 55% 55% Maximum Impervious Coverage 70% 70% 70% 70% 70% 70% Floor Area Ratio NA NA NA NA 0.80 0.80 Maximum Amount of Total Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA NA NA 0% 0% Project Size Requiring Planned Development District (PD) NA NA NA 6 units 6 units NA Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way Line (feet) (Note 2) 20 20 20 20 20 20  
Note 1: Front Yard Setbacks 
The required front yard setback is the larger of the average of the setback of adjacent structures to the property or the average of all properties on the blockface. An application for a building permit must include a calculation of these averages. The City Planner may vary this requirement if he/she determines that a different setback is necessary to maintain the integrity of the blockface. This shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact stating the reasons for such determination. 
Note 2: Landscaping on Lots with Small Setbacks 
If required setback is less than twenty (20) feet, Minimum Depth of Landscaping is equal to the entire depth of the required front yard. 
Note 3: Zero (0) Lot Line Development 
Within a common development, one (1) interior side yard may be equal to zero (0) for single-family detached residential use if: 
1.  The side yard opposite to the zero (0) yard must equal at least twice the normal required minimum side yard. 
2.  The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use. 
3.  An easement for maintenance of the zero (0) lot line façade is prepared and recorded by the developer with the appropriate County Register of Deeds, with a copy of the recorded easement provided to the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a building permit. 
42-104 - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS 
A.  Group residential uses, including fraternity and sorority houses, must provide at least eight hundred fifty (850) square feet of site area per resident. 
B.  New multi-family development must comply with the following dispersion requirements in the ND-1 District: 
1.  The property line of any new multiple-family development containing from three (3) to eight (8) residential units (Limited Multiple-Family Residential) must be located at least 300 (300) feet from the property line of any pre-existing multiple-family development. Separation for any new multiple-family development containing from nine (9) to twelve (12) residential units increases an additional thirty-five (35) feet for each additional unit over eight (8). 
2.  No new multiple-family development shall exceed twelve (12) units. 
Chapter 43 - DISTRICT FP/FW, FLOODPLAIN/FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT 

43-101 - PURPOSE 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize losses to property by applying the provisions of this chapter to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities. 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction. 
C.  Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for intended purposes because of flood hazard. 
D.  Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance in the National Flood Insurance Program when identified by the Federal Insurance Administration as a flood prone community. 
43-102 - FLOODPLAIN AND FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICTS: FINDINGS OF FACT 
A.  Flood Losses Resulting from Periodic Inundation. Flood hazard areas of the City of Kearney, Nebraska, are subject to inundation which results in loss of life or property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
1.  General Causes of These Flood Losses. These flood losses are caused by: 
(a)  The cumulative effect of obstruction in floodways causing increases in flood heights and velocities, 
(b)  The occupancy of flood areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to others which are inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flood damages. 
2.  Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards. This chapter uses a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series of interrelated steps. 
(a)  Selection of a base flood which is based upon engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this chapter is representative of large floods which are reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this chapter. It is in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any one (1) year, as delineated by applicable Flood Insurance Studies and the Federal Emergency Management Administration's Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, effective on November 26, 2010, or any subsequent effective Flood Insurance Studies, Rate Maps, and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps issued after the effective date of this ordinance and adopted by the City of Kearney. 
(b)  Calculation of water surface profiles based upon a hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the base flood. 
(c)  Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than one (1) foot at any point. 
(d)  Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no obstruction is permitted which would cause any increase in flood height. 
(e)  Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway encroachment lines but which still is subject to inundation by the base flood. 
B.  Land to Which Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Kearney identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), effective on November 26, 2010, as numbered and unnumbered A Zone and/or within the Overlay Districts FP and FW established in this chapter. In all areas covered by this chapter, no development shall be permitted except upon a permit to develop granted by the City Council or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the City Council may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare and health of the inhabitants of the community as contained in the City Code. 
C.  Enforcement Officer. The Chief Building Official of the City of Kearney is hereby designated as the City Council's duly designated Enforcement Officer under this chapter. Unless otherwise provided by the City Council, the Central Platte or Tri-Basin Natural Resources District shall assist the City of Kearney on interpretation of floodplain/floodway rules and regulations. The Enforcement Officer shall obtain comments from the NRD as part of his/her review of all proposed activity in this Overlay District. 
D.  Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. The boundaries of the Floodway/Floodway Overlay Districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map. Where interpretation is needed to the exact location of the boundaries of the districts as shown on the official zoning map, as, for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the Enforcement Officer shall make the necessary interpretation. In such cases where the interpretation is contested, the Board of Adjustment will resolve the dispute. The base flood elevation for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating the district boundary on the land. The person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his/her case to the Board of Adjustment and to submit his/her own technical evidence if he/she so desires. 
E.  Compliance. No development located within known flood hazard areas of the community shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
F.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
G.  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the City of Kearney and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statute. 
H.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside floodway and floodway fringe district boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Kearney or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
I.  Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. 
J.  Application for Appeal. Where a request for a permit to develop is denied by the Chief Building Official, the applicant may apply for such permit or variance directly to the Board of Adjustment. Procedures for appeals to the Board of Adjustment shall proceed as set forth by Section 59-108. 
(Ord. No. 7615, 9-14-2010) 
43-103 - FLOODPLAIN AND FLOODWAY PERMITS AND ADMINISTRATION 
A.  Permit Required. No person, firm, or corporation shall initiate any development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for development as defined in this chapter. 
B.  Administration. 
1.  The Chief Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Duties of the Chief Building Official shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Review of all development permits to assure that sites are reasonable, safe from flooding and that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(b)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
(c)  Notify adjacent communities and the appropriate Natural Resources District prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and shall submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration when participating in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(d)  Notify the appropriate Natural Resources District of any proposed construction and development activity in floodplain areas, and/or upon land situated within the Floodplain/Floodway Overlay Zoning District. 
(e)  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(f)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures. 
(g)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed. 
(h)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Chief Building Official shall be presented certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
C.  Application for Permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall: 
1.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit. 
2.  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
3.  Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
4.  Be accompanied by plans for the proposed construction. 
5.  Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority. 
6.  Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the Chief Building Official. 
43-104 - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 
    The mapped flood plain area within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided into the two following districts: A Floodway Overlay District (FW) and a Floodplain Overlay District (FP) as identified in the official Flood Plain Study. Within these districts, all uses not meeting the standards of this chapter and those standards of the underlying zoning district shall be prohibited. These zones shall be consistent with the numbered and unnumbered A Zones as identified on the official FIRM when identified in the Flood Insurance Study provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. 
43-105 - STANDARDS FOR FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT AND FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT 
A.  No permit for development shall be granted for new construction, substantial improvement or other improvements including the placement of manufactured homes within the identified flood plain unless the conditions of this section are satisfied. 
B.  All areas identified as unnumbered A Zones by the Federal Insurance Administration are subject to inundation of the one hundred (100) year flood; however, the water surface elevation was not provided. The unnumbered A Zones shall be subject to all development provisions of this chapter. If Flood Insurance Study Data is not available, the community shall utilize any base flood elevation data currently available within its area of jurisdiction. Further, in cases of proposed development within unnumbered "A" zones, the developer's engineer shall be required to conduct the necessary studies to determine the one hundred (100) year flood elevation and its extent in relation to such development. 
C.  New construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvement, prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes and other development shall require: 
1.  Design or anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads including the effect of buoyancy. 
2.  New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination. 
3.  Construction with materials resistant to flood damage, utilizing methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and with electrical, heating, ventilation that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4.  All utility and sanitary facilities be elevated or flood-proofed one (1) foot above the regulatory flood elevation. Such flood-proofing is permitted only for non-residential properties. 
5.  That until a floodway has been designated, no development including landfill, may be permitted within the identified flood plain unless the applicant for the land use has demonstrated that the proposed use, when combined with all other existing and reasonably anticipated uses, will not increase the water surface elevation of the one hundred (100) year flood more than one (1) foot on the average cross-section of the reach in which the development or landfill is located as shown in the official flood plain study incorporated by reference herein. 
6.  Storage of Materials and Equipment. 
(a)  The storage of processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyancy, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. 
(b)  Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
7.  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, be required to assure that: 
(a)  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(c)  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  Proposals for development (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is less, include within such proposals the regulatory flood elevation. 
43-106 - FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT: REGULATIONS 
A.  Permitted Uses. Any use permitted in the underlying base district shall be permitted in the Floodplain Overlay District. No use shall be permitted in the district unless the standards of this section are met. 
B.  Standards for the Floodplain Overlay District. 
1.  Any new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement elevated one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
2.  Any new construction or substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall be flood-proofed so that below such a level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydro-dynamic loads and effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Enforcement Official. Such flood-proofing is permitted only for non-residential properties. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvements that are fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designated to automatically equalize hydro-static flood forces or exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by the registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
4.  Within AH Zones, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
5.  Manufactured Homes. 
(a)  All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in accordance with local building codes or FEMA guidelines. In the event that over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met: 
(1)  Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the manufactured home with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations, and manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one (1) additional tie per side. 
(2)  Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points, and manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four (4) additional ties per side. 
(3)  All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of 4800 pounds. 
(4)  Any additions to manufactured homes shall be similarly anchored. 
(b)  All manufactured homes to be placed within Zones AL-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of the International Building Code. 
C.  AO Zones: Special Regulations. Located within the areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as AO Zones. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. Therefore, the following provisions apply with AO Zones: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM. 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
(a)  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM; or 
(b)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely flood-proofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effect of buoyancy. Such certification shall be provided to the Building Official as set forth in Section 43-103. 
(c)  Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004) 
43-107 - FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
A.  Permitted Uses. Only uses having a low flood-damage potential and not obstructing flood flows shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance, and provided that they do not require structures fill or storage of materials or equipment. No use shall increase the flood levels of the base flood elevation. These uses are subject to the standards of Section 43-104 and other applicable sections. 
1.  Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, nurseries, forestry. 
2.  Accessory residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and play areas. 
3.  Nonresidential areas such as loading areas, parking, and airport landing strips. 
4.  Public and private recreational uses such as golf courses, archery ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves. New placement of residential structures including manufactured homes is prohibited within the identified floodway (FW) area. 
5.  In Zone A unnumbered, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any floodway data available through federal, state or local sources in meeting the standards of this section. 
43-108 - REQUEST FOR VARIANCES FROM DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS 
A.  The Board of Adjustment, as established by the City of Kearney, shall hear and decide appeal and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Chief Building Official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as provided by Nebraska State Statutes. 
D.  In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
2.  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
3.  The susceptibility of proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
5.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
6.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
7.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
8.  The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Development Plan and flood plain management program for that area. 
9.  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinance and emergency vehicles. 
10.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effect of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
11.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
E.  Conditions for Variance. 
1.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level providing subparagraphs 2. through 6. below have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical jurisdiction required for issuing the variance increases. 
2.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
3.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
4.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
5.  In addition to the criteria for variances set forth in Section 59-109, variances shall only be issued upon: 
(a)  A showing of good and sufficient cause, 
(b)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and 
(c)  A determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
6.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given a written notice that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
43-109 - ZONING REGULATIONS FOR NONCONFORMING USES 
A.  Continuance of Nonconforming Uses. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of the ordinance but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
1.  No such use or substantial improvement of that use shall be expended, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
2.  If such use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. The Utility Department shall notify the Building Inspector in writing of instances of nonconforming uses where utility services have been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months. 
3.  Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue a nonconforming uses. 
B.  Replacement of Residential Uses. If any residential nonconforming use of structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred within those areas identified as floodway (FW). This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
C.  Replacement of Non-Residential Uses. If any non-residential nonconforming use of structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it should not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred except that if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
43-110 - DEFINITIONS 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    ACTUARIAL RATES. Or "risk premium rates" are those rates established by the Federal Insurance Administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 4014 and the accepted actuarial principles. Actuarial rates include provisions for operating costs and allowances. 
    APPEAL. A request for a review of the Chief Building Official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
    AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the flood plain within a community subject to one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. Elevation indicated in the official flood plain study as the elevation of the 100-year flood. 
    BASE FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. An elevation one (1) foot higher than the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with a definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. Channel flow, thus, is that water which is flowing within the limits of a defined channel. 
    COMMUNITY. Any state or area or political subdivision thereof which has authority to adopt and enforce flood plain management regulations for the area within its jurisdiction. 
    DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. (For the purposes of determining rates) structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM's effective before that date. "Existing Construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures". 
    FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters; (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the Flood Hazard Boundaries and the zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the community. 
    FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plan, flood control works, and flood plain management regulations. 
    FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard". Such a system typically includes levees or dikes. These specialized modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which would preclude the entry of water. Structural components shall have the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effect of buoyancy. 
    FLOODPLAIN (FP). That area of the flood plain, outside of the floodway, that on an average is likely to be flooded once every one hundred (100) years [i.e. that has a one percent (1%) chance of flood occurrence in any one (1) year.] 
    FLOODWAY (FW). The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent portion of the flood plain that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any point assuming equal conveyance reduction outside the channel from the two (2) sides of the flood plain. 
    FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of flood plain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the heights calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For flood plain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the "start of construction or substantial improvement" is commenced on or after the effective date of the FIRM. 
    100-YEAR FLOOD. The base flood having a one percent (1%) chance of annual occurrence. 
    OVERLAY DISTRICT. A district which acts in conjunction with the underlying zoning district or districts. 
    START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. Law 97-348) includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, providing the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of street and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation of the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
    STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
    SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
    VARIANCE. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
Chapter 44 - DISTRICT AV, AVIATION OVERLAY DISTRICT 

44-101 - PURPOSE 
    District AV, Aviation Overlay District is intended to provide for the safe operation of aircraft into and out of the Kearney Municipal Airport. This District provides special regulations to maintain adequate clearance and to eliminate potential hazard, safety, and development conflicts between airport operations and surrounding development. The following additional regulations shall apply to such lands within the corporate limits of Kearney, Nebraska, or one (1) mile therefrom situated within the area of three (3) miles in all directions from boundaries of any airport. This area within three (3) miles of the boundaries of said airport shall be known as the airport hazard area, and shall be regulated as follows: 
44-102 - BOUNDARIES, APPROACH ZONES, TRANSITION ZONES AND TURNING ZONES 
A.  Detailed Description of Hazard Area. 
1.  The hazard area consists of approach and operation zones, transition zones, and turning zones. The outer boundary of the hazard area is composed of a series of connected tangents and simple curves which also constitute the outer boundaries of the approach and turning zones. 
2.  The inner boundary of the hazard area is a boundary consisting of a series of intersecting tangents, five hundred (500) feet from and parallel to the center line of the instrument runway or landing strip and two hundred fifty (250) feet from and parallel to the respective center lines of all other runways or landing strips and connecting the inner boundaries of adjacent approach zones at the ends of the runways, landing strips or proposed runways or landing strips. 
B.  Zone Descriptions. 
1.  An operation zone shall be located at each end of each existing or proposed runway, landing strip or other portion of the airfield used regularly, or to be used regularly, for the landing or taking-off of airplanes. Such approach zones shall begin two hundred (200) feet beyond the ends of their respective strips and at such beginning shall be one thousand (1,000) feet in width for the instrument runway or landing strip and five hundred (500) feet in width for all other runways and landing strips. The approach zones shall begin at the ends of their respective operation zones and shall extend and expand uniformly centered along the extended center line of the respective landing strip, to the outer boundary of the approach zone at a rate of thirty (30) feet of width for each one hundred (100) feet of horizontal length for the instrument runway or landing strip and twenty (20) feet of width for each one hundred (100) feet of horizontal length of all other runways. 
The inner area of each approach zone shall be that portion of the approach zone beginning two hundred (200) feet beyond the end of the respective or proposed landing strip and extending to the intersection of the controlling glide angle with a plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the highest elevations of the end of the respective runway or landing strip. The outer area of each approach zone shall be the area between the inner area of the approach zone and the outer limit of the approach zone. 
2.  The transition zones shall be the areas bounded by the inner boundary of the hazard area, the sides of contiguous inner areas of approach zones and the outer limits of the transition zones; said outer limits of the transition zones being the intersections, at elevations of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the highest elevation at the ends or edges of the closest runway or landing strip, or proposed runway or landing strip, of a series of contiguous planes originating from bases established by the inner boundary of the hazard area and the edges of adjacent inner areas of approach zones. Said planes rising from their respective bases at the rate of one (1) foot vertically to seven (7) feet horizontally to the lines of intersection previously referred to. 
3.  The turning zones shall comprise all portions of the hazard area not contained in the approach zones and in the transition zones. The outer limits of the turning zones shall be a series of points forming a line which is a horizontal distance of three (3) statute miles from the nearest points of the Airport's property line boundary. 
C.  Height Regulations. No building, transmission line, communication line, pole, tree, smokestack, chimney, wires, tower or other structure or appurtenance thereto of any kind or character shall hereafter be erected, constructed, repaired or established, nor shall any tree or other object of natural growth be allowed to grow: 
1.  In inner areas of approach zones to a height above the elevation of the nearest point on the end or proposed end of said instrument runway or landing strip in excess of 1/50 and all other runways or landing strips in excess of 1/40 of the distance from the end of the approach zone to said structure or object; 
2.  In the outer area of approach zones and in turning zones to a height in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the elevation at the end or proposed end of the nearest runway or landing strip; 
3.  In the transition zones to a height above the planes forming the transition slopes; 
4.  In the existing or proposed operation zones to a height above the existing or proposed finished grade of said runways or landing strips or the surface of the ground. 
D.  Permit Required. It shall hereafter be unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, repair or establish any building, transmission line, communication line, pole, tree, tower, smokestack, chimney, wires or other structure or appurtenance thereto of any kind or character or to plant or replant any tree or other object of natural growth, within the boundary of the hazard area of said Airport without first obtaining a permit from the Building Official of Kearney, Nebraska. 
E.  Exceptions. In the outer area or approach zones and within the turning zones, these height regulations shall not apply to construction or planting which is no higher than seventy-five (75) feet above the elevation of the end of the nearest runway or landing strip. 
F.  Application Forms. Application for a permit as required under these regulations shall be made upon a form to be available in the office of the Building Official, Kearney, Nebraska, and shall indicate the approximate location, ground elevation with reference to the elevation at the end of the nearest runway or landing strip and height of the proposed structure or planting. 
G.  Nonconforming Structures. Within the hazard area as hereinbefore defined, no nonconforming building, transmission line, communication line, pole, tree, tower, smokestack, chimney, wires or other structure or appurtenance thereto of any kind or character or object of natural growth shall hereafter be replaced, substantially reconstructed, repaired, altered, replanted or allowed to grow, as the case may be, to a height which constitutes a greater hazard to air navigation than existed before these regulations were adopted; if such structures or objects of natural growth have been torn down, destroyed, have deteriorated or decayed to an extent of eighty percent (80%) or more, or abandoned for a period of twelve (12) months or more. Transmission lines and communication lines as referred to in these regulations shall be interpreted to mean all poles, wires, guys and all other equipment, necessary for the operation and maintenance of the same within the zone regulated. 
H.  Marking of Nonconforming Structures. Whenever the Building Official shall determine, or shall be notified by the Joint Airport Zoning Board or the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics that a specific nonconforming structure or object exists and has existed prior to the passage of these regulations and within the zones area hereinbefore described at such height or in such position as to constitute a hazard to the safe operation of aircraft landing at or taking off from said Airport, the owner or owners and the lessor or lessors of the premises on which such structure or object is located shall be notified in writing by the Building Official and shall within a reasonable time permit the marking thereof by suitable lights or other signals designated by the Building Official. The cost of such marking shall not be assessed against the owner or lessor of said premise. 
I.  Administrative Agency. The Building Official of the City of Kearney, Nebraska, shall administer and enforce these regulations and shall be the administrative agency provided for in Section 3-319 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the administrative agency as provided by the Joint Airport Zoning Board. 
J.  Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment of the City of Kearney, Nebraska, shall be the Board of Adjustment with respect to these regulations, to have and exercise the powers conferred by Section 3-320 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, and such other powers and duties as are conferred and imposed by law. 
Chapter 45 - DISTRICT W, WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT 

45-101 - PURPOSE 
    District W, Wellhead Protection Overlay District establishes performance standards to protect the integrity of Kearney's main wellfield along the Platte River in the southeast part of the planning jurisdiction. This District provides for four (4) specific performance zones, with regulations related to the ability of contamination in each area to affect the quality of the City's water supply. 
45-102 - PERMITTED USES 
    Uses permitted by the underlying zoning district are generally permitted within the W Overlay District. However, specific requirements within each wellhead protection zone may further restrict permitted land uses. 
45-103 - WELLHEAD PROTECTION ZONES 
    Four (4) Wellhead Protection Zones are established by these regulations and illustrated in the Localized Watershed Delineation Area map. These zones include: 
A.  Zone 1 corresponding to the Wellhead Protection Area delineated by the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services. This area is required by Title 179 of the Nebraska Administrative Code to protect the municipal water supply from microbiological contamination within a calculated one (1) year time of travel for groundwater flow. 
B.  Zone 2 corresponding to areas within a twenty-four (24) hour time of travel for surface water. 
C.  Zone 3 corresponding to areas near the wellfield where surface run-off can have a significant potential for surface contamination. 
D.  Zone 4 corresponding to areas where development review and control is necessary to ensure proper control of run-off. 
45-104 - ZONE 1 REGULATIONS 
    All development within Zone 1 is subject to the following regulations: 
A.  Septic systems and leachfields are prohibited. All development must be directly connected to City sewer services. 
B.  Any development must be connected to City water services if such services are available within five hundred (500) feet of the site. If a connection is impossible, all new wells shall be installed in accordance with Title 178 of the Nebraska Administrative Code. Well installation further requires the approval of both the City's Director of Utilities and the appropriate State of Nebraska regulatory agencies. 
C.  Storage of petroleum and agricultural chemicals for resale shall be prohibited. Storage of over five hundred (500) gallons of petroleum and/or agricultural chemicals for personal use shall require approval by both the City's Director of Utilities and the appropriate State of Nebraska regulatory agencies. 
D.  Surface water run-off shall be contained within the boundaries of any proposed development. 
E.  All development requires the written approval of the City's Director of Utilities and the appropriate State of Nebraska Department of Health. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
45-105 - ZONE 2 REGULATIONS 
    All development within Zone 2 is subject to the following regulations: 
A.  Residential and animal production use types are not permitted. 
B.  Septic systems and leachfields are prohibited. 
C.  Sludge from livestock operations or municipal waste shall not be applied in this area. 
D.  Storage of petroleum and agricultural chemicals for resale shall be prohibited. Storage of over fifty (50) gallons of petroleum and/or agricultural chemicals for personal use shall require approval by both the City's Director of Utilities and the appropriate State of Nebraska regulatory agencies. 
E.  Surface water run-off shall be contained within the boundaries of any proposed development. 
F.  All development must maintain separation standards established by the City's Director of Utilities. Surface water run-off shall not be allowed to discharge to any State of Nebraska waters without treatment according to standards developed by the City's Director of Utilities. 
G.  All development requires the written approval of the City's Director of Utilities and the appropriate State of Nebraska regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
45-106 - ZONE 3 REGULATIONS 
    All development within Zone 3 is subject to the following regulations: 
A.  Maximum residential density shall be one (1) unit per forty (40) acres. 
B.  The density of any animal production or occupancy shall be limited to one (1) animal unit per eight (8) acres. 
C.  Septic systems and leachfields are prohibited unless constructed in accordance with Title 124 of the Nebraska Administrative Code. 
D.  Sludge from livestock operations or municipal waste shall not be applied in this area. 
E.  Storage of petroleum and agricultural chemicals for resale shall be prohibited. Storage of over five hundred (500) gallons of petroleum and/or agricultural chemicals for personal use shall require approval by both the City's Director of Utilities and the appropriate State of Nebraska regulatory agencies. 
F.  Surface water run-off shall be contained within the boundaries of any proposed development. 
G.  All development must maintain separation standards established by the City's Director of Utilities. Run-off shall not be allowed to discharge to any State of Nebraska waters without treatment according to standards developed by the City's Director of Utilities. 
H.  All development requires the written approval of the City's Director of Utilities and the appropriate State of Nebraska regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
45-107 - ZONE 4 REGULATIONS 
    All development within Zone 4 is subject to the following regulations: 
A.  Any development shall connect to City water and sewer services if such services are within three hundred (300) feet of the development site. 
B.  Surface water run-off shall be contained within the boundaries of any proposed development. 
C.  Surface water run-off shall not be allowed to discharge to any State of Nebraska waters without treatment according to standards developed by the City's Director of Utilities. 
D.  All development requires written approval of the City's Director of Utilities. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
Chapter 46 - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS 

46-101 - PURPOSE 
    The Supplemental Use Regulations set forth-additional standards for certain uses located within the various zoning districts. These regulations recognize that certain use types have characteristics that require additional controls in order to protect public health, safety, and welfare. These regulations complement the use regulations contained in Chapter 13. 
46-102 - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS: AGRICULTURAL USES 
    Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a previous approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit issued under any local, state, or federal ordinance or statute. 
A.  Horticulture and Crop Production: Retail Sales. Retail operation of garden centers or roadside stands associated with a primary agricultural use may be permitted in the AG District, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Garden Centers. 
(a)  A garden center is a building or premises used for the retail sale of plant materials or items useful in the growing or display of lawns, gardens, and plants. 
(b)  Garden centers must conform to all site development regulations for the zoning district. 
(c)  Any garden center adjacent to a residential district must maintain a twenty (20) foot landscaped buffer yard, consistent with the standards established in Section 48-105. 
2.  Roadside Stands. 
(a)  A roadside stand is a facility used on a temporary or seasonal basis for the retail sale of produce grown largely on adjacent or surrounding agricultural lands. 
(b)  A roadside stand may be located within a required front yard but no closer than forty (40) feet to the edge of a traveled roadway. 
(c)  A roadside stand may operate for a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) days in any one (1) year. 
B.  Keeping Animals in Residential Zoning Districts. 
1.  Pets Generally. Keeping, breeding and raising of household pets as defined in Article 13, "Animals Generally," Section 8-1301, "Definitions" is allowed in all residential zoning districts, including RR-1 and RR-2 Districts subject to any restrictions listed. 
2.  Animal Production in the RR-1 and RR-2 Zoning Districts. Keeping, breeding, and raising of domestic animals as defined in Article 13, Section 8-1301 is permitted in the RR-1 and RR-2 Districts outside the corporate limits of the City. Any such activity must be located entirely within a rear yard. 
3.  Within the RR-1 and RR-2 Districts, outside the corporate limits of the City, containing one (1) acre or more may maintain two (2) horses, llamas, or other equine and/or hoofed animals and their immature offspring. Such site may have up to one (1) additional animal for each additional acre of dedicated site area, up to a maximum total of twenty (20) animals. Numbers of turkeys, guineas, peacocks; chickens, ducks, game hens, pheasants and similar birds shall not exceed six (6) per acre with a maximum of twenty (20). The number of rabbits shall not exceed twenty (20) animals. Quantities for other species will be determined on a case-by-case basis. 
C.  Animal Production: Disposal of Waste. 
1.  No disposal of garbage, rubbish, or offal associated with animal production shall occur within five hundred (500) feet of any pre-existing residential districts, including RR-1 through RM and shall only be conducted on premises outside the Corporate Limits of the City. 
D.  Commercial Feedlots. 
1.  No new commercial feedlots or CAFO (Confined Animal Feeding Operation) shall be established within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Kearney. 
E.  Urban Farming. Where permitted by Conditional Use Permit, urban farming with a Controlled Environmental Agriculture (CEA) system are subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The Conditional Use Permit application shall include the following additional information: 
(a)  Site Plan: The site plan shall include setbacks, footprints of all structures, driveways, walkways, landscaping, screening, lighting, utilities, refuse container(s) and any other relevant information to the project. 
(b)  Overall Safety Plan: The Overall Safety Plan shall note and/or show: 
i.  Electrical, water, and sewer hookup details. 
ii.  Anchoring system detail with the use the cargo container - farm. 
(c)  Incorporation of the Urban Farm and/or Cargo Container - Farm into the Existing Neighborhood: Shall note and/or show the details of incorporating the Urban Farm or Cargo Container - Farm into the surrounding neighborhood. 
(d)  Termination Plan: The Termination Plan for the project shall include a plan to restore the property to its original state and physically remove any Cargo Container - Farm and/or other temporary structures. 
2.  Conditions for Urban Farming: 
(a)  Base Zoning District Site Regulations apply to all urban farming structures. 
(b)  Life safety, building code, electrical, and plumbing standards apply to all urban farming structures. 
(c)  Conditional Use Permit valid for the three (3) years renewable for extended time if there are no legitimate complaints or concerns. 
(d)  Termination Plan must be completed within three (3) months of the expiration or retraction of the permit. 
(e)  If Cargo Container - Farm: Units cannot exceed the number of units approved on the Conditional Use Permit. 
(Ord. No. 7228, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 7793, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 7807, 5-14-2013; Ord. No. 8130, 3-14-2017; Ord. No. 8164, 7-11-2017) 
46-103 - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS: RESIDENTIAL USES 
A.  Downtown and Group Residential in CBD District. Downtown and Group Residential uses are permitted in the CBD District only on levels above street level. A unit or units specifically designed for occupancy by disabled residents may be developed at street level, subject to approval by the Board of Adjustments. 
B.  Group Residential. Group residential uses, when permitted, are subject to the requirements set forth in Table 46-1. 
Table 46-1 
Group Residential Density by Zoning District 
Zoning District Terms of Permitted Use Maximum Number of Unrelated Persons in Structure Minimum Floor Area per Resident (square feet) Minimum Site Area per Resident AG Conditional for Group Residential 5 500 1,500 R-2 Conditional for Group Residential 6 350 1,000 R-3 By Right for Group Residential 
Conditional for Lodging House 10 300 850 R-4 By Right 15 250 650 RM Conditional for Group Residential 6 350 1,000 ND-1 As Permitted by Underlying Zoning District 6 400 1,000 UC, C-1 and C-1(N) Conditional for Group Residential 10 300 650  
C.  Mobile Home Parks in the RM District. Mobile Home Parks and mobile home residential use are permitted in the RM District. Such use may be configured in a Mobile Home Park or Mobile Home Subdivision. Following the effective date of this Ordinance, no mobile home shall be located outside of a Mobile Home Park or Mobile Home Subdivision. A Mobile Home Park is subject to compliance with the following regulations: 
1.  Certification: 
(a)  A certification of compliance with all ordinances and regulations regarding mobile home licensing, zoning, health, plumbing, electrical, building, fire protection and any other applicable requirements shall be required of all Mobile Home Parks. 
(b)  The Building Official is authorized to perform an annual inspection of any Mobile Home Park to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
2.  Minimum and Maximum Area: A Mobile Home Park shall be considered to be one (1) zoned lot. The minimum contiguous area of a Mobile Home Park shall be one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet. 
3.  Density Requirements: 
(a)  The maximum gross density of a Mobile Home Park shall be ten (10) units per acre. 
(b)  The minimum size of an individual mobile home space shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet for single-wide mobile home units and five thousand (5,000) square feet for double-wide mobile home units. 
(c)  Each mobile home space shall have a width of at least forty (40) feet and a length of at least seventy-five (75) feet. 
4.  Site Development Standards: 
(a)  Setbacks: Each Mobile Home Park shall have a minimum perimeter setback of thirty-five (35) feet from adjacent non-residential uses and fifty (50) feet from adjacent residential uses. No space for a dwelling unit or any other structure shall be permitted in the required setback. 
(b)  Setback landscaping: All area contained within the required setbacks except sidewalks and private drives shall be landscaped and screened in conformance with Chapter 48. Screening shall be provided in conformance with Section 48-106 for any common property line with another non-residential use. 
(c)  Impervious Coverage: Impervious coverage for a Mobile Home Park shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total site area. 
(d)  Open Space: Each Mobile Home Park shall provide a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of open recreational space per unit. Such space shall be provided at a central location accessible from all parts of the park by pedestrians. Required perimeter setbacks or buffers shall not be credited toward the fulfillment of this requirement. 
(e)  Separation Between Mobile Home Units: The minimum separation between a mobile home unit and attached accessory structure and any other mobile home units and/or accessory structure shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(f)  Separation and Setbacks for Accessory Buildings: An accessory building on a mobile home space shall maintain a minimum rear and side yard setback of five (5) feet. A minimum distance of ten (10) feet shall be provided between any mobile home and an unattached accessory building. 
5.  Street Access and Circulation Requirements: 
(a)  Access to Public Street: Each Mobile Home Park must abut and have access to a dedicated public street with a right-of-way of at least sixty (60) feet. Direct access to a mobile home space from a public street is prohibited. 
(b)  Vehicular Circulation: The Mobile Home Park must provide interior vehicular circulation on a private internal street system. Minimum interior street width shall be twenty-seven (27) feet. The street system shall be continuous and connected with other internal and public streets; or shall have a cul-de-sac with a minimum diameter of one hundred (100) feet. No such cul-de-sacs may exceed three hundred (300) feet in length. 
(c)  Separation between Units and Circulation Areas: The minimum distance between a mobile home unit and any attached accessory structure and the pavement of an internal street or parking area shall be ten (10) feet. 
(d)  Sidewalks: Each Mobile Home Park shall provide a sidewalk system to connect each mobile home space to common buildings or community facilities constructed for the use of its residents; and to the fronting public right-of-way. Sidewalk width shall be at least four (4) feet. 
(e)  Street and Sidewalk Standards: All internal streets and sidewalks shall be hard-surfaced. Electric street lighting is required along all internal streets. 
(f)  Parking Requirements: Each Mobile Home Park must provide at least two (2) off-street parking stalls for each mobile home space. 
6.  Utilities: 
(a)  All Mobile Home Parks shall provide individual units and common facilities with an adequate, piped supply of hot and cold water for both drinking and domestic purposes; and standard electrical service, providing at least one 120-volt and one 240-volt electrical service outlet to each mobile home space. 
(b)  Complete water and sewer service shall be provided within each Mobile Home Park in accordance with the Subdivision Chapter of the Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
(c)  Properly spaced and operating fire hydrants shall be provided for proper fire protection within each Mobile Home Park in accordance with the Subdivision Chapter of the Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
(d)  All electric, telephone, gas, and other utility lines shall be installed underground. 
7.  Financial Responsibility: Each application for a Mobile Home Park shall include a demonstration by the developer of financial capability to complete the project, and a construction schedule. 
8.  Completion Schedule: Construction must begin on any approved Mobile Home Park within one (1) year of the date of approval by the Planning Commission and City Council. Such construction shall be completed within two (2) years of approval, unless otherwise extended by the Planning Commission. 
9.  All other uses and provisions of the Kearney Mobile Home Park regulations are incorporated herein by reference. These provisions include tie-down and other structural requirements included in the Kearney Municipal Code. 
10.  All Mobile Home Parks are subject to an annual inspection by the Building Official to assure continued compliance with applicable standards. 
D.  Mobile Home Subdivisions in the RM District. 
1.  Mobile Home Subdivisions shall be developed in accordance with all standards and requirements set forth in the Subdivision Chapter of the Unified Land Development Ordinance of Kearney. Site development regulations shall be the same as those required in the R-2 Zoning District. Each mobile home shall be considered a single-family detached residential unit for the purpose of determining applicable development regulations. 
2.  Mobile home units within Mobile Home Subdivisions shall be built in accordance with the minimum design standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and display a certification of such compliance. All units shall be installed on a permanent foundation with complete removal of wheels and towing packages. 
E.  Retirement Residence. 
1.  Maximum Floor Area Ratio is 0.5 for buildings up to and including three (3) stories, 0.6 for buildings from four (4) to six (6) stories, and 0.8 for buildings over six (6) stories. Number of living units and occupants is determined by Floor Area Ratio rather than site area per unit regulators. 
2.  Any action that would result in occupancy of the project by persons less than retirement age requires approval by the City Council following a recommendation by the Planning Commission. 
46-104 - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS: CIVIC USES 
A.  Clubs. 
1.  Clubs located adjacent to residential uses shall maintain a bufferyard of not less than fifteen (15) feet along the common boundary with such residential use. 
B.  Group Care Facilities and Group Homes. 
1.  Each group care facility or group home must be validly licensed by either the State of Nebraska or the appropriate governmental agency. 
2.  Group homes are permitted in the CBD District only on levels above street level except that a facility specifically designed for occupancy by disabled residents may be developed at street level, subject to approval as a Conditional Use by the Planning Commission. 
C.  Day Care Homes Services and Day Care Centers. 
1.  Day Care Home Services (Limited), Day Care Home Services (General), and Day Care Centers shall be restricted to hours of operation between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. when located in a residential zone (RR-1, RR-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RM). 
2.  Day Care Home Services (General) shall provide two (2) off-street parking spaces for employees and an off-street loading and unloading zone for a minimum of one (1) vehicle. 
3.  The parking requirements for each day care type can be found in Table 49-1: Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements. 
D.  Religious Assemblies. Accessory uses related, but subordinate and incidental, to the primary religious assembly are allowed in the principle structure. Any combination of these accessory uses are allowed, provided they occupy no greater than forty percent (40%) of the total gross floor area of the building. The following are permitted supplemental accessory uses for religious assemblies: 
1.  Offices for guidance services. 
2.  Preschool. 
3.  Day care center. 
4.  Common kitchen. 
5.  Food bank. 
6.  Gymnasium. 
(Ord. No. 7835, 9-10-2013, effective January 1, 2014, Ord. No. 8164, 7-11-2017; Ord. No. 8321 , § 3, 2-12-2019) 
46-105 - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS: COMMERCIAL USES 
A.  Auto Service, Repair, Equipment Repair, Travel Center, Truck Stop, and Body Repair Uses. 
1.  Where permitted in commercial districts, all repair activities, including oil drainage, lifts, and other equipment, must take place within a completely enclosed building. Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to Auto Repair and Body Repair, provided that such storage is completely screened so as not to be visible from residential areas or public rights-of-way. Screening is subject to provisions of Chapter 48. 
2.  Any spray painting must take place within structures designed for that purpose and be approved by the Building Official. 
3.  All entrances and exits serving a gasoline or diesel service station, convenience store offering fuel sales, or automobile repair shop shall be at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from a school, public park, religious assembly use, hospital, or residential use, as measured along any public street. Such access shall be at least forty (40) feet away from the right-of-way line of any intersection. 
4.  All fuel pumps shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from any street line. 
B.  Auto Washing Facilities. 
1.  Each conveyor operated auto washing facility shall provide one hundred (100) feet of on-site stacking capacity per washing lane on the approach side of the washing structure and on-site stacking space for two (2) vehicles on the exit side. 
2.  Each self-service auto washing facility shall provide stacking space for three (3) automobiles per bay on the approach side and one (1) space per bay on the exit side of the building. 
C.  Automobile and Equipment Rental and Sales. 
1.  All outdoor display areas for rental and sales facilities shall be hard-surfaced. 
2.  Body repair services are permitted as an accessory use to automobile rental and sales facilities, provided that such repair services shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the building. 
D.  Bed and Breakfasts. 
1.  Bed and Breakfasts permitted in the CBD District must provide any sleeping facility only on levels above street level except that units specifically designed and reserved for occupancy by handicapped people may be located on the street level. 
2.  See Chapter 49, Off-Street Parking, Table 49-1, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements, Commercial Use Types, Lodging, Bed & Breakfast for minimum off-street parking requirements. 
E.  Campgrounds . 
1.  Minimum Size: Each campground established after the effective date of this Ordinance shall have a minimum size of one (1) acre. 
2.  Setbacks: All campgrounds shall maintain a fifty (50) foot front yard setback and a twenty-five (25) foot bufferyard from all other property lines. 
3.  Each campground must maintain water supply, sewage disposal, and water and toilet facilities in compliance with all City ordinances; or, alternately, be limited to use by self-contained campers, providing their own on-board water and disposal systems. 
F.  Construction Sales and Service. When permitted outside of District M-1 and District M-2, retail home improvement stores and centers may include outdoor storage of materials and must comply with the following conditions: 
1.  Architectural design and materials shall be consistent with the current or projected character of the surrounding area. 
2.  All outside storage or display of merchandise or other materials or equipment shall be screened from view at eye level from a public street or adjacent property. 
3.  All storage buildings with overhead doors, drive openings, or open bays and all loading areas shall be fully screened from view at eye level from a public street or adjacent property. 
4.  Minimum screening shall be consistent with screening standards set forth in Section 48-106. 
5.  All areas not occupied by buildings or landscaping shall be paved with concrete or asphalt. 
G.  Convenience Storage. When permitted outside of the M-1 District and M-2 District, convenience storage facilities shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
1.  The minimum size of a convenience storage facility shall be one (1) acre. 
2.  Activities within the facility shall be limited to the rental of storage cubicles and the administration and maintenance of the facility. 
3.  All driveways within the facility shall provide a paved surface with a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet. 
4.  All storage must be within enclosed buildings and shall not include the storage of hazardous materials. 
5.  No storage buildings may open into required front yards. 
6.  Facilities must maintain landscaped bufferyards of thirty-five (35) feet adjacent to any public right-of-way and twenty (20) feet adjacent to other property lines, unless greater setbacks are required by Chapter 48. 
H.  Conversion of Residential Building. No building that was designed and constructed as a residential building shall be converted for commercial use unless the following conditions are met: 
1.  Setbacks must comply with those required in the zoning district. 
2.  All off-street parking required by the proposed use of the premises can be achieved. 
3.  The existing structure shall be made to comply with all commercial code requirements. 
4.  The premises shall be screened from view of any abutting property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
5.  A site plan depicting the above requirements plus any changes to the exterior of the building shall be prepared by a registered architect and submitted for review and approved by the City staff prior to applying for a building permit. 
I.  Kennels. 
1.  The minimum lot size shall be two (2) acres. 
2.  No building or dog runs shall be located nearer than one hundred (100) feet from any property line and five hundred (500) feet to the property line of any residential use or district. 
3.  All kennel facilities shall be screened around such facilities or at property lines to prevent distracting or exciting animals. Screening shall be of a type provided by Chapter 48, establishing landscape and screening standards. 
J.  Marinas. 
1.  A boat marina, including related commercial sales, boat service, and amphibious events of sport, skill, or exhibition, shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the boundary of any residential district, unless such marina is occupied by the owner or caretaker residing on the site. 
K.  Restricted (Adult Entertainment) Businesses. Adult entertainment businesses shall be subject to the following restrictions, and no person shall cause or permit the establishment of any adult entertainment business contrary to said restrictions: 
1.  No adult entertainment business shall be open for business between the hours of twelve midnight (12:00 a.m.) and six (6:00) a.m. 
2.  A new adult entertainment business shall not be allowed within one thousand (1,000) feet of another existing adult entertainment business. 
3.  A new adult entertainment business shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any residential use and/or residentially zoned district or one thousand (1,000) feet of a pre-existing school, public park, or place of worship. 
4.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any adult entertainment businesses in existence at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect. All nonconformance shall come into compliance on or before January 1, 2005, and no such nonconforming use shall be permitted to expand in size or scope and the rights granted in this chapter shall terminate upon cessation of business, sale or transfer of ownership of the adult entertainment business. 
5.  Measurement of distances. For the purpose of this chapter, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the main entrance of such adult entertainment business to the point on the property line of such other business, school, church, public park or areas zoned for residential use which is closest to the said main entrance of such adult entertainment business. 
6.  No adult entertainment business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of models or any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening from any public way or from any property not licensed as an adult use. No operator of an adult entertainment business or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, owner, or employee of such business shall engage in any activity or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct in or about the premises which is prohibited by this code or any laws of the State of Nebraska or the United States. 
7.  No part of the interior of the adult entertainment business shall be visible from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or other public or semipublic area. 
8.  An adult entertainment business shall post a sign at the entrance of the premises, which shall state the nature of the business and shall state that no one under the age of eighteen (18) years is allowed on the premises. The sign shall comply with the City's sign regulations. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the owner from establishing an older age limitation for coming on the premises. 
9.  Nuisance Operation: Any adult entertainment business operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this chapter, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner prescribed by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
46-106 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
46-107 - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS: INDUSTRIAL USES 
A.  Resource Extraction. Resource extraction, where permitted, is subject to the following additional requirements: 
1.  Erosion Control: A resource extraction use may not increase the amount of storm run-off onto adjacent properties as determined by review of the Public Works. Erosion control facilities, including retention and sediment basins, are required of each facility, if necessary, to meet this standard. 
2.  Surface Drainage: The surface of the use may not result in the collection or ponding of water, unless specifically permitted as part of a Conditional Use Permit. 
3.  Storage of Topsoil: Topsoil shall be collected and stored for redistribution following the end of the operation. 
4.  Elimination of Hazards: Excavation shall not result in a hazard to any person or property. The following measures are required: 
(a)  Restoration of slopes to a gradient not exceeding thirty-three (33%) as soon as possible. 
(b)  Installation of perimeter safety screening and/or fencing. 
(c)  Installation of visual screening adjacent to any property within a residential or public use district consistent with Bufferyard Standards contained in Section 48-105. Resource extraction uses in the AG District shall be subject to the same bufferyard requirements as those in the M-2 District. 
5.  Restoration of Landscape: The topography and soil of the resource extraction site shall be restored and stabilized within nine (9) months of completion of the operation. The site shall be seeded, planted, and contoured in a way that prevents erosion. Alternately, the site may be used as a lake or body of water, subject to approval by the City Council with the recommendation of the Planning Commission and the appropriate Natural Resources District. 
B.  Construction Batch Plants. Construction Batch Plants in the C-3, General Commercial District or M-1, Limited Industrial District, provided that: 
1.  No plant may be located within six hundred (600) feet of a developed residential use, park, or school. 
2.  The facility is located no more than one (1) mile from its job site. The City Planner may extend this distance to two (2) miles, if such extension avoids use of local streets by plant-related vehicles. 
3.  Hours of operation do not exceed twelve (12) hours per day. 
4.  The duration of the plant's operation does not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
C.  Salvage Services and Long-term Vehicle Storage and Dismantling. 
1.  Screening: 
(a)  The perimeter of each new facility shall be fully enclosed by opaque, freestanding fencing or screen walls. Minimum height of this enclosure shall be eight (8) feet. Any such enclosure shall be constructed behind required landscaped bufferyards. 
(b)  Each existing salvage services facility shall be screened as provided above within one (1) year of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(c)  The above requirement shall also apply to uses adjacent to residential zoning districts or residential uses that include the long-term storage and dismantling of vehicles. 
2.  Storage of materials within any salvage services facility may not be higher than the height of the surrounding screen fence or wall. 
3.  No new Salvage Services use may be established within five hundred (500) feet of the nearest property line of a pre-existing residential zoning district or of any pre-established civic use. 
D.  Therapeutic Riding. 
1.  The maximum number of hoofed animals allowed for therapeutic riding shall be based on the amount of land area dedicated solely to the keeping of said animals as pasture, corral, paddock or barn. Two (2) animals are allowed on the first acre and one (1) additional animal may be allowed for each additional acre of land up to a maximum of six (6) animals. Animals may be brought to and from the site on a daily basis if no dedicated area for the keeping of the animals is available on site. 
(Ord. No. 7153, 4-12-2005; Ord. No. 8096, 9-13-2016) 
46-108 - REPEALED 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 8096, 9-13-2016) 
46-109 - MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND LEVELS ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
A.  Table 46-2 displays the maximum permitted sound levels that may be generated by uses in the C-2, C-3, BP, M-1, or M-2 zoning districts where adjacent to residential zoning districts. All measurements shall be taken at or within the boundary between the originating district and the adjacent residential zoning district with a sound level meter meeting ANSI specifications for a Type II or better general purpose sound level meter. The A-weighted response shall be used. 
B.  The standards set forth in Table 46-2 do not apply to industrial uses in operation on the effective date of this Ordinance. 
Table 46-2 
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels at Residential Boundaries 
Originating Zoning District Time Maximum One Hour Leq* 
(dbA) C-1, C-2, BP, M-1 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 60 10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 55 M-2 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 65 10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 55  
* Leq is the constant sound level that, in a given situation and time period, conveys the same sound energy as the actual time-varying A-weighted sound. It is the average sound level and accurately portrays the sound the human ear actually hears. 
46-110 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS 
A.  Policy Statement. 
1.  The purpose of this Section is to provide specific regulations for the placement, construction and modification of radio, television, and personal wireless service facilities. The provisions of this Section are not intended to and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or to have the effect of prohibiting the provision of radio, television, and personal wireless services, nor shall the provisions of this Section be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent services. The goals of this Section are to: (i) encourage the location of towers on public property and in non-residential areas and to minimize the total number of towers throughout the City; (ii) encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; (iii) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the City is minimal; (iv) encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the visual impact of the towers and antennas; and (v) enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services throughout the City quickly, effectively, and efficiently. Accordingly, the City Council finds that the promulgation of this Section is warranted and necessary: 
(a)  To manage the location of towers and antennas in the City and provide for the use of public property for the placement thereof; 
(b)  To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and falling ice; 
(c)  To minimize visual and aesthetic impacts of towers through minimal use of towers, careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(d)  To accommodate the growing need for towers; 
(e)  To promote and encourage shared use/co-location of existing and new towers as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers, and to reduce the number of such structures needed in the future; 
(f)  To consider the public health and safety of towers to the extent allowed by the Telecommunications Act of 1996; and 
(g)  To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties through engineering and proper siting of antenna support structure. 
Existing Uses: All towers existing on the date of passage of this Ordinance shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such existing towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on existing towers shall comply with the requirements of this Section. 
New Uses: All new antennas shall comply with this Section after the date of passage. 
B.  Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them below: 
1.  ABANDONMENT shall mean: 
(a)  To cease operation for a period of sixty (60) or more consecutive days; 
(b)  To reduce the affected radiated power of an antenna by seventy-five (75) percent for sixty (60) or more consecutive days; 
(c)  To relocate an antenna at a point less than eighty (80) percent of the height of an antenna support structure; or 
(d)  To reduce the number of transmissions from an antenna by seventy-five (75) percent for sixty (60) or more consecutive days. 
2.  ANTENNA shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, data, Internet or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves including equipment attached to a tower, pole, light standard or building for the purpose of providing personal wireless services including, for example, unlicensed wireless telecommunications services, wireless telecommunications services utilizing frequencies authorized by the Federal Communications Commission for "cellular," "paging," "enhanced specialized mobile radio," "low power mobile radio" and "personal communications services" telecommunications services, and its attendant base station. 
3.  ANTENNA HEIGHT shall mean the vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure even if said highest point is an antenna. Measurement of tower height shall include antenna, base pad, and other appurtenances and shall be measured from the finished grade of the parcel. If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades of the parcel shall be used in calculating the antenna height. 
4.  ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE shall mean any pole, light standard, telescoping mast, tower, tripod or other structure which supports a device used in the transmitting or receiving of radio, telephonic or television frequency or television signals. 
5.  CELL SITE shall mean a tract or parcel of land that contains the telecommunications service facilities including any antenna, tower support structure, accessory buildings, and parking, and may include other uses associated with and ancillary to telecommunications services. 
6.  FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
7.  FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
8.  GOVERNING AUTHORITY shall mean the governing authority of the City, namely the City Council. 
9.  PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE and PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES , as used in this Section, shall be defined in the same manner as in Title 47, United States Code, Section 332(c)(7)(C), as they may be amended now or in the future. 
10.  TOWER shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas, including any antenna support structure, self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term encompasses personal wireless service facilities, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers or personal communications services towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
C.  Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this Section and shall be permitted in all zones: 
1.  Industrial processing equipment and scientific or medical equipment using frequencies regulated by the FCC. 
2.  Antennas and related equipment no more than three (3) feet in height that are being stored, shipped, or displayed for sale. 
3.  Radar systems for military and civilian communications and navigation. 
4.  Wireless radio utilized for temporary emergency communications in the event of a disaster. 
5.  Licensed amateur (ham) radio operations. 
6.  Satellite dish antennas less than one (1) meters in diameter, including direct to home satellite services, when used as a secondary use of the property with the limitation of two (2) Satellite dish antennas per address. 
7.  Routine maintenance or repair of a personal wireless service facility and related equipment (excluding structure work or changes in height or dimensions of antennas, towers, or buildings), provided that compliance with the standards of this Section are maintained. 
8.  Subject to compliance with all other applicable standards of this Section, a building permit application need not be filed for emergency repair or maintenance of a personal wireless service facility until thirty (30) days after the completion of such emergency activity. 
D.  Industry Site Selection Criteria. In siting a new tower or antenna site, it is anticipated that the industry will propose locations that are technically compatible with the established network. A general area is to be identified based upon engineering constraints and the desired area of service. 
    Specific locations within that general area will be evaluated using the following criteria, which are not listed in order of priority; 
1.  Topography as it relates to line of sight transmissions for optimum efficiency. 
2.  Availability of road access. 
3.  Availability of electric power. 
4.  Availability of land-based telephone lines or microwave link capability. 
5.  Leaseable lands, and landlords who want facilities to be located on their properties consistent with zoning regulations. 
6.  Screening potential of existing vegetation, structures and topographic features. 
7.  Zoning that will allow personal wireless service facilities. 
8.  Compatibility with adjacent land uses. 
9.  The fewest number of sites to cover the desired area. 
10.  The greatest amount of coverage, consistent with physical requirements. 
11.  Opportunities to mitigate possible visual impact. 
12.  Availability of suitable existing structures for antenna mounting. 
E.  City Site Selection Criteria. 
1.  As a fundamental element of this Section, the telecommunications company proposing to construct an antenna support structure, or mount an antenna on an existing structure, is required to demonstrate, using technological evidence, that the antenna must go where it is proposed in order to satisfy its function in the company's grid system. Further, the company must demonstrate by technological evidence that the height requested is the minimum height necessary. 
2.  Applications for necessary permits will only be processed when the applicant demonstrates that it is either an FCC licensed telecommunications provider or has in place necessary agreements with an FCC licensed telecommunications provider for use or lease of the support structure. 
3.  Personal wireless service facilities should be located and designed to minimize any impacts on residential property values. Sites should be placed in locations where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening. 
4.  Location and design of sites in all districts should consider the impact of the site on the surrounding neighborhood and the visual impact within the zone district. In residential districts and residential land use areas, the minimum lot size for towers shall be three (3) acres. 
F.  Priorities. The following establishes the order of priorities for locating new communications facilities: 
1.  Place antennas and towers on public property (excluding prairie, conservation or wildlife areas). 
2.  Place antennas on appropriate existing structures, such as buildings, towers, water towers, and smokestacks in other zoned districts. 
3.  Place antennas and towers in districts zoned District AG, Agricultural District, District M-1, Limited Industrial District, and District M-2, General Industrial District, which do not adjoin or adversely impact residential neighborhoods. 
4.  Place antennas and towers in the Downtown Improvement and Parking District as defined in Section 3-1902 of the Kearney City Code, provided that such towers may be no more than forty (40) feet in height. 
5.  Place antennas and towers on other private non-residential property in districts zoned C-O, C-1, C-2, and C-3, Commercial Districts. 
6.  Place antennas and towers on multi-family residential structures exceeding thirty (30) feet in height in districts zoned R-3, and R-4. 
7.  Place antennas and towers in districts zoned R-1, R-2, and RM: (a) only if locations for which a need has been demonstrated are not available on existing structures or in non-residential districts; and (b) only on or in existing churches, parks, schools, utility facilities or other appropriate public facilities. 
8.  An applicant for a new antenna support structure to be located in a residential zoning district shall demonstrate that a diligent effort has been made to locate the proposed communications facilities on a government structure, a private institutional structure, or other appropriate existing structures within a non-residential zoning district, and that due to valid considerations including physical constraints, or technological feasibility, no appropriate location is available. The telecommunications company is required to demonstrate that it contacted the owners of structures in excess of thirty (30) feet within a one-quarter (1/4) mile radius of the site proposed, asked for permission to install the antenna on those structures, and was denied for reasons other than economic ones. The information submitted by the applicant shall include a map of the area to be served by the tower, its relationship to other antenna sites in the applicant's network, and an evaluation of existing buildings taller than thirty (30) feet, towers and water tanks within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the proposed tower. 
G.  Use of City Property. 
1.  Priority of Users. Priority for the use of City-owned land for wireless telecommunication antennas and towers will be given to the following entities in descending order: 
(a)  City of Kearney; 
(b)  Public safety agencies, including law enforcement, fire, and ambulance services, which are not part of the City of Kearney and private entities with a public safety agreement with the City of Kearney; 
(c)  Other governmental agencies, for uses which are not related to public safety; and 
(d)  Entities providing licensed, and unlicensed (where permitted by law), commercial wireless telecommunication services, cellular, personal communication services (PCS), radio and television services, specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), data, Internet, paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public. 
2.  Minimum Requirements. The placement of wireless telecommunication antennas or towers on City-owned property must comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  The antennas or tower will not interfere with the purpose for which the City-owned property is intended; 
(b)  The antennas or tower will have no significant adverse impact on surrounding private property; 
(c)  The applicant is willing to obtain adequate liability insurance and commit to a lease agreement, which includes equitable compensation for the use of public land and other necessary provisions and safeguards. The fees shall be established by the City Council after considering comparable rates in other cities, potential expenses, risks to the City, and other appropriate factors; 
(d)  The applicant will submit a letter of credit, performance bond, or other security acceptable to the City to cover the costs of antenna or tower removal; 
(e)  The antennas or tower will not interfere with other users who have a higher priority as discussed in Section 46-110.G; 
(f)  The applicant must reimburse the City for any costs, which it incurs because of the presence of the applicant's antennas or tower; 
(g)  The user must obtain all necessary land use approvals; and 
(h)  The applicant will cooperate with the City's objective to promote co-locations and thus limit the number of separate antenna sites requested. 
3.  Special Requirements. The use of certain City-owned property, such as water tower sites and parks, for wireless telecommunication antennas or towers brings with it special concerns due to the unique nature of these sites. The placement of wireless telecommunication antennas or towers on these special City-owned sites will be allowed only when the following additional requirements are met: 
(a)  Water Tower or Reservoir Sites. The City's water towers and reservoirs represent a large public investment in water pressure stabilization and peak capacity reserves. Protection of the quality of the City's water supply is of prime importance to the City. As access to the City's water storage systems increases, so too increased is the potential for contamination of the public water supply. For these reasons, the placement of wireless telecommunication antennas or towers on water tower or reservoir sites will be allowed only when the City is fully satisfied that the following additional requirements are met: 
(1)  The applicant's access to the facility will not increase the risks of contamination to the City's water supply; 
(2)  There is sufficient room on the structure and/or on the grounds to accommodate the applicant's facility; 
(3)  The presence of the facility will not increase the water tower or reservoir maintenance cost to the City; and 
(4)  The presence of the facility will not be harmful to the health of workers maintaining the water tower or reservoir. 
(b)  Parks: The presence of certain personal wireless service facilities, antennas or towers represent a potential conflict with the purpose of some parks. In no case shall towers or antennas be allowed in designated prairie or other conservation or wildlife area unless they are to be installed in areas, which currently contain tower facilities or antennas, and in no case shall towers or antennas be allowed in areas without road access to the base of the tower, antenna support structure or facilities. Personal wireless facilities, antenna support structure, antennas or towers will be considered only in the following parks after the recommendation of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, Planning Commission and approval of the City Council: 
(1)  Public parks of a sufficient scale and character that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use; 
(2)  Commercial recreation areas and major play fields; and 
(3)  Park maintenance facilities. 
H.  Co-Location. 
1.  To minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation of towers, co-location of antennas by more than one (1) carrier on existing or new towers and location of such antennas on public property shall take precedence over the construction of new single-use towers on public property as follows: 
(a)  Proposed antennas may, and are encouraged by the opportunity for expedited review as provided in this Section to, co-locate onto existing towers. Even where such co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with the policy, site criteria, and landscape/screening provisions contained in this Section, new or additional conditional use approval is required, and any other permit, license, lease, or franchise requirements also must be satisfied. 
(b)  The conditional use requirement for antennas may be expedited, upon the Director of Public Work's sole determination, to eliminate Planning Commission review and submit such application directly to City Council for its review, in nonresidential zones if the applicant locates the antenna on an existing structure including an existing tower and/or if the antenna is proposed to be located on suitable public property such as a water tower, government building, or other public tower or pole. Suitability of public property shall be determined in the City's sole discretion. The applicant must submit detailed plans to the Public Works Department for an administrative review to determine if the conditional use permit process and public hearing can be expedited, as provided herein. No building permit will be issued until the conditional use is granted. 
(c)  The City may deny the application to construct a new tower if the applicant has not shown by substantial evidence that it has made a good faith effort to mount the antenna on an existing structure and/or public property. 
(d)  In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in the City in the future, any new proposed support structure shall be designed to accommodate antenna for more than one (1) user, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not feasible for economic, technical or physical reasons. 
(e)  Unless co-location has been demonstrated to be infeasible, the site plan shall delineate an area near the base of the tower to be used for the placement of additional equipment buildings for other users. The site plan for towers in excess of one hundred (100) feet must propose space for two (2) comparable tower users while the site plan for towers under one hundred (100) feet must propose space for one (1) comparable tower user. 
(f)  To provide further incentive for co-location as a primary option, an existing tower may be modified or reconstructed to accommodate the co-location of additional antenna, provided the additional antenna shall be consistent with the use and aesthetics as that on the existing tower. This is permitted by conditional use permit for existing towers in all zoning districts, subject to the following criteria being met: 
(1)  Height: An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, to accommodate the co-location of additional antenna, so long as it is done in accordance with (e) and (f), above. 
(2)  Onsite Location: A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna may be moved on-site within fifty (50) feet of its existing location so long as it remains within the same zone and complies with the other provisions of this Section. After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location, only one (1) tower may remain on site. 
(3)  Signage Prohibited: Except as set forth in Section 46-11012(c), no signs, banners or similar devices or materials may be attached to the towers, antenna support structure or antennas. 
2.  Subject to the priorities as set forth in Section 46-110.F, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation of towers, co-location of antennas by more than one (1) carrier on existing or new towers and location of such antennas on commercial, business, industrial or residential property shall take precedence over the construction of new single-use towers on commercial, business, industrial or residential property, as follows: 
(a)  Proposed antennas may, and are encouraged by the opportunity for expedited review as provided in this Section to, co-locate onto existing towers. Even where such co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with the policy, site criteria, and landscape/screening provisions contained in this Section, new or additional conditional use approval is required, and any other permit, license, lease, or franchise requirements also must be satisfied. 
(b)  The conditional use requirement for antennas may be expedited, upon the Director of Public Works' sole determination, to eliminate Planning Commission review and submit such application directly to City Council for its review, in commercial, business, industrial and residential zones if the applicant locates the antenna on an existing structure including an existing tower and if the antenna is proposed to be located on suitable commercial, business, industrial or residential property. Suitability of commercial, business, industrial or residential property shall be determined in the City's sole discretion. The applicant must submit detailed plans to the Public Works Department for an administrative review to determine if the conditional use permit process and public hearing can be expedited, as provided herein. No building permit will be issued until the conditional use permit is granted. 
(c)  The City may deny the application to construct a new tower if the applicant has not shown by substantial evidence that it has made a good faith effort to mount the antenna on an existing structure. 
(d)  In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in the City in the future, any new proposed support structure shall be designed to accommodate antenna for more than one (1) user, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not feasible for economic, technical or physical reasons. 
(e)  Unless co-location has been demonstrated to be infeasible, the site plan shall delineate an area near the base of the tower to be used for the placement of additional equipment buildings for other users. The site plan for towers in excess of one hundred (100) feet must propose space for two (2) comparable tower users while the site plan for towers under one hundred (100) feet must propose space for one (1) comparable tower user. 
(f)  To provide further incentive for co-location as a primary option, an existing tower may be modified or reconstructed to accommodate the co-location of additional antenna, provided the additional antenna shall be consistent with the use and aesthetics as that on the existing tower. This is permitted by conditional use permit for existing towers in all zoning districts, subject to the following criteria being met: 
(1)  Height: An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, to accommodate the co-location of additional antenna, so long as it is done in accordance with (e) and (e), above. 
(2)  Onsite Location: A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna may be moved onsite within fifty (50) feet of its existing location so long as it remains within the same zone and complies with the other provisions of this Section. After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location, only one (1) tower may remain on site. 
(3)  Signage Prohibited: Except as set forth in Section 46-1101 2(c), no signs, banners or similar devices or materials may be attached to the towers, antenna support structure or antennas. 
I.  Design Criteria. 
1.  New towers and antenna support structure shall be designed to accommodate co-location for antenna for more than one (1) user throughout the City in zoning districts as permitted by this Section, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not feasible for economic, technical or physical reasons. 
2.  Facilities should be architecturally compatible with the surrounding buildings and land uses in the zoning district or otherwise integrated, through location and design, to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
(a)  Setback: Tower setbacks shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property line of the parcel on which it is located. Unless there are unusual geographic limitations or other public policy considerations as determined in the City's sole discretion, in residential districts and residential land use areas, where permitted, towers shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to three hundred (300) percent of tower height as measured from ground level. Except as provided herein and except for unusual geographic limitations or other public policy considerations, as determined in the City's sole discretion, towers shall comply with the minimum setback requirements of the area in which they are located in all other zoning districts. 
(b)  Color: Towers shall have a color generally matching the surroundings or background that minimizes their visibility, unless a different color is required by the FCC or FAA. 
(c)  Lights, Signals and Signs: No signals, lights or signs shall be permitted on towers unless required by the FCC or the FAA. Should lighting be required, at the time of construction of the tower in cases where there are residential users located within a distance which is three hundred (300) percent of the height of the tower from the tower, then dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA. 
(d)  Equipment Structures: Ground level equipment and buildings and the tower base shall be screened from public streets and residentially zoned properties. The standards for the equipment buildings are as follows: 
(1)  The maximum floor area is three hundred fifty (350) square feet per provider and the maximum height is twelve (12) feet. Depending upon the aesthetics and other issues, the City, in its sole discretion, may approve multiple equipment structures or one (1) or more larger structures. 
(2)  Ground level buildings shall be screened from adjacent properties by landscape plantings, fencing and other appropriate means, as specified herein or in the Kearney City Code. 
(3)  Equipment buildings mounted on a roof and other roof mounted equipment shall have a finish similar to the exterior building walls. Equipment for roof-mounted antenna may also be located within the building on which the antenna is mounted. 
(4)  In instances where equipment structures are located in residential zones or in close proximity to public rights-of-way, equipment structures shall comply with setback requirements and shall be designed so as to conform in appearance with nearby structures. 
(e)  Equipment buildings, antenna and related equipment shall occupy no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total roof area of a building, which may vary in the City's sole discretion if co-location and an adequate penthouse-type structure are used. 
(f)  Antenna or equipment buildings not meeting these standards require a special exception in addition to the conditional use permit. The special exception must be approved on a comprehensive sketch plan or final development plan, as applicable. 
3.  Federal Requirements: All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this Section shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations in accordance with the compliance deadlines/requirements of such standards and regulations. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owners' expense. 
4.  Building Codes; Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable City building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association ("EIA"), as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days, the City may remove such tower at the owner's expense. 
5.  Structural Design: Towers shall be constructed to the EIA Standards, which may be amended from time to time, and all applicable construction/building codes. Further, any improvements and/or additions to existing towers shall require submission of site plans sealed and verified by a professional engineer which demonstrate compliance with the EIA Standards and all other good industry practices in effect at the time of said improvement or addition. Said plans shall be submitted to and reviewed at the time building permits are requested. 
6.  Fencing: A well-constructed masonry, wood, PVC, or stone fence, or chain link fence in an industrial zone, not less than eight (8) feet in height from finished grade shall be provided around each tower. Access to the tower and equipment structures shall be through a locked gate. Security fencing should be colored or should be of a design, which blends into the character of the existing environment. 
7.  Antenna height: The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna is the minimum height required to function satisfactorily. No antenna that is taller than this minimum height shall be approved. 
8.  Antenna support structure safety: The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna and support structure are safe and the surrounding areas also will not be negatively affected by interference. All support structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices, as approved by the manufacturers. 
9.  Required parking: If the cell site is fully automated, adequate parking shall be required for maintenance workers. If the site is not automated, arrangements for adequate off-street parking shall be made and documentation thereof provided to the City. 
10.  Antenna Criteria: Antenna on or above a structure shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  The antenna must be architecturally compatible with the building and wall on which it is mounted and designed and located so as to minimize any adverse aesthetic impact. 
(b)  The antenna shall be mounted on a wall of an existing building in a configuration as flush to the wall as technically possible and shall not project above the wall on which it is mounted unless, for technical reasons, the antenna needs to project above the roof line. In no event shall an antenna project more than ten (10) feet above the roofline. 
(c)  The antenna shall be constructed, painted or fully screened to match as closely as possible the color and texture of the building and wall on which it is mounted. 
(d)  The antenna may be attached to an existing conforming mechanical equipment enclosure which projects above the roof of the building, but may not project any higher than the enclosure. 
(e)  If an accessory equipment shelter is present, it must blend with the surrounding buildings in architectural character and color. 
(f)  The antenna, facilities and accessory equipment shelter must be architecturally and visually (color, size, bulk) compatible with surrounding existing buildings, structures, vegetation and/or uses or those likely to exist under the terms of the underlying zoning. Such antenna, facilities and accessory equipment shelter will be considered architecturally and visually compatible if they are camouflaged to disguise the facility. 
(g)  Site location and development shall preserve the pre-existing character of the site as much as possible. Existing vegetation should be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography of the site should be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site on the surrounding area. The effectiveness of visual mitigation techniques must be evaluated by City, in City's sole discretion, taking into consideration the site as built. 
(h)  For installations on buildings greater than thirty (30) feet in height, see other applicable provisions of this Section. In addition to the other requirements of this Section, on buildings thirty (30) feet or less in height, the antenna may be mounted on the roof if the following additional criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  The City finds that it is not technically possible or aesthetically desirable to mount the antenna on a wall. 
(2)  No portion of the antenna or base station causes the height of the building to exceed the limitations set forth herein. 
(3)  The antenna or antennas and related base stations cover no more than an aggregate total of twenty-five (25) percent of the roof area of a building, which may vary in the City's sole discretion, if co-location and an adequate penthouse-type structure are used. 
(4)  Roof-mounted antenna and related base stations must be appropriately camouflaged or substantially screened from view by materials that are consistent and compatible with the design, color, and materials of the building. 
(5)  No portion of the antenna may exceed ten (10) feet above the height of the existing building. 
11.  If a proposed antenna is located on a building or a lot subject to a site review, conditional use approval is still required prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
12.  No antenna shall be permitted on property designated as an individual landmark or as a part of a historic district, unless such antenna has been approved in accordance with the City Code. 
13.  No antenna owner or lessee or officer or employee thereof shall fail to cooperate in good faith to accommodate other competitors in their attempts to use the same tower or building for other antennas. If a dispute arises about the feasibility of accommodating another competitor, the City Manager may require a third party technical study, at the expense of either or both parties, to resolve the dispute. 
14.  No antenna owner or lessee shall fail to assure that the antenna complies at all times with the then current applicable EIA or FCC standards, or other applicable federal standards, whichever standard is more stringent. After installation, but prior to putting the antenna in service, each antenna owner shall provide a notarized statement signed by a qualified engineer to that effect. 
15.  No antenna shall cause localized interference with the reception of any other communications signals including, but not limited to, public safety signals, and television and radio broadcast signals. 
16.  No person shall locate an antenna or tower for wireless communications services upon any lot or parcel except as provided in this Section. 
J.  Other Permitted Uses. 
1.  Applications for antenna for personal wireless communications services and associated unmanned equipment buildings may be reviewed in accordance with the use by special review process so long as the requirements of this Section and the following standards are met: 
(a)  In addition to the other requirements in this Section, where the antenna is attached to the roof or sides of a building, an existing tower, a water tank, or a similar structure; 
(b)  The following antennae are permitted under the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Omni directional or whip antenna no more than seven (7) inches in diameter and extending no more than ten (10) feet above the structure to which they are attached; or 
(2)  Panel or similar antenna no more than two (2) feet wide and six (6) feet long, extending above the structure to which they are attached by no more than ten (10) feet; or 
(c)  Antenna and antenna array not on publicly-owned property shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above the highest point of the structure on which it is mounted. The antenna, antenna array, and its support structure shall be mounted so as to blend with the structure to which the antenna is attached. The antenna and its support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of one hundred (100) miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires, in all zones. The antenna, antenna array, and its support structure shall be a color that blends with the structure on which they are mounted. 
(d)  Setback from street: Unless there are unusual geographic limitations or other public policy considerations, as determined in the City's sole discretion, no such antenna, antenna array, or its support structure shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the minimum setback for the zone in which it is located. 
(e)  Guy wires restricted: No guy or other support wires shall be used in connection with such antenna, antenna array, or its support structure except upon approval of a conditional use permit. 
K.  Inspection Requirements. Each year after a facility becomes operational, the facility operator shall conduct a safety inspection in accordance with the EIA and FCC Standards and, within sixty (60) days of the inspection, file a report with the City Manager. Submission of a FCC required, and duly filed, safety inspection report, or the facility operator's maintenance reports for the prior twelve (12) months in the event no FCC report is required for such year, to the City Manager shall satisfy the requirements of this section. 
L.  Landscaping/Screening. 
1.  Landscaping. Landscaping, as described herein, shall be required to screen as much of the support structure as possible, the fence surrounding both the support structure and any other ground level features (such as a building), and in general soften the appearance of the cell site. The City may permit any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features instead of landscaping, if they achieve the same degree of screening as the required landscaping in Chapter 48 of the UDLO. If the antenna is mounted on an existing building, and other equipment is housed inside an existing structure, landscaping shall not be required. 
2.  Screening. The visual impacts of a tower shall be mitigated through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of the tower and ancillary structures. The landscaping and buffering of towers shall be required around the perimeter of the tower and accessory structures, except that the standards may be waived by the City for those sides of the proposed tower that are located adjacent to undevelopable lands and lands not in public view. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of fences. Further, existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute for or in supplement towards meeting landscaping requirements. 
3.  Maintenance. In the event that landscaping is not maintained at the required level, the City, after giving thirty (30) days advance written notice, may maintain or do the landscaping and bill both the owner and lessee for such costs until such costs are paid in full. 
M.  Non-Use/Abandonment: In the event the use of any tower or antenna has been discontinued for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days, the tower or antenna shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the City, which shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from the tower or antenna owner/operator regarding the issue of tower or antenna usage. Upon such abandonment, the owner/operator of the tower or antenna or the owner of property upon which such facility is located shall have an additional sixty (60) days within which to: 
1.  Reactivate the use of the tower or antenna or transfer the tower or antenna to another owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower or antenna; or 
2.  In the event that abandonment as defined in this Section occurs due to relocation of an antenna at a lower point on the antenna support structure, reduction in the affected radiated power of the antenna or reduction in the number of transmissions from the antennas, the operator of the tower shall have six (6) months from the date of effective abandonment to co-locate another service on the tower. If another service provider is not added to the tower, then the operator shall promptly dismantle and remove that portion of the tower, which exceeds the minimum height, required to function satisfactorily. Notwithstanding the foregoing, changes which are made to personal wireless facilities which do not diminish their essential role in providing a total system shall not constitute abandonment; however, in the event that there is a physical reduction in height of substantially all of the providers' towers in the City, then all of such providers' towers within the City shall similarly be reduced in height. 
3.  Dismantle and remove the tower or antenna. If such tower or antenna is not removed within said sixty (60) days from the date of abandonment, the City may remove such tower or antenna, in accordance with applicable law, at the facility owner's and/or property owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower or antenna, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower or antenna. 
4.  At the earlier of sixty (60) days from the date of abandonment without reactivation or upon completion of dismantling and removal, City approval for the tower or antenna shall automatically expire. 
N.  Application Requirements. In the course of reviewing any request for any approval required under this Section made by an applicant to provide personal wireless service or to install personal wireless service facilities, the Planning Commission or the City Council, as the case may be, shall act within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed with the City, taking into account the nature and scope of the request, and any decision to deny such a request shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. All applicants who wish to locate a wireless telecommunication antenna or tower in the City must submit to the City Manager a completed application and detailed plan that complies with the submittal requirements of this Section, the Unified Land Development Ordinance and other regulations and ordinances of the City along with other pertinent information requested by the City. Application submission for conditional use, variance, and building permit requests may utilize any combination of site plans, surveys, maps, technical reports or written narratives necessary to convey the following information: 
1.  A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower, and any other proposed structures; 
2.  A current map and aerial as provided by the County Surveyor's office showing the location of the proposed tower; 
3.  Legal description of the parcel, if applicable; 
4.  Approximate distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties; 
5.  A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials; 
6.  Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination; 
7.  A notarized letter signed by the applicant stating the tower will comply with all EIA Standards and all applicable federal and state laws and regulations and the City Code including specifically F.A.A. regulations; 
8.  A statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate co- location of additional antenna for future users; 
9.  A notarized letter signed by the applicant stating that the antenna usage will not interfere with other adjacent or neighboring transmission or reception functions; 
10.  The telecommunications company must demonstrate that it is licensed by the F.C.C. if required to be licensed under F.C.C. regulations; 
11.  The applicant, if not the telecommunications service provider, shall submit proof of lease agreements with an F.C.C. licensed telecommunications provider if such telecommunications provider is required to be licensed by the F.C.C.; 
12.  A full site plan shall be required for all cell sites, showing the antenna, antenna support structure, building, fencing, buffering, access, and all other items required in this Section. The site plan shall not be required if the antenna is to be mounted on an existing structure; 
13.  At the time of site selection, the applicant should demonstrate how the proposed site fits into its overall network within the City; 
14.  This Section shall apply to all applications which were filed prior to the effective date hereof and which have not been approved by the City Council as of the effective date of this Ordinance, and to applications filed thereafter. 
O.  Third Party Review. The telecommunications providers use various methodologies and analysis tools, including geographically-based computer software, to determine the specific technical parameters of telecommunications services and facilities, such as expected coverage area, antenna configuration, topographic constraints that affect signal paths, etc. In certain instances, there may be a need for expert review by a third party of the technical data submitted by the telecommunications provider. The City Council or the Planning Commission may require such a technical review, to be paid for by the applicant for the telecommunications services or facilities. The selection of the third party expert shall be by mutual agreement between the applicant and City, such agreement not to be unreasonably withheld by either party. The expert review is intended to be a site-specific review of technical aspects of the telecommunications services or facilities and other matters as described herein with respect to potential interference issues, and not a subjective review of the site selection. Such a review should address the accuracy and completeness of the technical data, whether the analysis techniques and methodologies are legitimate, the validity of the conclusions and any specific technical issues outlined by the City Council, Planning Commission, City Staff, or interested parties. Based on the results of the third party review, the City may require changes to the application for the telecommunications services, facilities and other matters as described herein that comply with the recommendations of the expert. 
P.  Conditional Use Permit Requirement. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, in all instances a conditional use permit must be obtained with the affirmative vote of City Council before any radio, television, personal wireless services or facilities may be constructed or operated within the City. 
Q.  Termination. The City Council may, subject to applicable law, rescind any previously granted or pending City approval or lease necessary for the construction, installation or operation of telecommunications facilities if it determines that any one (1) of the following conditions exist: 
1.  A potential user with a higher priority cannot find another adequate location and the potential use would be incompatible with the existing use; 
2.  A user's frequency broadcast unreasonably interferes with other users of higher priority of use as set forth in Section 46-110.H, regardless of whether or not this interference was adequately predicted in the technical analysis; or 
3.  A user violates any of the standards in this Section or the conditions of City approval, lease provisions with the City or other terms of authorization by the City. 
    Before taking action, the City will provide notice to the user of the intended termination and the reasons for it, and provide a reasonable opportunity for the user to either cure the alleged interference, violation or condition or address the City Council regarding the proposed action. 
    This procedure need not be followed in emergency situations. 
    Notwithstanding the above, the City Council reserves the right to deny, for any reason, the use of any or all City-owned property by any one (1) or all applicants. Such denial shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
R.  Violations; Penalties; City Remedies. 
1.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section 46-110 shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-111 of the Kearney City Code. 
2.  Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted by any such person. 
3.  In addition to receiving any fines or other monetary remuneration, the City shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for any and all violations of this Section and all other remedies provided by law or in equity. 
4.  Before taking action, the City will provide notice to the user of the alleged violation, and provide a reasonable opportunity for the user to either cease or cure the alleged violation or address the City Council regarding such alleged violation. This procedure need not be followed in emergency situations. 
S.  Severability. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Section be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases or words of this Section, all of which will remain in full force and effect. 
T.  Conflict. To the extent that any provision or provisions of this Section are inconsistent or in conflict with any other provision of the City Code, the Unified Land Development Ordinance or any ordinance or regulation of the City, the provisions of this Section shall be deemed to control. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
(Ord. No. 6311, 8-26-1997; Ord. No. 8285 , § 2, 9-11-2018) 
46-111 - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS: MISCELLANEOUS USES 
A.  Landfills. 
1.  Compliance with Codes: Each landfill must comply with all relevant City, County, State, or Federal codes and statutes. 
2.  Prevention of Hazards: No facility shall present a hazard to surrounding residents or properties. 
3.  Drainage and Water Supply: No landfill may modify or prevent the flow of major natural drainage ways within the jurisdiction of the City of Kearney. Landfills shall not produce a measurable increase in pollution in any public water-based recreational facility or in any waterway or well that is a part of a public or private water supply. 
4.  Minimum Separation from Residential Uses: No non-putrescible landfill may be established within three hundred (300) feet of a developed residential or public use. No landfill involving the disposal of putrescible or septic wastes shall be established within one-fourth mile of any residential, public, or commercial zoning district, or any State of Federal Highway. 
5.  Restoration of Site: The site of any landfill must be restored, stabilized, planted, and seeded within six (6) months after the end of the operation. Dissipation of waste products must be accomplished in a manner approved by the State of Nebraska's Department of Environmental Quality. 
6.  Toxic Waste: The disposal of hazardous, toxic, or radioactive wastes as defined by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency shall be prohibited within the City of Kearney and its extra-territorial jurisdiction. 
B.  Large Wind Energy Conversion Systems (LWECS). 
1.  The distance from all lot lines or any building or power line to any tower support base of a LWECS shall be equal to the sum of the tower height and the diameter of the rotor. A reduction of this requirement may be granted as part of a Conditional Use Permit approval if the Planning Commission finds that the reduction is consistent with public health, safety, and welfare. 
2.  The distance between the tower support bases of any two (2) LWECS shall be the minimum of five (5) rotor lengths, determined by the size of the largest rotor. A reduction of this requirement may be granted as part of a Conditional Use Permit approval if the Planning Commission finds that the reduction does not impede the operation of either LWECS. 
3.  The LWECS operation shall not interfere with radio, television, computer, or other electronic operations on adjacent properties. 
4.  A fence eight (8) feet high with a locking gate shall be placed around any LWECS tower base; or the tower climbing apparatus shall begin no lower than twelve (12) feet above ground. 
5.  The LWECS is exempt from the height restrictions of the base district. 
C.  Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems (SWECS). 
1.  SWECS structures are not permitted in CBD or UC zoning districts. 
2.  The maximum height of a SWECS shall not exceed height restrictions of the base district plus ten (10) feet. 
3.  The minimum setback(s) from any property line to a SWECS shall equal the default setback(s) for the zoning district in which it is erected or the platted setbacks recorded on the Final Plat, whichever is greater, with the following exceptions: 
(a)  No SWECS shall be erected in a front yard. 
(b)  No SWECS shall be erected within thirty (30) feet of any occupied structure on an adjacent or adjoining lot. 
(c)  In zoning districts AG, RR-1, and RR-2, a SWECS may be erected within a side yard or rear yard setback, but no portion of the SWECS may be erected within thirty (30) feet of any occupied structure on an adjacent or adjoining lot. A SWECS may not be erected in a side yard in any other zone. 
4.  No portion of the SWECS shall extend beyond any setback line or into the following: 
(a)  Any public road right-of-way or alley right-of-way, unless written permission is granted by the government entity with jurisdiction over said right-of-way. 
(b)  Any overhead utility line, unless written permission is granted by the government entity or utility company that owns and/or controls the utility line(s). 
5.  All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access. For tower-mounted SWECS, the tower shall be engineered so as not to provide step bolts, ladders, or other publicly accessible means of climbing the tower, for a minimum of eight (8) feet above the ground. 
6.  SWECS shall not be artificially lighted unless the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requires such lighting. 
7.  The wind generator and energy systems shall remain painted or finished in the color or finish that was originally applied by the manufacturer, unless a different color or finish is required at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
8.  The SWECS operation shall not interfere with radio, television, computer, or other electronic operations on adjacent properties. 
9.  No signs that are visible from any public road may be posted on a SWECS or any associated equipment building(s). The manufacturer's and installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification shall be clearly visible and affixed to the tower at eye level. 
10.  A building permit shall be required for the installation of a SWECS. The permit application shall include a plot plan, drawn to scale, which includes the following: 
(a)  Property lines and physical dimensions of the property. 
(b)  Location, dimensions, and types of existing structures and improvements located on the property. 
(c)  Location of the proposed SWECS with dimensions from property lines, setback lines, utility easements, street or alley right-of-way lines, overhead utility lines, residential structures within fifty (50) feet (on the property or adjacent properties). A current aerial photograph with dimensions is acceptable to show existing structures in relation to the proposed SWECS. 
(d)  SWECS specifications including manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type (freestanding or guyed), color and finish. 
(e)  Engineered foundation drawings prepared and sealed by a licensed engineer. 
(Ord. No. 7835, 9-10-2013, effective January 1, 2014; Ord. No. 7870, 2-11-2014) 
46-112 - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS: ACCESSORY USES 
A.  Home-Based Businesses/Home Occupations. Home-based businesses and home occupations are permitted as an accessory use in residential units subject to the following conditions: 
1.  External Effects: 
(a)  There shall be no change in the exterior appearance of the building or premises housing the home occupation other than signage permitted within this section. 
(b)  No noise, odors, bright lights, electronic interference, storage or other external effects attributable to the home occupation shall be noticeable from any adjacent property or public right-of-way. 
(c)  The home occupation shall be carried on entirely within the principal residential structure. 
(d)  Mechanical or electrical equipment supporting the home occupation shall be limited to that which is self-contained within the structure and normally used for office, domestic or household purposes. 
(e)  No outdoor storage of materials or equipment used in the home occupation shall be permitted, other than motor vehicles used by the owner to conduct the occupation. Parking or storage of heavy commercial vehicles to conduct the home occupation is prohibited. 
(f)  No home occupation shall discharge into any sewer, drainageway, or the ground any material which is radioactive, poisonous, detrimental to normal sewer plant operation, or corrosive to sewer pipes and installations. 
2.  Employees: The home occupation shall employ no more than one (1) full time or part time employee on site other than the residents of the dwelling unit, provided that one (1) off-street parking space is made available and used by that non-resident employee. 
3.  Extent of Use: For all residential and agricultural zoning districts, the lesser of twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of the dwelling or four hundred (400) square feet may be devoted to the home occupation, inclusive of any detached accessory buildings used for the home occupation. 
4.  Signage: Each home-based business shall be permitted to have one (1) non-illuminated wall sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in area. 
5.  Traffic Generation and Parking. 
(a)  Home-based businesses may generate no more than ten (10) vehicle trips per day, corresponding to amount of traffic normally generated by a dwelling unit. 
(b)  Deliveries or service by commercial vehicles or trucks rated at ten (10) tons gross empty weight is prohibited for any home-based business located on a local street. 
(c)  Parking needs generated by a home-based business shall be satisfied with off-street parking. No more than one (1) vehicle used in connection with any home occupation shall be parked on the property. Such parking shall not be located in a required front yard. No more than two (2) on-street parking spaces shall be used by the home occupation at any one time. 
6.  Prohibited Home-Based Businesses/Home Occupations: The following activities are prohibited as home-based businesses, even if they meet the other requirements set forth in this section: 
(a)  Animal hospitals. 
(b)  Beauty and Barber Shops. 
(c)  General retail sales. 
(d)  Mortuaries. 
(e)  Repair shops or service establishments including major electrical appliance repair, motorized vehicle repair, and related uses. 
(f)  Stables or kennels. 
(g)  Welding, vehicle body repair, or rebuilding or dismantling of vehicles. 
B.  Permitted Accessory Uses: Residential Uses. Residential uses may include the following accessory uses, activities, and structures on the same lot. 
1.  Private garages and parking for the residency use. 
2.  Recreational activities and uses by residents. 
3.  Home occupations, subject to Section 46-112.A. 
4.  Non-commercial convenience services for the primary use of residents of multi-family uses or mobile home parks, including laundromats, clubhouses, and post offices. 
5.  Garage sales, provided that the frequency of such sales at any one (1) location shall not exceed one (1) during a continuous, two (2) month period or four (4) sales during any twelve (12) month period. 
C.  Permitted Accessory Uses: Civic Use Types. Guidance Services and Health Care use types are permitted in the M-1, Limited Industrial Districts only as accessory uses to a primary industrial use. 
D.  Permitted Accessory Uses: Other Use Types. Other use types may include the following accessory uses, activities, and structures on the same lot: 
1.  Parking for the principal use. 
2.  Manufacturing or fabrication of products made for sale in a principal commercial use, provided such manufacturing is totally contained within the structure housing the principal use. 
3.  Services operated for the sole benefit of employees of the principal use. 
E.  Permitted Accessory Uses: Agricultural Use Types. 
1.  Garden centers and roadside stands, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 46-102.A. 
2.  Other uses and activities necessarily and customarily associated with the purpose and functions of agricultural uses. 
3.  Buildings which directly serve and are required for the conduct of crop and animal production are exempt from requirements for building permits and inspections. Structures which house other uses are subject to the requirements of this ordinance, even if located on property zoned or primarily zoned or used for agricultural purposes. 
46-113 - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS: OUTDOOR STORAGE OUTSIDE OF THE M-1 AND M-2 ZONING DISTRICTS 
    Outdoor storage is prohibited in all zoning districts except the M-1, Limited Industrial District and M-2, General Industrial District, except as provided in this section. 
A.  Agricultural Use Types. Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to agricultural uses. 
B.  Civic Use Types. Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to maintenance facilities. 
C.  Commercial Use Types. 
1.  Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to agricultural sales and service, auto rentals and sales, construction sales and service, equipment sales and service, stables and kennels, and surplus sales. 
2.  Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to auto services, equipment repair, long-term vehicle storage, and body repair, provided that such storage is completely screened at property lines by an opaque barrier, as set forth in Section 46-107.B. This provision shall apply to any auto services, equipment repair, or body repair use established after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
3.  Retail and wholesale establishments that bale cardboard for recycling shall locate the baler and associated equipment and the finished bales within an enclosed area or the area shall be screened from view of all adjacent property and public rights-of-way with a solid fence or dense evergreen landscaping. 
D.  Industrial and Miscellaneous Use Types. 
1.  Outdoor storage is permitted where it is incidental to industrial uses within the AG, Agricultural District and M-1, Limited Industrial District. Any such outdoor storage is subject to screening requirements set forth in Section 48-106. 
2.  Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to landfills. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
46-114 - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS: TEMPORARY USES 
A.  Purpose. These provisions are intended to permit occasional, temporary uses and activities, when consistent with the objectives of the Unified Land Development Ordinance and compatible with surrounding uses. They are further intended to prevent temporary uses from assuming the character of permanent uses. 
B.  Temporary Use Types. The following temporary uses are permitted, subject to the regulations contained within these sections: 
1.  Model homes or apartments, if contained within the development to which they pertain. 
2.  Development sales offices. Such offices may remain in place until ninety percent (90%) of the lots or units within the development are sold and may not be located within a mobile home or manufactured home/structure. 
3.  Public assemblies, displays, and exhibits. 
4.  Commercial circuses, carnivals, fairs, festivals, or other transient events, provided that events are located on property owned by the sponsoring non-profit organization, or are located within a CBD, Kearney Center Mixed Use District or more intensive zoning district. 
5.  Outdoor art shows and exhibits. 
6.  Christmas tree or other holiday-related merchandise sales lots, provided that such facilities are not located in a residential zoning district. 
7.  Construction site offices, if located on the construction site itself. 
8.  Outdoor special sales, provided that such sales operate no more than three (3) days in the same week and five (5) days in the same month; and are located in commercial or industrial zoning districts. 
9.  Cargo Containers and Portable Storage Containers 
(a)  Cargo containers sixteen (16) feet long and longer are only allowed in commercial and industrial zoning districts subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The time duration that storage containers can be allowed on a particular site shall be established by the Development Review Team (DRT). 
2.  Containers shall be limited in quantity to the number allowed by the Development Review Team and shall not be increased without additional review. 
3.  Location of containers on the site shall be restricted to the location approved on the site plan by the Development Review Team. 
4.  If the site is located in a Planned Development Overlay District, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council and the City Council shall make a final determination of the quantity, location, and time duration allowable for the storage containers. 
5.  Containers approved for a duration of twelve (12) months or more may be screened from view of any adjacent property and public streets in a manner approved by the Development Review Team including, but not limited to, fencing, berming, landscaping or a combination thereof. 
6.  All storage containers shall be clean and well maintained. 
(b)  Portable Storage Containers sixteen (16) feet and less in length are allowed in residential zoning districts subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The temporary placement of one (1) portable storage container not to exceed the size dimensions of eight (8) feet wide by eight (8) feet high by sixteen (16) feet long on a residential lot for the purpose of loading and unloading household contents shall be permitted for a time not to exceed ninety (90) days in a twelve (12) month consecutive period. Additional time is subject to City approval by the Development Services Department on a case by case basis. Additional containers on the same site require City approval by the Development Services Department prior to placement. 
2.  Portable storage containers shall not be used for long term storage. 
3.  No permit is required; however, the street address of the location the container is going to be placed and the date of placement shall be communicated by telephone, electronic mail, or in person, to the Development Services Department the same day the container is placed. 
4.  The property must be occupied by a principal residential building. 
5.  Containers are allowed in the front building setback but shall be placed a minimum distance of five (5) feet from any side or rear property lines. Preferred location is in the driveway of the residence, but in no case shall the container be placed in the street or encroaching on public right-of-way. 
6.  Signs on any portable storage container shall be limited to not more than twelve (12) square feet each, not to exceed one (1) per side. Signage on the container shall not be used for advertising off-premise businesses other than the company that owns and operates the container business. 
7.  No sales shall be conducted from a portable storage container. 
8.  All storage containers shall be clean and well maintained. 
9.  Reserved. 
10.  Construction Batch Plants in the C-3, General Commercial District or M-1, Limited Industrial District, provided that: 
(a)  No plant may be located within six hundred (600) feet of a developed residential use, park, or school. 
(b)  The facility is located no more than one (1) mile from its job site. The City Planner may extend this distance to two (2) miles, if such extension avoids use of local streets by plant-related vehicles. 
(c)  Hours of operation do not exceed twelve (12) hours per day. 
(d)  The duration of the plant's operation does not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
11.  Additional temporary uses that the City Planner determines to be similar to the previously described uses in this section. 
C.  Required Conditions of All Temporary Uses. 
1.  Each site shall be left free of debris, litter, or other evidence of the use upon its completion or removal. 
2.  The City Planner may establish other conditions which he/she deems necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses. 
D.  Permit Application and Issuance. 
1.  An application to conduct a temporary use shall be made to the City Planner and shall include at a minimum a description of the proposed use; a diagram of its location; information regarding hours and duration of operation; and other information necessary to evaluate the application. 
2.  The City Planner may authorize a temporary use only if he/she determines that: 
(a)  The use will not impair the normal operation of a present or future permanent use on the site. 
(b)  The use will be compatible with surrounding uses and will not adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
3.  The duration of the permit shall be explicitly stated on the permit. 
4.  Decisions of the City Planner may be appealed to the Planning Commission and City Council. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7594, 5-11-2010) 
Chapter 47 - SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 

47-101 - PURPOSE 
    The Supplemental Development Regulations establish basic requirements for developable lots, including frontage requirements. They recognize the existence of special conditions that cannot comply literally with the development regulations set out for each zoning district. Therefore, these regulations qualify or modify the district regulations of this Ordinance and provide for specific areas of exception. 
47-102 - REQUIRED STREET FRONTAGE 
    Any lot used in whole or part for residential purposes shall provide a minimum frontage of twenty (20) feet along at least one (1) public street, or shall possess an exclusive, uninterrupted private easement of access or right-of-way of at least twenty (20) feet wide to a public street. There shall not be more than one (1) single-family housing unit for such frontage or easement. A common easement of access at least forty (40) feet in width may be provided for two (2) or more single-family units or for one (1) or more duplex, two-family, townhouse, or multiple-family housing units. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
47-103 - LOT SIZE EXCEPTIONS 
    In any district permitting residential use types, a single-family use type may be located on any lot or plot of official record but nonconforming in size as of the effective date of this Ordinance, regardless of its area or width but must meet all setbacks on the zoning districts. If two (2) or more such adjacent lots are combined under single ownership, the resulting combined lots shall be treated as a single lot for purposes of applying these setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
47-104 - SETBACK ADJUSTMENTS 
A.  Lots Adjoining Alleys. In calculating the depth of a required side or rear yard setback for a lot adjoining a dedicated public alley, one-half (1/2) of the alley may be credited as a portion of the yard. However, no residential structure may be nearer than three (3) feet to the near side of the alley. 
B.  Encroachments on Required Yards or Platted Building Setbacks. Every part of a required yard or a platted building setback shall be open and unobstructed from finished grade upward, except as specified herein. 
1.  Architectural projections, including roofs which cover porches, enclosed porches, window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, flues and chimneys, and ornamental features may project three (3) feet into a required yard or a platted building setback. 
2.  Terraces, patios, uncovered decks, and ornamental features which have no structural element (excluding handrails and guardrails) more than thirty (30) inches above or below the adjacent ground level may project six (6) feet into a required front yard, side yard or platted building setback or ten (10) feet into a required rear yard. However, all such projections must be set back at least three (3) feet from an adjacent side lot line; or twenty (20) feet from any street property line. 
3.  Fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies opening to fire towers may project a maximum of three (3) feet into required yards, provided that they do not obstruct the light and ventilation of adjacent buildings. 
4.  For buildings constructed upon a front property line, a cornice may project into public right-of-way, unless such property is constructed on a State or Federal Highway. Maximum projection is the smaller of four (4) feet or five (5) percent of the right-of-way width. 
5.  In commercial districts, a canopy may extend into a required front yard or platted building setback, provided that the canopy is set back at least five (5) feet from the front property line, covers less than fifteen (15) percent of the area of the required front yard or platted building setback, and has a vertical clearance of at least eight (8) feet six (6) inches. 
6.  Swimming pools shall be subject to the same location and setback requirements as accessory buildings. 
(a)  Swimming pools within complexes of more than six (6) residential units must be at least fifty (50) feet from a side or rear lot line. 
7.  Lamp posts with a maximum height of ten (10) feet, and flag poles up to maximum height of base district may be located within required yards or platted building setback, provided they are set back at least five (5) feet from property lines. The spread of a flag when fully extended shall not extend onto public right-of-way. 
8.  Detached garage Setbacks: Any garage that fronts on a public street must be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from such street, regardless of the setback requirement within the zoning district. This shall not be interpreted to waive a larger required minimum setback required by the zoning district. 
9.  Fences: As provided for in Section 47-109, Fence Regulations. 
C.  Setbacks on Arterial Streets. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, all buildings built or altered, or off-street parking areas developed along a state or federally designated highway shall maintain a setback indicated by the Arterial Setback map in this section. 
    Properties located where a properly dedicated and accepted frontage road right-of-way exists are exempt from these provisions and are instead subject to the setback requirements of their respective zoning district. 
D.  Setback Adjustments. 
1.  Setbacks on Built-Up Blockfaces: These provisions apply if thirty (30) percent or more of the buildings on that blockface have front yard setbacks different from those required for the specific district. 
(a)  If a building is to be built on a parcel of land within one hundred (100) feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be the mean front yard setbacks of the adjacent buildings. 
(b)  If a building is to be built on a parcel of land within one hundred (100) feet of an existing building on one (1) side only, the minimum front yard shall be the front yard setback of the adjacent building. 
(c)  If a building is to be built on a parcel of land not within one hundred (100) feet of an existing building on either side, then the minimum front yard shall be the mean front yard setback of all existing buildings on the blockface. 
(d)  No setback adjustment pursuant to this section shall create a required front yard setback more than five (5) feet greater than that otherwise required by the applicable zoning district. 
2.  Corner Lots. 
(a)  Required setbacks shall not reduce the buildable width of any corner lot to less than twenty-four (24) feet. Appropriate setback adjustments shall be allowed to maintain this minimum width. 
(b)  No setback adjustment shall permit encroachment into the vision clearance triangle. 
E.  Double Frontage Lots. Residentially zoned double frontage lots on a major street, and with no access to that street may have a twenty-five-foot minimum front yard setback along said street. All other double frontage lots must provide full front yard setbacks from each adjacent street. 
F.  Satellite Antennas. 
1.  Each lot shall have no more than one (1) satellite antenna. 
2.  Antennas with a surface area over six and three-tenths (6.3) square feet which are accessory to a primary use and are designed to receive and transmit electromagnetic signals, or to receive signals from satellites, shall not be located within any front yard of the primary use. 
3.  Antennas with a surface area of over six and three-tenths (6.3) square feet are subject to the following additional regulations: 
(a)  Such antennas shall be located no less than ten (10) feet from the property line of an adjacent property line. 
(b)  The maximum height shall be fifteen (15) feet and the maximum diameter shall be eleven (11) feet. 
(c)  Each antenna shall be screened by a six (6) foot high wood or masonry fence, or by natural plants or trees of equal minimum height. 
G.  Vision Clearance Zones. Except in the CBD District, no structure, including a fence, shall be built to a height of more than two (2) feet above the established curb grade on the part of the lot within a vision clearance zone. The vision clearance zone shall be a triangle measured from the point of intersection of the curb lines or edge of pavement of the streets to a point forty (40) feet in each direction from the intersection along such curb lines or edges of pavement. At the intersection of major streets as defined in the Comprehensive Development Plan, the forty (40) foot distance shall be increased to sixty (60) feet. No landscaping shall be planted in such area which will materially obstruct the view of drivers approaching the street intersection. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7835, 9-10-2013, effective January 1, 2014, Ord. No. 8185, 10-10-2017; Ord. No. 8232 , § 3, 4-24-2018) 
47-105 - ACCESSORY BUILDINGS 
A.  Accessory Buildings for R-1 and R-2 Districts. For the purpose of this section accessory buildings shall include detached garages and carports. Accessory buildings are subject to all development regulations listed below and may not exceed the maximum building coverage and impervious coverage of the zoning district where the building is located. Additional requirements and exceptions are listed below the following matrix. 
In Square Feet Permit Front Yard Interior Side Yard Street Side Yard Rear Yard Separation Between Buildings Height of Building Less than 120 No Not Permitted (NP) 3 feet 25 feet 3 feet 10 feet* 15 feet to peak 120 to 720 Yes 25 feet 3 feet 25 feet 3 feet 10 feet* 15 feet to peak 720 to 1200 Yes 25 feet Greater of 7 feet or 10% of lot width up to 15 feet 25 feet 5 feet with no alley; 10 feet with an alley 10 feet 20 feet to peak  
* Buildings may be four (4) feet apart when offset corner-to-corner. 
    General Requirements: No accessory building shall be built upon any lot until construction of the principal building has begun. 
    Permits: A permit is required for an accessory use building that is greater than one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
    Total Number of Accessory Buildings: A property, with an accessory building equal to or less than seven hundred twenty (720) square feet in area, may have one (1) additional accessory building, which does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area. A property with an accessory building greater than seven hundred twenty (720) square feet is not permitted additional accessory buildings. 
    Total Lot Coverage: All buildings on a site, taken together, must comply with the building coverage requirements for the zoning district and accessory buildings shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of any rear yard. 
    Multiple Frontage Lots: Multiple-frontage lots require a minimum twenty-five-foot setback along on all street frontages. 
    Easements: No accessory building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way along the rear or side property line. Easements may be incorporated into required setbacks. 
    Materials: Any accessory building shall have a minimum vertical rise of two and one-half (21/2) inches in each twelve (12) inches of horizontal run and a building design that is harmonious with the character of the neighborhood. No portion of any accessory building shall be covered with unpainted galvanized metal or corrugated sheets or panels. 
    Attached Accessory Structures: Any accessory building physically attached to the principal building shall be considered part of the principal building and subject to the development regulations of its zoning district. 
    Allowable Uses: Accessory buildings shall be used only for use types that are permitted within the zoning district. 
B.  Accessory Buildings for R-3, R-4 and R-M Districts. For the purpose of this section accessory buildings shall include detached garages and carports. Accessory buildings for apartment complexes are not limited in size provided all buildings on a site, taken together, comply with the building coverage and impervious coverage requirements of the zoning district where the building is located and the site plan has been reviewed and approved by City Staff in accordance Chapter 59. 
In Square Feet Permit Front Yard Interior Side Yard Street Side Yard Rear Yard Separation Between Buildings Height of Building 120 to 720 Yes 25 feet 3 feet 25 feet 3 feet 10 feet 15 feet to peak Greater than 720 Yes 25 feet Greater of 7 feet or 10% of lot width up to 15 feet 25 feet 5 feet with no alley; 10 feet with an alley 10 feet Height of district  
    Additional Requirements: The additional requirements apply to residential complexes of more than six (6) units: 
1.  Accessory buildings, and garages must be at least ten (10) feet from a side or rear lot line. A greater separation from residential zoning districts may be required by Site Development Regulations. 
C.  Accessory Buildings for RR-1 and RR-2 Districts. For the purpose of this section accessory buildings shall include detached garages, carports and all buildings proposed for agriculture use. Accessory buildings or detached garages are subject to all development regulations listed below and may not exceed the maximum building coverage and impervious coverage requirements of the zoning district where the building is located. Additional requirements and exceptions are listed below the following matrix. 
Permit Front Yard Interior Side Yard Street Side Yard Rear Yard Separation Between Buildings Yes 50 feet 15 feet 50 feet 25 feet 10 feet  
    General Requirements: A building complying with the general regulations of the district may be constructed. 
    Permits: A permit is required for an accessory use building that is greater than one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
    Height: The maximum height of accessory buildings shall not exceed the height limits of the district. 
    Total Number of Accessory Buildings: The number of accessory buildings is not limited but cannot exceed the impervious coverage percentages. 
    Allowable Uses: Accessory buildings shall be used only for use types that are permitted within the zoning district. 
1.  See Section 46-102 "Supplemental Use Regulations: Agricultural Uses" of Chapter 46 "Supplemental Use Regulations" of the Code of the City of Kearney, Nebraska. 
D.  Accessory Buildings for Agricultural Districts. Accessory buildings, detached garages and carports are subject to all development regulations listed below. Additional requirements and exceptions are listed below the following matrix. A permit is required for an accessory use building that is greater than one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
Permit Front Yard Interior Side Yard Street Side Yard Rear Yard Separation Between Buildings Yes 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 10 feet  
    No permit is required for agricultural buildings when such building is used in conjunction with an agricultural use as defined in Chapter 13, Section 12-103. No agricultural building shall be constructed without first receiving approval from the Building and Zoning Department for the proposed use and location on property. 
    The following minimum requirements apply to agricultural use buildings. 
Permit Front Yard Interior Side Yard Street Side Yard Rear Yard Separation Between Buildings No 50 feet No Restrictions 50 feet No Restrictions No Restrictions  
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7061, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 7227, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 7793, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 8164, 7-11-2017; Ord. No. 8232 , § 4, 4-24-2018) 
47-106 - HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS 
    These provisions allow exceptions to the height limit of any zoning district in certain situations. 
A.  Vertical Projections. 
1.  Chimneys, cooling towers, building mechanical equipment, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, grain elevators, non-parabolic receiving antennas, tanks, solariums, steeples, penthouses not exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of total roof area, flag poles, stage towers or scenery lofts, and water towers may be built to any height in accordance with existing ordinances. 
2.  Any such equipment or vertical projections attached to a building and exceeding the height limit shall be screened to prevent visibility from public right-of-way or adjacent property using materials or design features which are consistent with the overall design of the main building. 
3.  No such projection may be built which in the event of failure could constitute a hazard or fall onto either public right-of-way or property, or another private property. 
B.  Civic Buildings. Buildings housing civic use types may be built to a maximum height of sixty (60) feet. Such buildings located in residential districts shall be set back one (1) foot in addition to required setbacks from each property line for each foot of height over the maximum height of the zoning district. 
C.  Wind Energy Conservation Systems (WECS). Wind Energy Conservation Systems are exempt from the height restrictions of the base district but are subject to the regulations of Section 46-111.B. 
D.  Conditional Use Approvals. The Planning Commission may grant an exception from the height limit for a zoning district for a Conditional Use as part of its approval of that use. The limit or extent of this exception shall be a specific part of the Conditional Use Permit. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
47-107 - EXCEPTIONS TO DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS FOR INNOVATIVE DEVELOPMENT DESIGN: CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS, TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENTS, OR PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 
A.  Purpose. As part of the approval process of innovative development designs, including Conservation Subdivisions, Traditional Neighborhood Developments, or Planned Developments, the City may authorize greater flexibility in setbacks in order to produce innovative residential environments, to provide for more efficient use of land, to protect topographic and to encourage the preservation of common area and open space. These special regulations and design exceptions apply only to Conservation Subdivisions. 
B.  Site Area Per Unit. 
1.  Unless otherwise provided, the site area per unit for an innovative development as a whole shall be that of the zoning district in which such subdivision is located. For the purpose of computing site area per unit, the area of public streets and private ways within the subdivision must be excluded. Residential use types may be combined within the creative subdivision provided that the subdivision as a whole complies with the required maximum density of the zoning district. 
C.  Perimeter Yards. 
1.  Structures must maintain normal street yard setbacks from any public streets that form the perimeter of the development. 
2.  Structures must maintain a twenty (20) foot minimum sideyard setback from any property line that forms the boundary of the development. 
D.  Area and Yards for Individual Lots. 
1.  Individual lots within an innovative development are exempt from minimum lot area or yard setback requirements set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance, unless provided for by the regulations for a specific zoning district. A creative subdivision must be planned and developed as a common development. A minimum separation of twenty (20) feet shall be established for all residential structures not attached to one (1) another, unless the City Council grants a specific exception for developments proposing unique circumstances, only in as much as said development can be demonstrated to avoid detriment to Kearney's efforts to protect public health, safety, welfare, community character, property values and aesthetics. 
2.  Any private garage oriented to or facing a public street or private way internal to the creative subdivision must be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from that public street or private way. 
E.  Coverage and Landscaping Requirements. Individual lots in an innovative development are exempt from maximum building and impervious coverage limitations and street yard landscaping requirements established for the zoning district. However, the subdivision as a whole, including streets, walks, and access ways, must comply with the building and impervious coverage regulations for its zoning district. 
47-108 - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 
A.  Purpose. This section is intended to restrict or control the use of outdoor lighting devices and techniques which contribute to overall environmental glare, light trespass, public safety, and light pollution, affect the quality of the outdoor nighttime environment, and have a detrimental effect on astronomical observations. 
B.  Alternative Materials. This section is not intended to prevent the use of materials or techniques not specifically mentioned in this section, provided that such alternative along public rights-of-way is approved by the City Planner or the Director of Public Works. 
C.  Terms and Definitions. 
1.  Outdoor Light Fixtures shall mean outdoor artificial illuminating devices, outdoor fixtures, lamps and other devices, permanent or portable, used for illumination or advertisement. Such devices shall include, but not be limited to, search, spot, or flood lights for buildings and structures, recreational areas, parking lots, landscape lighting, signs, street lighting, and display and service areas. 
2.  Installed shall mean the initial installation of outdoor light fixtures following the effective date of this Ordinance, but shall not apply to outdoor light fixtures installed before that date. 
3.  Fully Shielded shall mean fixtures that are shielded or designed in such a manner that light emitted by the fixture, either directly by the lamp or indirectly by the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. 
4.  Filtering shall mean that light emitted by the lamp passes through a glass, acrylic, or translucent enclosure. Quartz glass does not meet the requirement of filtering. 
D.  Requirements for Shielding and Filtering. Requirements for shielding and filtering of light sources are set forth in Table 47-1. 
Table 47-1 
Shielding and Filtering Requirements for Light Sources 
Fixture Lamp Type Shielded Filtered Low Pressure Sodium Fully None High Pressure Sodium Fully None Metal Halide (Note 1) Fully Yes (Note 3) Fluorescent Fully (Note 4) Yes (Note 5) Quartz (Note 2) Fully None Incandescent greater than 100W Fully None Incandescent 100W or less None None Mercury Vapor Prohibited Prohibited Fossil Fuel None None Glass Tubes filled with Inert Gases None None Other Sources By approval of City Planner and Director of Public Works By approval of City Planner and Director of Public Works  
Notes to Table 47-1: 
Note 1: Should be in enclosed luminaries. 
Note 2: Not considered an incandescent light source. 
Note 3: Most glass, acrylic, or translucent enclosures meet filtering requirements 
Note 4: Outdoor signs constructed of translucent materials with internal lighting do not require shielding. 
Note 5: Warm white natural lamps are recommended. 
E.  Exemptions. The following installations are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
1.  Nonconforming fixtures, provided that any change in use, replacement, structural alteration, or restoration shall be made in conformance to this section. 
2.  Fossil fuel lighting, such as fixtures using natural gas combustion as a light source. 
3.  Ornamental or thematic lighting in Kearney Center, Traditional Neighborhood Developments, Neighborhood Centers, and other projects, provided that such lights do not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height. Ornamental lights in excess of sixteen (16) feet high may be approved for specific design purposes by the City Planner. 
4.  Construction or emergency lighting, provided that such lighting is removed on completion of the construction project or emergency. 
5.  Temporary event lighting such as searchlights, subject to issuance of a temporary permit by the Building Official for a specific duration of time. 
6.  Exemptions granted by the Director of Public Works for special conditions, upon issuing a written finding that conditions exist that make conforming fixtures inadequate to the specific task. 
F.  Inclusion in Permit Applications. Lighting plans shall be submitted as part of building, electrical, or sign permits and shall be reviewed as part of the normal review process for such permits. 
47-109 - FENCE REGULATIONS 
    Fence construction in all Zoning Districts is subject to the following provisions: 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  Location Restrictions. 
a.  Unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance or other sections of the Kearney Municipal Code, no fence shall be erected on any lot or tract outside the surveyed lot lines. 
b.  No fence shall be erected on public land by a private party or individual. Removal of any such fence shall be at the expense of the owner 
2.  Sight Obstruction at Street Intersections in All Districts. All fences erected in a Vision Clearance Triangle shall comply with Section 9-1209 of the Code of the City of Kearney. 
3.  Effect on Adjacent Properties and Drainage. In all Districts, fences shall be erected and maintained so as to avoid limiting or obstructing the flow of water in natural drainage courses, or drainageways created within easements. 
4.  Fence Construction on Utility Easements. In all Districts, a fence erected on a tract of land subject to an easement for the construction, maintenance, operations, or replacement of any water, sanitary or storm sewer, gas line, electric power, telephone, or other utility poles, or other cables or lines shall be designed and constructed to be readily removable to permit the use of the easement. Such fences shall be subject to removal by request whenever necessary to permit access. The cost of removal or replacement shall be the responsibility of the owner of the fence. 
5.  Protective Fences around Swimming Pools. A fence with a minimum height of four (4) feet shall be required around public or private swimming pools. Any gate around a protective fence shall be lockable and maintained in a locked state when the pool is not in use. 
6.  Applicability. 
a.  The regulations contained in this section apply to all fences with a height above grade of thirty (30) inches and over. 
b.  A permit to erect a fence is required in all zoning Districts except AG, RR-1 and RR-2 Districts. 
B.  Residential Fences. Fences constructed within Residential Districts or on land used for residential purposes are subject to the following special provisions: 
1.  Definitions: 
a.  OPEN FENCE: A fence where the design contains openings that constitute not less than fifty percent (50%) of the surface area of the fence. The surface area is the product of a length of fence, measured from the inside edge of one support post or column to the inside edge of the next adjacent support post or column; times the height of the same section of fence. Fifty percent (50%) of the surface area shall be open, in order to qualify as an "open fence". Support posts or columns less than two (2) feet in width are not considered part of the fence design. 
b.  CLOSED FENCE: A fence where the design of the fence has more than fifty percent (50%) of the surface area closed. 
2.  Construction Requirements: 
a.  Height: The maximum height of all fences excluding supports, posts or attached ornaments shall be six (6) feet. 
b.  Openings: 
i.  Front Yards: All fences built in required front yard building setbacks shall be constructed as an open fence. 
ii.  Street Yards: All fences built in required street-side building setbacks shall be constructed as an open fence. 
iii.  Interior Side Yards and Rear Yards: All fences built outside of a required front or street-side building setback may be constructed as a closed fence. 
iv.  Arterial Street Yards: Fences built within the required street-side building setback on arterial streets, may be constructed as a closed fence, except when such fence is located in a street side-yard adjacent to a neighboring front yard. A fence erected within twenty-five (25) feet of the common property pin of a street side-yard and a front yard shall be constructed as an open fence. 
c.  Materials: Fences shall be constructed of wood, chain-link, PVC/resin, stone or masonry materials, or ornamental metals only. Wood fences shall utilize traditionally accepted residential fence materials. Mesh or chain-link fences may exceed six (6) feet in height to enclose public or private recreational sports complexes. 
d.  Barbed Wire: Barbed wire and/or electrified fences are not permitted within the City limits of the City of Kearney, and are defined as any fence that includes in its material barbs, blades, razors, electric current or other features specifically designed to injure or abrade an individual or animal who attempts to negotiate the fence. 
C.  Civic, Office, Commercial, and Industrial Fences. Fences constructed in commercial and industrial districts are subject to the following special provisions: 
1.  Height: The maximum height of a fence in a required front yard and street side yard for any permitted use in any non-residential zoning district shall be five (5) feet and may be one hundred percent (100%) closed construction. Fences constructed outside of a required front yard or street side yard shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and may be one hundred percent (100%) closed construction. 
2.  Civic Uses in Residential Districts: The maximum height of fences installed as part of primary and secondary educational facilities, day care, and park and recreation use types, or any other use that provides secured outdoor space for the use of children within residential zoning districts shall not exceed six (6) feet. 
3.  Barbed Wire: Barbed wire and electrified fences are not permitted within the City limits of the City of Kearney. Except barbed wire may be used in the construction of fencing in an industrial district provided that the bottom strand of the barbed wire shall be at least six (6) feet above ground level. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7055, 5-11-2004) 
47-110 - APPEALS 
    Denial, revocations, or cancellations of a building permit based on the provisions of this Chapter may be appealed to the Board of Adjustments, as set forth in Chapter 59. 
Chapter 48 - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS 

48-101 - PURPOSE 
    The Landscaping and Screening Regulations provide additional guidance on the development of sites within Kearney by addressing landscaping and screening requirements. They are designed to improve the appearance of the community, buffer potentially incompatible land uses from one another, and conserve the value of properties within the City of Kearney and its extra-territorial jurisdiction. The Landscape and Screening provisions are further intended to expedite development approval by including predictable, uniform standards for landscaping, avoiding the unnecessary use of Planned Development Districts. 
48-102 - APPLICABILITY 
    The provisions of this section shall apply to all new development on each lot or site upon application for a building permit, except for the following: 
A.  Reconstruction or replacement of a lawfully existing use or structure following a casualty loss. 
B.  Remodeling, rehabilitation, or improvements to existing uses or structures which do not substantially change the location of structures, parking, or other site improvements. 
C.  Additions or enlargements of existing uses or structures which increase floor area or impervious coverage area by less than twenty percent (20%) of the building established on the site on the effective date of this Ordinance. Where such cumulative additions or enlargements are twenty percent (20%) or greater, these provisions shall apply only to that portion where the new development occurs. 
48-103 - LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Depth of Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required adjacent to each street property line and shall extend to a minimum depth inward on private property as set forth in the Site Development Regulations in Chapters 18 through 32.B. Obstructions 
    Landscape areas required by this ordinance shall not be obstructed by any type or size of fence. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
48-104 - LANDSCAPING MATERIALS AND INSTALLATION STANDARDS 
A.  Official List of Recommended and Prohibited Plant Materials. Plantings shall be used in required landscaped areas or bufferyards consistent with the Official List of Recommended and Prohibited Plant Materials, provided through the office of the City Planner. All plant materials shall conform in size, species and spacing with this section of the ordinance. 
B.  Required Right-of-Way Landscape. Plantings placed in the public right-of-way as defined by Section 7.502, shall be consistent with the depth of landscaping required by the underlying zoning. 
C.  Use of Inorganic Landscaping Materials. 
1.  No artificial trees, shrubs, plants or turf shall be used to fulfill the minimum requirements for landscaping. Inorganic materials, such as stone or decorative pavers, may be used provided that such material does not comprise more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the minimum required landscaped area. Other concrete and/or asphalt pavement surfaces may not be used within the minimum required landscaped area, except for driveways and walkways. 
2.  Loose rock, mulch, bark or wood chips shall not be permitted within the required landscaped area adjacent to street rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003, Ord. No. 8185, 10-10-2017) 
48-105 - BUFFERYARD AND SCREENING PROVISIONS 
A.  Bufferyard Applications. These provisions apply when use is established in a more intensive zoning district which abuts to a less intensive zoning district, residential use or for property that directly abuts the Interstate 80 right-of-way. A property shall not be considered abutting if it is separated by a street or an alley. All bufferyards must be free of paved access ways, storage, or other nuisance. 
1.  The owner, developer, or operator of the more intensive use shall install and maintain a landscaped bufferyard on his/her lot or site, as set forth in the Site Development Regulations in Chapters 18 through 32. Bufferyards are not required of duplex or townhouse use types in the more intensive zoning district. 
2.  Bufferyards of less than ten (10) feet in width shall require a six (6) foot high solid wood, PVC, and/or masonry fence or wall to be installed. 
3.  Criteria for review and approval of appropriate bufferyard site design includes, but is not limited to the following: meets base bufferyard requirements, provides separation of uses, obstructs view between uses, allows access to utilities and detention, and maintains surface water drainage. Appropriate site design may allow for bufferyards to be incorporated into storm water detention, water quality areas, and utility easements. 
Bufferyard landscaping shall consist of one of the following: 
(a)  Hedges of evergreen or approved deciduous plant material, capable of providing a substantial opaque barrier, and attaining a minimum height of 6 feet within three years. 
(b)  A solid wood, PVC, and/or masonry fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. 
(c)  A landscaped earth berm with a maximum slope of three (3) to one (1), rising no less than six (6) feet above the existing grade of the lot line separating the zoning districts. 
(d)  Any combination of these methods that achieves a cumulative minimum height of six (6) feet and provides an opaque barrier. 
B.  Screening Application. Screening is required between adjacent zoning districts when one (1) or more of the following conditions in the more intensive zoning district is visible from a street right-of-way and faces toward the boundary of the less intensive zoning district: 
1.  Outdoor storage areas, cargo containers or storage tanks, unless otherwise screened. 
2.  Loading docks, refuse collection points, and other service areas. 
3.  Major machinery or areas housing a manufacturing process. 
4.  Major on-site traffic circulation areas or truck and/or trailer parking. 
5.  Sources of glare, noise, or other environmental effects. 
6.  Bailing or stockpiling of cardboard or other shipping or packaging materials. 
7.  Surface parking lots with one hundred fifty (150) or more stalls directly adjacent to less intensive districts. 
C.  Opaque Barrier. A six (6) foot opaque barrier shall be provided which visually screens the conditions listed in Section 48-105.B from less intensive uses as follows: 
1.  A solid wood, PVC, and/or masonry fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Fence construction is required to meet the related regulations in Section 47-109 Fence Regulations of the ULDO. 
2.  A landscaping screen, using evergreen or deciduous materials, capable of providing a substantially opaque, hedge-like barrier and attaining a minimum height of six (6) feet within three (3) years of planting. 
3.  A landscaped earth berm with a maximum slope of three (3) to one (1), rising no less than six (6) feet above the existing grade of the lot line separating the zoning districts. 
4.  Any combination of these methods that achieves a cumulative height of six (6) feet. 
5.  Appropriate site design may allow for screening to be incorporated into storm water detention, water quality areas, and utility easements. 
6.  Criteria for review and approval of appropriate screening site design includes but is not limited to the following: meets base screening requirements, provides separation of uses, obstructs view between uses, allows access to utilities and detention, and maintains surface water drainage. 
7.  When a street separates adjacent zoning districts requiring screening, the height of the screen may be reduced at the discretion of the planning staff. 
D.  Screening: Effect on Drainage. Screening shall not adversely affect surface water drainage. 
E.  Permitted Interruptions of Screening. Screening may be interrupted to provide access drives to service areas or for loading purposes to buildings. Such breaks or interruptions shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the length of the required screened area. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016; Ord. No. 8115, 11-8-2016; Ord. No. 8203, 12-12-2017) 
48-106 - PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING 
A.  Landscape and Screening Requirements. Unless otherwise noted, each off-street parking facility of over six thousand (6,000) square feet shall comply with the following regulations: 
1.  Each off-street parking facility shall provide a minimum landscaped buffer, depth of landscaping, and/or a combination of both along any street property line as set forth in Site Development Regulations in Chapters 18 through 32. 
2.  Any parking facility which abuts property in a residential district shall provide a fence, wall, landscape screen, or earth berm not less than four (4) feet in height for the length of the common boundary. A grade change, terrace, or other site feature which blocks the sight line of headlights into a residential property may satisfy this requirement, subject to the determination of the City Planner. When a street separates adjacent residential use or district requiring screening, the height of the screening may be reduced at the discretion of the planning staff. 
3.  Any parking facility with over one hundred twenty-five (125) parking spaces is required to install landscape islands within the parking facility. 
4.  Each unenclosed parking facility of over six thousand (6,000) square feet within any street yard shall provide interior landscaped area equal to no less than five percent (5%) of the total paved area of the parking facility. Parking facilities within the M-1 and M-2 Districts shall be exempt from this requirement. 
5.  Interior landscaping shall be credited toward the satisfaction of overall landscaping requirements set forth in this section. 
6.  Landscaping or screening installed in any required landscaped area shall not obstruct the view from the off-street parking facility to any driveway approach, street, alley, or sidewalk. Landscaping shall further not obstruct any views among parking spaces and circulation ways, or visibility between vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016; Ord. No. 8203, 12-12-2017) 
48-107 - TREE PLANTINGS 
A.  Quantity. In any landscaped area required by the Minimum Depth Requirements or the Bufferyard Requirements, one (1) tree of an approved species meeting minimum requirements shall be planted and maintained for each five hundred (500) square feet of required landscaped area. Existing trees approved for preservation shall be counted toward satisfaction of this requirement. 
B.  Trees in Parking Lots. Any landscaped islands required to meet the interior landscaping requirements for parking lots shall include one (1) two-inch caliper or larger deciduous tree unless a light pole is located within the island. Additional shrubs and/or ground cover shall be planted in each island. Landscaped islands containing a tree shall not be less than three hundred sixty (360) square feet and designed to protect plant material from the intrusion of vehicles. 
C.  Bonus. Any tree of an approved species planted or maintained with a caliper of three (3) inches or above shall count as 1.25 trees toward the satisfaction of the requirements of this section. An approved existing tree with a caliper of eight (8) inches or above preserved on a site shall count as 2.00 trees toward the satisfaction of the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016; Ord. No. 8203, 12-12-2017) 
48-108 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
A.  Time of Application. The provisions contained in this Section shall be applied for each individual lot or site when an application for a building permit on such lot is made. A Landscape Plan shall be submitted with each application for a building permit. Such plan shall be reviewed by the City Planner for compliance with the provisions of this section. 
B.  Maintenance of Required Landscaping. 
1.  Upon installation of required landscape materials, the landowner agrees to promote vigorous growth of the required plants by performing continuous and properly timed maintenance. The maintenance responsibility consist of watering, weeding, fertilizing, controlling diseases and insects, pruning, removing stakes and wires used to secure the plant when planting and removing and replacing unhealthy, damaged and/or dead plants. The replacement plant must be the same species, size, and in the same location as shown on the approved landscape plan and planted during the next appropriate planting season. Substitute plants may be permitted by submitting a request to the City Planner. 
2.  Underground irrigation shall be provided for all required landscaped areas in multi-family, commercial, or office developments. 
C.  Obstruction of View. Landscaping or screening installed in any landscaped area shall not obstruct the view from or to any driveway approach, street, alley, or sidewalk, and shall be consistent with the provisions of Section 7-520 "Vision Clearance" of Chapter 7 "Park and Recreation" of the Code of the City of Kearney. 
D.  Earth Berm Locations. All earth berm locations shall be reviewed by the City Planner, or his/her designee to determine how the berms shall relate to drainage and public utilities. 
E.  Exceptions. A development may continue to comply with the bufferyard and screening requirements in effect at the time of issuance of its original permit, regardless of whether an adjacent lot or site is subsequently rezoned to a less intensive district which would otherwise require compliance with bufferyard or screening provisions. 
(Ord. No. 7354, 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 8096, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 8203, 12-12-2017) 
Chapter 49 - OFF-STREET PARKING 

49-101 - PURPOSE 
    The Off-Street Parking Regulations require that developments provide parking in proportion to the need created by each use. These regulations further establish standards for the functional design of parking facilities. These regulations are intended to accommodate vehicles in a functionally satisfactory manner and to minimize external effects on neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002) 
49-102 - GENERAL APPLICATIONS 
A.  Applicability. Off-street parking shall be provided for any new buildings constructed; for new uses or conversions of existing buildings; or for enlargements of existing structures. 
B.  Exemptions. 
1.  Any use within the CBD, Kearney Center District is exempt from the off-street parking requirements. Any off-street parking facility constructed in the CBD District after the effective date of this Ordinance must comply with the design standards set forth in this section. 
C.  Exceptions. 
1.  The City Council may approve a reduced number of parking spaces for a specific project after receiving a summary of Code requirements from the Development Services Staff, provided that the applicant presents a plot plan demonstrating that an area on site is reserved for the designated number of spaces as required by Code and agrees to improve that area for parking within sixty (60) days of the time the City Council deems such parking shall be improved. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
49-103 - SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
    Parking facilities for each use shall be provided in accordance with the minimum requirements set forth in Table 49-1. 
A.  Computation. 
1.  When a computation of required parking results in a fraction of 0.5 or greater, the requirement shall be rounded up to the next whole number. Any parking computation for any use other than single-family residential and requiring such a calculation shall have a minimum requirement of three (3) parking stalls 
2.  Unless otherwise indicated, parking requirements are based on gross floor area. 
3.  When parking requirements are computed on the basis of capacity, capacity shall be determined by the building code or other official determinations of occupancy in effect for the City of Kearney at the time the use is established. 
Table 49-1: 
Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements 
Agricultural Use Types Horticulture 1 space per 1,000 square feet of sales area. Crop/Animal Production No requirement. Residential Use Types Single-Family Residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit that contain up to 3 bedrooms and 3 spaces per dwelling units that contain 4 or more bedrooms. Duplex Residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit that contain up to 3 bedrooms and 3 spaces per dwelling units that contain 4 or more bedrooms. Multi-Family Residential 1.5 spaces per efficiency or 1-bedroom unit; 2 spaces per 2-bedroom unit; 3 spaces for 3 or more bedroom unit. Downtown Residential No requirement. Group Residential 1 space for each resident. Mobile Home Residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit. Retirement Residence 1.5 space per independent living unit; 0.5 spaces per assisted living unit. Civic Use Types Administration 1 space for 300 square feet of gross floor area. Cemetery No requirement. Clubs 1 space per 4-person capacity. College/University 1 space per three full-time students. Convalescent Services 1 space for 4 beds. Cultural Services 1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area. Day Care Home Services (Limited and General) 2 off-street parking spaces required. Day Care Centers 1 space per 300 square feet. Group Care Facility 1 space per 4 person capacity + 1 space per employee of largest shift. Group Home 1 space per 4 person capacity + 1 space per employee of largest shift. Guidance Services 1 space per 300 square feet. Health Care 1 space per 300 square feet + 1 space per employee of largest shift. Hospitals 1 space per 2 beds + 1 space per employee of the largest shift. Maintenance Facilities See Schedule A. Parks and Recreation Established by an approved site master plan. Postal Facilities See Schedule A. Primary Education 1 space per employee of largest shift + 10 stalls for visitors. Public Assembly 1 space per 4-person capacity. Religious Assembly 1 space per 4-person capacity in largest assembly area. Safety Services 1 space per employee of maximum shift + 1 stall per 1,000 sq. ft. Secondary Education 1 space per employee of max shift + 1 space for each 3 11th and 12th grade students. Utilities 1 space per employee of maximum shift. Commercial Use Types Agricultural Sales/Service See Schedule A. Auto Rental and Sales See Schedule A. Auto Service * 4 times service capacity. Body Repair * 5 spaces per repair stall. Business Support Services 1 space per 500 square feet. Campground 1 space per camping unit. Cocktail Lounge 1 space per 50 square feet of customer service area. Commercial Recreation 1 space per 4-person capacity. For bowling alleys, 4 spaces per lane. Communication Services 1 space per 500 square feet. Construction Sales See Schedule A. Consumer Services 1 space per 200 square feet. Convenience Storage 1 space per 20 storage units. Equipment Sales/Service See Schedule A. Food Sales (All Types) 1 space per 200 square feet. Furniture/Appliance Store See Schedule A. General Retail Services 
50,000 Square Feet or Less 1 space per 200 square feet. General Retail Services 
50,001 to 100,000 Square Feet 1 space per 250 square feet. General Retail Services 
100,001 Square Feet or Larger 1 space per 300 square feet. Liquor Sales 1 space per 200 square feet. Lodging, Bed & Breakfast 1 space per rental unit. Personal Improvement 1 space per 200 square feet. Personal Services 1 space per 250 square feet. Pet Services 1 space per 500 square feet. Restaurants (Drive-in) 1 space per 50 square feet of customer service area. Restaurants (General) 1 space per 3-person capacity in dining area. Stables/Kennels 1 space per employee + 1 stall per 5,000 sq. ft. of site area. Surplus Sales See Schedule A. Trade Services 1 space per 500 square feet. Veterinary Services 1 space per 500 square feet. Office Use Types Corporate Offices 1 space per 250 square feet. General Offices 1 space per 250 square feet. Financial Services 1 space per 350 square feet. Medical Offices 1 space per 250 square feet. Miscellaneous Use Types Broadcasting Tower See Schedule A. Non-Putrescible Landfill See Schedule A. All Landfills See Schedule A. Industrial Use Types Agricultural Industries See Schedule A. Light Industry See Schedule A. General Industry See Schedule A. Heavy Industry See Schedule A. Railroad Facilities See Schedule A. Resource Extraction 1 space per employee on largest shift. Salvage Services See Schedule A. Warehousing See Schedule A. Construction Yards See Schedule A.  
Schedule A 
This schedule sets forth minimum off-street parking requirements for uses with elements that have different functions and operating characteristics. Function of Element Requirement Office or Administration 1 space per 300 square feet. Indoor Sales, Display or Service Area 1 space per 350 square feet. Outdoor Sales, Display or Service Area 1 space per 2,000 square feet. Equipment Servicing or Manufacturing 1 space per 1,000 square feet. Indoor or Outdoor Storage or Warehousing 1 space per 5,000 square feet.  
* Auto Service and Body Repair subject to other restrictions applicable under this ordinance: See Chapter 13: Use Types - "Vehicle Storage"; also, Chapter 46: Supplemental Use Regulations, "Outdoor Storage." 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 6963, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7212, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 8096, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 8164, 7-11-2017) 
49-104 - PARKING FACILITY LOCATION 
A.  Residential Parking. 
1.  With the exception of Downtown Residential uses, off-street parking for residential uses shall be located on the same lot or site as the use. For single-family and duplex residential, the parking spaces may be a garage, carport, or a parking pad. At least one (1) of the parking spaces shall be behind the front or side yard building setback lines when two (2) spaces are required. When three (3) spaces are required, at least two (2) of the parking spaces shall be behind the front or side yard building setback lines. The remaining required spaces may be in the driveway leading to the other parking spaces. 
The driveway shall lead from a street or alley to the parking spaces. Parking is allowed in the rear yard. 
2.  Off-street parking areas for any multi-family or group residential uses shall be at least six (6) feet from any main building; and shall not be located within a required front yard or street side yard. 
3.  For multi-family residential uses, separately leased detached garages may not be used to satisfy parking requirements for such use. Parking incorporated into the design of multi-family buildings, or within parking structures, shall be counted toward fulfillment of parking requirements. 
B.  Non-residential Parking. Off-street parking for non-residential uses shall be located on the same lot or site as the use, or within three hundred (300) feet of that use if the parking site is within a zoning district that permits the Off- Street Parking use type. Control of ownership or use rights to the remote off-street parking must be demonstrated as a condition of permission. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002) 
49-105 - PARKING FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES 
A.  Each off-street parking facility shall provide the number of parking spaces set forth in Table 49-2 designed and designated for use by people with disabilities. Every eighth (8th) parking space shall be van-accessible. Design criteria and dimensions shall be in accordance with Federal Register, Volume 56, No 144. Parking facilities for single-family, duplex, two-family, and mobile home residential uses are exempt from this requirement. 
B.  Spaces designated for people with disabilities shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet. Each handicapped space shall provide a barrier free route to an accessible building entrance, which shall not require users to walk or wheel behind parked cars. Such spaces shall be designated with an upright sign exhibiting the universal symbol for accessibility by the handicapped. All such spaces shall be designed in compliance with the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Table 49-2: Accessible Parking Requirements 
Number of Stalls Number of Required Accessible Spaces Number of Stalls Number of Required Accessible Spaces 1-25 1 201-300 7 26-50 2 301-400 8 51-75 3 401-500 9 76-100 4 501-1,000 2% of total 101-150 5 1,001 and over 20, plus 1 for each 100 151-200 6 stalls over 1,000  
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002) 
49-106 - OFF-STREET PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS 
A.  Dimensions. 
1.  Standard parking stalls shall be nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long. 
2.  Where parking stalls are located adjacent to landscaped areas, the paved depth of such stalls may be decreased by two (2) feet to provide for a vehicle overhang area. The vehicle overhang area may not encroach into a required landscaped area or public sidewalk or right-of-way. 
B.  Pavement and Drainage. 
1.  All off-street parking facilities, including approaches and maneuvering areas, shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt, asphaltic concrete, or brick and shall be maintained with materials sufficient to prevent mud, dust, or loose material except as provided below: 
(a)  Sites within the AG, RR-1 and RR-2 Districts are exempt from this requirement. 
(b)  In residential areas, all parking spaces and driveways used for parking shall be paved, including driveways that lead to paved parking spaces. 
(c)  In M-1 and M-2 Districts, the paving requirement for parking and loading areas serving industrial uses is not required. The approach from the public right-of-way plus an additional ten (10) foot of driveway on private property must be paved. In addition, disability accessible parking spaces must be paved. 
2.  Off-street parking facilities shall be designed and built to prevent the free flow of water onto adjacent properties. Parking lot design which discharges water onto public right-of-way is subject to review and approval by the Director of Public Works. 
C.  Landscape and Screening Requirements. Landscape requirements for off-street parking facilities are set forth in Section 48-107. 
D.  Entrances and Exits. 
1.  Adequate maneuvering area shall be provided on site to each parking space. Minimum standards are set forth in the City of Kearney Design Manual. No portion of the maneuvering area for parking and loading areas shall extend onto a public right-of-way. 
2.  Adequate access to each parking facility shall be provided by means of clearly defined and limited driveways or access points. Such driveways shall be designed to direct non-residential traffic away from residential areas. 
3.  Parking facilities other than driveways for single-family, duplex, two-family, or mobile home residential uses must permit vehicles to enter streets in a forward position. 
4.  Head-in parking from any public right-of-way shall be permitted only in the CBD or C-1(N) Districts, or as part of a specific Planned Development design. 
E.  Design and Pedestrian Access. 
1.  Parking lots providing over two hundred (200) stalls should be divided into smaller parking fields not exceeding one hundred (100) stalls to reduce the visual impact of large parking expanses. Divisions should be made with landscape strips, peninsulas, or grade changes. 
2.  Commercial or office parking lots shall be designed to separate pedestrians from vehicles to the maximum degree possible and to provide protected pedestrian paths within parking areas which lead to store, building, or shopping center entrances. 
3.  Sidewalks and walkways in commercial developments should link to the City's sidewalk and trail system where available, and shall provide a safe pedestrian route from adjacent public sidewalks and trails. 
F.  Safety Features. 
1.  Parking facilities shall be designed to provide visibility of and between pedestrians and vehicles when circulating within or entering or leaving the facility; and shall not create blind, hidden, or hazardous areas. 
2.  Circulation patterns shall be designed in accordance with accepted standards of traffic engineering and safety. 
G.  Maintenance. All parking facilities shall be maintained to assure the continued usefulness and compatibility of the facility. Acceptable maintenance includes keeping the facility free of refuse, debris, and litter; maintaining parking surfaces in sound condition; and providing proper care of landscaped areas. 
H.  Adjustment for Conditional Uses and Planned Mixed Use Projects. 
1.  For uses subject to a Conditional Use Permit approval, the Planning Commission may adjust the minimum requirements of this section, in order to provide design, usability, attractiveness, or protection to adjoining uses in a manner equal to or greater than the minimum requirements of this section 
2.  In mixed use projects, different uses may have complementary parking requirements. This can result in a parking requirement that is less than the sum of parking required for each use and added separately. The Planning Commission may authorize an adjustment to the total parking requirement for separate uses located as part of a common development, or for separate uses located on adjacent sites and served by common parking facilities. All parking facilities subject to the mixed use adjustment must be located in a common facility, equally accessible and usable to all served uses. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
49-107 - BICYCLE PARKING 
A.  Parking Requirements. 
1.  Each parking facility providing fifty (50) spaces or more shall provide parking accommodations for bicycles as provided by the Table 49-3. 
Table 49-3: Bicycle Parking Requirements 
Number of Parking Stalls Required Bicycle Spaces 50-100 5 100-150 8 150-200 10 Over 200 2 additional spaces for each 50 parking stall  
2.  Bicycle parking facilities shall include bicycle racks secured to prevent easy removal, bicycle lockers, or bicycle posts or bollards expressly designed for the secure storage. 
3.  The location of bicycle parking facilities shall be at least as convenient to the main entrance of the primary use as the most convenient automobile parking not reserved for use by disabled people. 
4.  Bicycle parking should be located to prevent hazards or obstructions to the normal flow of pedestrians into a use. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002) 
49-108 - OFF-STREET LOADING 
A.  Loading Requirement. In any district with every building or part thereof hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the same lot with such building, at least one (1) off-street loading space plus one (1) additional such loading space for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area, so used, in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
B.  Design Standards. 
1.  Each loading space shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide by forty (40) feet long, with a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet and shall provide adequate maneuvering area on site to access the loading space. No portion of a maneuvering area for a loading space shall extend onto a public right-of-way. 
2.  Paving of loading spaces and access areas shall be permanent, durable, and free of dust. 
3.  Off-street loading areas are subject to the landscaping and buffering requirements for parking facilities set forth in this Section. 
C.  Schedule of Loading Spaces. Loading spaces for each use requiring them shall be provided in accordance with the minimum requirements set forth in Table 49-4. 
Table 49-4: Off-Street Loading Requirements 
Gross Floor Area of Use (square feet) Number of Required Loading Spaces 5,000 or less None 5,001-25,000 1 25,001-75,000 2 Larger than 75,000 3  
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
49-109 - STACKING REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICES 
A.  Commercial establishments providing drive-in or drive-through services shall provide minimum on-site stacking distance as provided by Table 49-5. 
Table 49-5: Off-Street Stacking Requirements 
Type of Operation Minimum Stacking Space Financial Services with Drive-Up Tellers 4 vehicles per window or kiosk Financial Services with Drive-Up ATM 4 vehicles per ATM station Self-service or automatic car wash Entrance: 4 vehicles per bay 
Exit: 1 vehicle per bay Fast food restaurant* Without menu boards: a minimum stacking space of 4 vehicles behind the first service window 
With separate menu boards and service windows: A minimum stacking space of 8 vehicles behind the first service windows Coffee Shop Minimum stacking space of three (3) vehicles behind the first service window Photo processing, dry cleaning, or other drive-up personal services 2 vehicles per service window Gas stations 2 vehicles per gas dispenser pump Gated parking lot, community entrance, or overhead door 1 vehicle per gate or door on local streets 
2 vehicles per gate or door on collector streets  
Note: Minimum vehicle lane shall be twelve (12) feet. Vehicle length = twenty (20) feet. 
* May be increased based on Site Plan review. 
B.  Alternative Runaround Access for Drive-Through Lanes Exceptions 
1.  Facilities with two (2) ingress/egress access points not connected to the drive-through lane(s). 
2.  Facilities that have no public indoor seating. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7311, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 8096, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 8232 , § 5, 4-24-2018) 
49-110 - PARKING FOR PERSONAL AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS 
A.  Definitions. 
    COMMERCIAL VEHICLES: Truck-tractors or semi-trailers, semi-tractors, panel trucks and any commercial hauling trailers. 
    ENCLOSED STRUCTURE: A structure that conforms to the regulation in Section 47-105 "Accessory Buildings" of Chapter 47 "Supplemental Development Regulations" of the Code of the City of Kearney. 
    HAULING TRAILERS (COMMERCIAL AND PERSONAL): Trailers customarily towed behind passenger cars or light pick-up trucks for personal or commercial use. 
    PARKING PAD: A hard surfaced or rock aggregate area with a minimum dimension of nine (9) feet wide by twenty (20) feet in length. 
    PERSONAL VEHICLE: Any kind of conveyance capable of being propelled or driven on the street, whether propelled by manpower, animal or mechanical power. 
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any motor propelled camping vehicle or towed camping trailer designed to be pulled or carried by a truck or vehicle, which is used for traveling and recreational activities; including boats and boat trailers. In no case shall a recreational vehicle be classed as a residence for the purposes of this Chapter or other ordinances of the City. 
B.  Approved Locations for Parking Personal Vehicles; Recreational Vehicles and Personal Hauling Trailers. This section defines where parking is permitted for all such vehicles on residential developed lots: 
1.  Parking is permitted within an enclosed structure. 
2.  All parking located in the front yard or street side yard shall be on a hard surfaced pad or hard surfaced driveway. Such driveway must provide access to a parking pad located behind the twenty-five (25) foot street yard setback. 
3.  Recreational vehicles or personal hauling trailers may be parked in the front yard or street side yard on a paved driveway provided that no portion of the recreational vehicle or personal hauling trailer is closer than ten (10) feet to the back of the curb, however, in no case shall the recreational vehicle or personal hauling trailer encroach into or over the public sidewalk. 
4.  Recreational vehicles or personal hauling trailers may be parked on interior side yards or rear yards on a paved parking pad or on a surface consisting of crushed concrete or rock provided the aggregate size is at least one and one half (11/2) inch minimum graded aggregate. Aggregate pads shall be contained within a physical boundary such as landscape timbers, bricks or railroad ties with a minimum depth of four (4) inches. Aggregate pads shall be maintained free of weeds, grass or other vegetation. 
5.  All parking pads shall be sized to ensure the entire width and length of the recreational vehicle or personal hauling trailer is parked on the designated area. 
6.  In no case shall personal vehicles, recreational vehicles or personal hauling trailers be parked in such a manner to encroach upon the public right-of-way, including the public sidewalk. 
C.  Materials for Parking Spaces and Driveways. 
1.  All driveways and parking spaces for personal vehicles, recreational vehicles and personal hauling trailers shall be on a paved surface connected by a paved driveway to a dedicated public street, road or paved alley in accordance with Item B, Pavement and Drainage, of Section 49-106 "Off-Street Parking Design Standards" of Chapter 49 "Off-Street Parking" of the Code of the City of Kearney.. 
2.  A paved driveway is not required when access to the enclosed structure or parking pad is from an unimproved alley or for a recreational vehicle or personal hauling trailer which is parked in a rear yard. 
3.  Any paving shall not exceed the maximum impervious coverage limit of the zoning district. 
4.  The approach width at the curb may be increased provided the driveway leads to at least a nine (9) foot by twenty (20) foot hard surfaced parking pad located behind the twenty-five (25) foot building setback. 
D.  Provisions for Commercial Vehicles and Commercial Hauling Trailers. 
1.  Commercial vehicles and commercial hauling trailers shall not be parked or stored on private property or on the public right-of-way in any residential zoning district; except for the following: 
a.  Commercial vehicles and commercial hauling trailers used exclusively for the purpose of or associated with the construction of residential or commercial buildings may be parked on construction sites off the public right-of-way. 
b.  Commercial vehicles and commercial hauling trailers associated with a home based business with approval of the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 7440, 6-10-2008) 
Chapter 50 - SIGN REGULATIONS 

50-101 - PURPOSE 
    The Sign Regulations provide standards for communicating information in the environment of the City of Kearney and its jurisdiction. These regulations recognize the need to protect public health, safety, and welfare; to maintain the City's attractive appearance; to provide for adequate business identification, advertising, and communication of information; and to encourage the fair enforcement of sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7424, 3-11-2008) 
50-102 - DEFINITION OF TERMS 
    The following definitions shall be used for terms contained in this chapter that are not otherwise defined in the Kearney City Code which includes the Unified Land Development Ordinance. 
A.  ABANDONED SIGN: A sign, including sign face and supporting structure, which refers to a discontinued business, profession, commodity, service, or other activity or use formerly occupying the site; or which contains no sign copy on all sign faces for a continuous period of six (6) months. 
B.  ATTACHED SIGN: A sign which is structurally connected to a building or depends upon that building for support 
C.  AUXILIARY DESIGN ELEMENTS: Terms which describe secondary characteristics of a sign, including its method of illumination and other features within the bounds of its basic shape. 
D.  AWNING AND AWNING SIGN: A temporary or movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and composed of non-rigid materials, except for a supporting framework. An awning sign is a message printed on such a shelter. 
E.  BANNER: Material exceeding four (4) square feet in size with a printed message or graphic secured or mounted to the primary building. 
F.  BUILDING MARKER: An historic or commemorative plaque, or a building name or cornerstone carved into a masonry surface. 
G.  BUSINESS CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign which identifies a building or group of commercial buildings in single ownership or control, sharing parking and access. 
H.  CANOPY (OR ARCADE) SIGN: A sign which is attached or made an integral part of a canopy. 
I.  CITY OF KEARNEY OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN REGISTRY: A list of all outdoor advertising signs shall be maintained by the Building Services Division, detailing location, ownership, and size of all billboard signs. 
J.  CLEARANCE: The distance from the bottom of a sign face elevated above grade and the grade below. 
K.  DETACHED SIGN: A sign which is self-supporting and structurally independent from any building. 
L.  DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign which serves only to designate the location or direction of any area or place. 
M.  DOUBLE-FACED SIGN: A sign consisting of no more than two (2) parallel or near parallel faces supported by a single structure. The angle created by the two (2) faces of a double-faced sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) degrees. 
N.  ELECTRONIC INFORMATION SIGNS: On-Premise signs which use an array of electrically illuminated lights, generally controlled by a computer or other electronic programming device, to display information or supporting graphics. Information may include news, events, or information about businesses or attractions. 
O.  ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN (ECMS): An outdoor advertising sign that changes the message, advertisement, or copy on the sign face by electronic or mechanical device or process, either automated or remote, regardless of the process used. Blinking, flashing, rotating, revolving, spinning, fluttering lighting or animation is not allowed. Transition between messages is permitted, but such transitions may only fade, scroll, travel or reveal. 
P.  FLAG SIGN: Signs which are emblazoned on a flag and are intended to be displayed in a free-flowing manner. Flags of the United States, the State of Nebraska, and any institution in the University of Nebraska system shall not be considered flag signs for the purpose of this Ordinance. 
Q.  FLASHING SIGN: A sign which has a lighting source or lighting element that periodically illuminates or is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and/or color at all times when the sign is in use, usually in a manner as to draw the attention of the viewer. 
R.  FRONTAGE: The length of a property line of any one (1) premises abutting and parallel to a public street, private way, or court. 
S.  GROUND SIGN: A detached on-premise sign built on a freestanding frame, mast, or pole(s) with a clearance no greater than three (3) feet. 
T.  ILLUMINATION: Lighting sources installed for the primary purpose of lighting a specific sign or group of signs. 
U.  MARQUEE: A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and extending over public right-of-way. 
V.  MAXIMUM PERMITTED SIGN AREA: The maximum permitted combined area of all signs allowed on a specific property. 
W.  MONUMENT SIGN: An on-premise freestanding sign with the appearance of a solid base. 
X.  MOVING SIGN: A sign which conveys its message through rotating, changing, or animated elements. 
Y.  NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign that was legally erected prior to the adoption of this chapter but which violates the regulations of this chapter. 
Z.  NUMERIC DISPLAY SIGNS: On premise signs which display numeric information only. Typical examples include time and temperature displays and fuel price displays. The numeric information may be changed electronically or manually. 
AA.  OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS: A panel for the display of information relating to a business, product, event, or other subject of advertising or publicity. Outdoor advertising signs may advertise on-premise or off-premise businesses or products, but are not included in the definition of premise identification signs. Special regulations or permissions apply to outdoor advertising signs in certain geographic locations within the City of Kearney and its jurisdiction. 
BB.  POLE SIGN: An on-premise sign built on a freestanding frame, mast, or pole(s) with a clearance greater than three (3) feet. 
CC.  PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to bases not permanently attached to the ground or a building and capable of being moved from place to place. 
DD.  POSTER: A temporary sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area and three (3) feet in height, mounted on stakes or spikes intended to be stuck into the ground and used as a detached temporary sign. 
EE.  PREMISE IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign which pertains to the use of a premises and which contains information about the owner or operator of that use; the type of business being conducted or the principal brand name of a commodity sold on the premises; and other information relative to the conduct of the use. 
FF.  PREMISES: A tract of one (1) or more lots or sites which are contiguous and under common ownership or control. 
GG.  PROJECTING SIGNS: A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to and projects from a building face. 
HH.  RESIDENTIAL SIGN: A small detached or attached sign located on a residential premise, conveying a message communicated by the owner of the property. 
II.  ROOF SIGN: Any sign or part of sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof or on top of or above the parapet or cornice of a building. 
(a)  Integral Roof Sign: A roof sign positioned between an eave line and the peak or highest point on a roof, substantially parallel to the face of a building. 
(b)  Above-peak Roof Sign: A roof sign positioned above the peak of a roof or above a parapet or cornice. 
JJ.  SIGN: A symbolic, visual device fixed upon a building, vehicle, structure, or parcel of land which is intended to convey information about a product, business, activity, place, person, institution, candidate, or political idea. 
KK.  SIGN TYPE: A functional description of the use of an individual sign. Includes owner identification, advertising, directional, electronic message, and temporary. 
LL.  STREET FACADE: Any separate external face of a building, including parapet walls and omitted wall lines, oriented to and facing a public street, a private street, or court (excluding alleys). Separate faces oriented in the same direction or within forty-five (45) degrees of one (1) another are considered part of the same street facade. 
MM.  TEMPORARY SIGNS: Any sign designed or fabricated of materials that advertise or communicate messages that change frequently or that become outdated; are made of materials of relatively low durability; are intended to be removed or replaced within a period of six (6) months or less; or are portable. Temporary signs generally fall into two (2) categories: temporary civic signs and temporary commercial signs. Temporary Commercial Signs shall fall into two (2) categories: (a) attached temporary commercial sign, and (b) detached temporary commercial sign. 
NN.  WALL SIGN: A sign attached to and parallel with the side of a building. 
OO.  WINDOW SIGN: A sign painted on or installed inside a window for the purpose of viewing from outside the premises. 
PP.  ZONE LOT: A parcel of land in single ownership that is large enough to meet the minimum zoning requirements of its zoning district and can provide such yards and other open spaces that are required by the site development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7009, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 7424, 3-11-2008; Ord. No. 7445, 7-22-2008; Ord. No. 7456, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 7495, 12-9-2008) 
50-103 - GENERAL SIGN AND STREET GRAPHICS REGULATIONS 
A.  Compliance. Each sign or part of a sign erected within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Kearney must comply with the provisions of this chapter, other relevant provisions of the City of Kearney's Municipal Code, and applicable building codes. 
B.  Resolution of Conflicting Regulations. This chapter is not meant to repeal or interfere with enforcement of other sections of the City of Kearney's Municipal Code. In cases of conflicts between Code sections, State or Federal Regulations, the more restrictive regulations shall apply. 
C.  Prohibited Signs. The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts. 
1.  Obsolete Signs. Signs that advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer conducted on the premises on which the sign is located. All obsolete signs shall remove the reference sign face(s) within six months of business closure. If an obsolete sign structure is in disrepair to a point of over fifty percent of the sign's total value, the City Manager or authorized officer may order the structure removed. 
2.  Signs or sign structures which resemble, imitate, simulate, or conflict with traffic control signs or devices included in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, which otherwise mislead or confuse persons traveling on public streets, which create a traffic hazard, or which violate any of the provisions of Section 60-6,127 or Section 60-6,128 of the Nebraska Rules of the Road or any other applicable State statutes. 
3.  Signs which create a safety hazard by obstructing the clear view of pedestrians or vehicles, or which obscure official signs or signals. 
4.  Off-premise Signs on Public Property. Off-premise signs located on public property which is being used for public purposes. This restriction also applies to hand-held signs carried by persons and persons dressed in costumes or as character actors for the purposes of advertising a service or product. 
5.  Off-premise Signs on Private Property. A permanent sign, other than outdoor advertising sign, located on private property which promotes a use or uses not taking place on the property. 
6.  Flashing Signs. No flashing, blinking, or rotation lights shall be permitted for either permanent or temporary signs. Illumination levels controlling brightness and minimum required hold time for electronic information signs shall comply with Section 50-104 of this Chapter. 
7.  Moving Signs. No sign shall be permitted, any part of which moves by motorized or similar mechanical means. 
8.  Painted Wall Signs. Off-premise signs painted on building walls unless specifically approved as an element of a Historic Neighborhood Conservation District plan. 
9.  All roof signs. 
D.  Exempt Signs. The following signs are permitted in any zoning district and are exempt from other provisions of this chapter. 
1.  Real Estate Signs. Signs advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the signs are displayed. One (1) non-illuminated sign, not to exceed six (6) square feet in residential districts and thirty-two (32) square feet in commercial or industrial districts, shall be permitted on each premises in residential districts. Such signs shall not extend higher than three (3) feet above grade level or closer than ten (10) feet from any property line unless located on the wall of a building. Such signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the disposition of the premises. 
2.  Construction Signs. Signs identifying the architect, engineer, contractor or other individuals involved in the construction of a building and such signs announcing the character of the building enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended but not including product advertising. One (1) non-illuminated sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet shall be permitted per street frontage. Such sign shall not extend higher than ten (10) feet above grade level and meet the front yard requirement for a principal structure unless located on the wall of a building on the premises or on a protective barricade surrounding the construction. Such signs shall be removed within one (1) week following completion of construction. 
3.  Political Campaign Signs. Signs announcing candidates seeking public political office or pertinent political issues. Such signs shall be confined to private property and shall be placed no sooner than forty-five (45) days prior to an election and shall be removed within ten (10) days following the election to which they pertain. 
4.  Street Banners. Signs advertising a public event, providing that specific approval is granted under regulations established by the City Council. 
5.  Seasonal Decorations. Signs pertaining to recognized national holidays and national observances. 
6.  Public Signs. Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, erected by or upon the order of a public officer in the performance of his public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest and other similar signs, including signs designating hospitals, libraries, schools and other institutions or places of public interest or concern. 
7.  Integral Signs. Signs for churches or temples, or names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and other similar signs when carved into stone, concrete or other building material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the structure to which they are attached. 
8.  Window Signs. Such signs which are displayed inside of a window or within a building provided, however, that neon window signs shall be permitted only in those districts where neon signs are permitted. 
9.  Works of graphic art painted or applied to building walls which contain no advertising or business identification messages. 
10.  Residential signs under two (2) square feet in size. 
11.  Neighborhood or subdivision identification signs under fifty (50) square feet. 
12.  Signs, which are not visible from a public right-of-way, private way, or court or from a property other than that on which the sign is installed. 
13.  Directional signs provided that such signs: 
(a)  Do not exceed four (4) square feet in maximum size or three (3) feet in maximum height. 
(b)  Are limited to one (1) sign at each driveway or access point with a public street; and one (1) sign at any critical decision point internal to the project. 
14.  Hand-Held Signs. Hand-held signs carried by persons and persons dressed in costumes or as character actors for the purposes of advertising a service or product, provided that such advertisement is limited to the lot or lots where the service or product is offered. 
E.  Detached Temporary Commercial Signs. 
1.  Permit Required. All Detached Temporary Commercial Signs not listed in Section 50-103.D but falling within the definition of temporary commercial signs shall be classified as Detached Temporary Commercial Signs. All Detached Temporary Commercial Signs, except for 4.(e) below, shall obtain a Temporary Sign Permit from the City of Kearney prior to any repair, alteration, relocation, or maintenance of such a sign. 
2.  Duration of Permits. Except for 4.(e) below, a Detached Temporary Commercial Sign shall be in effect for a period of thirty (30) days on two (2) separate occasions from the date of issuance. 
3.  Size. 
(a)  Except for posters, the maximum size of detached temporary signs or portable signs shall be fifty (50) square feet in area. Detached Temporary Commercial Signs shall be no smaller than eight (8) square feet. Posters shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and three (3) feet in height. 
4.  Location Requirements for Detached Temporary Commercial Signs. 
(a)  Detached Temporary Commercial Signs are prohibited in any public right-of-way or property, including streets, sidewalks, parks, and public facilities. 
(b)  Detached Temporary Commercial Signs shall not be located within the Vision Clearance Triangle defined by Section 47-104.H. 
(c)  Detached Temporary Commercial Signs shall not interfere with any public right-of-way, driveway or access way, or any means of access or egress to any building. 
(d)  Inflatable balloons, pennants, ribbons, streamers, flags, spinners and other similar moving devices, intended to attract attention, shall be allowed only for businesses with associated outdoor display of a product on the same lot or lots as the primary business. In all cases, such displays shall not be attached to any temporary or permanent pole or structure on the public right-of-way, nor shall any such sign display encroach upon the public right-of way or neighboring property, including air space. 
5.  Permit Application. 
(a)  Except for 4.(d) above, an application for a Detached Temporary Commercial Sign shall be submitted on a form developed by the City and shall an established fee shall be paid. 
F.  Attached Temporary Commercial Signs. 
1.  No permit or permit fee is required. 
2.  Duration of Sign Display. An Attached Temporary Commercial Sign shall have no time limit for the duration of display of any sign that meets the following criteria: 
(a)  The total amount of attached temporary commercial signage permitted on any premise shall be limited to a total of two (2) Attached Temporary Commercial Signs that do not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area on any street façade (including any building facades adjacent to public streets. Alleys are not streets.) 
(b)  Attached Temporary Commercial Signs shall not be attached to any sign pole or light pole on public or private property; or public utility poles, trees, or wooden or metal fence posts on either public or private property. 
(c)  Any Attached Temporary Commercial Sign shall be attached only to vertical facades of the primary building and shall not be attached to roofs, roof extensions, cornices, overhangs, or other building extensions. 
G.  Condition of Temporary Signs. 
(a)  All temporary signs shall be maintained in sound condition. Any sign that exhibits deterioration of structure or materials may be removed subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  The City Manager and his/her authorized officers shall order the removal of any sign not in compliance with any provisions of this section. If the owner of the premise on which such sign is located, or the owner of the sign if unlawfully located on public property, fails to remove such sign, the City Manager and his/her officers shall be authorized to remove the sign. Any costs of removal of a sign on private property shall be assessed to the owner of the property. Any such removal shall also result in the immediate cancellation of any outstanding temporary sign permit. 
H.  Vision-Clearance Area. Except in the CBD District, no structure shall be built to a height of more than two (2) feet above the established curb grade on the part of the lot within a vision clearance zone. The vision clearance zone shall be a triangle measured from the point of intersection of the curb lines or edge of pavement of the streets to a point forty (40) feet in each direction from the intersection along such curb lines or edges of pavement. At the intersection of major streets as defined in the Comprehensive Development Plan, the forty (40) foot distance shall be increased to sixty (60) feet. No landscaping shall be planted in such area which will materially obstruct the view of drivers approaching the street intersection. 
I.  Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a good state of repair, including, but not limited to, the structural components, the lighting, if any, the portion attaching the sign to the ground or structure, and the surface features. If a sign structure, other than outdoor advertising sign, is in disrepair to a point of over fifty percent of the sign's total value, the City Manager or authorized officer may order the structure removed. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7009, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 7456, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 7495, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 8115, 11-8-2016, Ord. No. 8185, 10-10-2017) 
50-104 - GENERAL REGULATIONS: BASIC DESIGN ELEMENTS FOR SIGNS 
A.  Wall Signs and Graphics. Wall signs and graphics are subject to the following general regulations. 
1.  A wall sign shall not extend more than eighteen (18) inches from the wall to which it is attached. 
2.  A wall sign must be parallel to the wall to which it is attached. 
3.  A wall sign may not extend beyond the corner of the wall to which it is attached, except where attached to another wall sign, it may extend to provide for the attachment. 
4.  A wall sign may not extend beyond its building's roof line. 
5.  A wall sign in the CBD District attached to a building on its front property line may encroach upon public right-of-way by no more than eighteen (18) inches. Such a wall sign shall provide minimum clearance of eight (8) feet, six (6) inches. This encroachment is not permitted along state or federal highways in the CBD District. 
6.  For the purpose of calculating permitted sign areas pursuant to this chapter, signs painted on the walls of buildings shall be considered wall signs. 
7.  Where permitted, canopy signs are counted as wall signs when calculating total permitted sign area. 
B.  Projecting Signs and Graphics. Projecting signs and graphics are subject to the following general regulations. 
1.  The maximum projection of any projecting sign shall be as follows: 
(a)  Three (3) feet over public sidewalks less than twelve (12) feet wide; 
(b)  Five (5) feet over public sidewalks twelve (12) feet wide or more, or over private property. 
2.  Within the CBD District, a projecting sign may come within five (5) feet from the vertical plane of the inside curb line. 
3.  Each projecting sign must maintain at least the following vertical clearances: 
(a)  Twelve (12) feet over sidewalks; except that a canopy may reduce its vertical clearance to seven (7) feet, six (6) inches; 
(b)  Fifteen (15) feet outside of parking areas or driveways, but within three (3) feet of such areas; or within fifty (50) feet of the right-of-way lines formed by a street intersection; 
(c)  Fifteen (15) feet over parking lots; 
(d)  Eighteen (18) feet over driveways. 
4.  No projecting sign extending three (3) feet or more from a property line may be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any other projecting sign extending three (3) feet or more from a property line. 
5.  Projecting signs must minimize visible support structure and may not expose guy wires, cables, turnbuckles, angle iron, or other similar external support structure. 
C.  Pole Signs. Pole signs, where permitted, are subject to the following general regulations: 
1.  Each pole sign must maintain at least the following vertical clearances: 
(a)  Eight (8) feet, six (6) inches over sidewalks; 
(b)  Ten (10) feet outside of parking areas or driveways, but within three (3) feet of such areas; or within fifty (50) feet of the right-of-way lines formed by a street intersection. 
(c)  Fourteen (14) feet over parking lots; 
(d)  Eighteen (18) feet over driveways. 
D.  Awning Signs. Awning signs, where permitted are subject to the following regulations: 
1.  The copy area of an awning sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25%) of the total face area of the awning. The combined area of all front-facing awning panels shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the total wall area. 
2.  Awnings shall not extend above the eave or parapet of the building facade and shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet six (6) inches above the sidewalk or grade, whichever is higher. Awnings shall not extend over any area utilized by motor vehicles. 
3.  Awnings may project no more than nine (9) feet from the facade of the wall to which they are mounted. Any extension beyond six (6) feet shall have plans stamped by a licensed architect or professional engineer, certifying the ability of the wall and associated structures to carry all imposed loads. 
E.  Electronic Information Signs. Electronic information signs, where permitted, are subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Electronic information signs shall be set back a minimum of two (2) feet from any right-of-way line and shall not be located within an arc with a seventy-five (75)-foot radius formed by the intersecting right-of-way lines of a corner lot or lots. 
2.  No more than one (1) electronic information sign is permitted per property. 
3.  No electronic information sign shall be programmed in a way that suggests or resembles a traffic control device, such as a traffic signal. 
4.  Electronic information signs shall be programmed in a way that no sign shall flash or blink and the image, message or lighting pattern shall hold for a minimum of two (2) seconds, however, full animation video is allowable provided such video does not flash or blink. 
5.  The surface/face illumination of any sign shall not exceed one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) Nits after dusk or seven thousand five hundred (7,500) Nits during daylight hours. Such illuminated sign shall be equipped with a sensor and/or timer or other device to automatically adjust the day/night light intensity levels in accordance with the standard set herein. 
6.  Electronic information signs shall be deducted from the total sign budget allowed for the premises. 
F.  Numeric Display Signs. Numeric signs, where permitted are subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Numeric signs shall be set back a minimum of two (2) feet from any right-of-way line. 
2.  Numeric signs located within an arc with a seventy-five (75) foot radius formed by the intersecting right-of-way lines of a corner lot or lots shall be no larger than twenty-five (25) square feet in area, and if illuminated, shall not flash or blink. 
3.  All illuminated numeric signs shall not exceed 1,250 nits after dusk or 7,500 nits during daylight hours. 
4.  Numeric signs shall be deducted from the total sign budget allowed for the premises. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 7009, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 7445, 7-22-2008; Ord. No. 7456, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 8115, 11-8-2016) 
50-105 - GENERAL REGULATIONS: OTHER DESIGN ELEMENTS 
A.  Illumination. 
1.  Lighting, when installed, must be positioned in such a manner that light is not directed onto an adjoining property or onto a public street or highway, and in accordance with the Outdoor Lighting provisions of Section 47-108. 
B.  Marquees and Marquee Signs. 
1.  Signs placed on, attached to, or constructed on a marquee are subject to the maximum projection and clearance regulations of projecting signs. 
C.  Permanent Banners. 
1.  A banner sign projecting from a building may not exceed the wall height of the building. 
2.  Maximum projection for any banner is five (5) feet from the building with a minimum clearance of ten (10) feet. 
3.  Flag signs and banner signs count against the sign area permitted a premise. 
D.  Clocks. For the purposes of this chapter, clocks are not considered a sign. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 7009, 12-9-2003) 
50-106 - COMPLIANCE AND AMORTIZATION OF PREMISE IDENTIFICATION SIGNS 
A.  Nonconformance and Amortization of Premise Identification Signs. Where a sign exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title that could not be built under the terms of this title by reason of restrictions on area, use, height, setback, or other characteristics of the sign or its location on the lot, such sign may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  No such sign may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity; however, reasonable repairs and alterations may be permitted. 
2.  Should such a sign be destroyed by any means to an extent of sixty (60) percent or more of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this title. 
3.  Within any zoning district, all premise identification signs or other signage that pertains to the premises on which such sign is located, shall comply fully with the provisions of this Ordinance, unless otherwise provided, within fifteen (15) years after the effective date of this Ordinance. This amortization provision does not apply to outdoor advertising signs, provided that such signs remain in continuous use. Any nonconforming outdoor advertising sign that remains unused for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall forfeit its right to continue as a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7424, 3-11-2008) 
50-107 - GENERAL PERMIT PROCEDURES 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  A sign permit, approved by the Building Official, shall be required before the erection, construction, alteration, placing, or locating of all signs conforming with this title. 
2.  A permit shall not be required for repainting without changing permanent wording, composition, or colors; or nonstructural repairs. 
B.  Plans Submittal. A copy of plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Building Official for each sign regulated by this title. Such plans shall show sufficient details about size of the sign, location and materials to be used and such other data as may be required for the Building Official to determine compliance with this title. When requested by the Building Official, the applicant shall furnish a certification of the structural integrity of the sign and its installation by a registered professional engineer with specialization in structures. 
C.  Appeals. Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Building Official to approve or disapprove a sign permit, as provided by this title, may appeal such decision to the Board of Adjustment as provided by Section 59-108. 
D.  Application Fees. Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by any applicable fees, which shall be established by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002) 
50-108 - METHOD OF MEASUREMENT FOR REGULATORS 
A.  Maximum Permitted Sign Area. Maximum permitted sign area for a premises is set forth as a numerical limit or as a function of the frontage of the premises on a street or private way. For properties with frontage on more than one (1) public street or private street (excluding alleys), the total frontage shall be calculated as the longest frontage plus one-half the length of all additional frontages. 
B.  Sign Area. 
1.  Sign area includes the entire area within the perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the sign, excluding any structure essential for support or service of the sign, or architectural elements of the building. 
2.  The area of double-faced signs is calculated on the largest face only. 
3.  The sign area for ground signs, monument signs, and architectural sign bands is calculated as the area enclosing the extreme limits of the copy only. 
4.  In the case of individual letters mounted to a wall, only the total area of the letters themselves is included within the sign area. 
C.  Height. The height of a sign is measured from the average grade level below the sign to the topmost point of the sign or sign structure. 
D.  Setback. The setback of a sign is measured from the property line to the line projected to the ground plane of the nearest portion of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 7009, 12-9-2003) 
50-109 - PERMITTED SIGN TYPES BY ZONING DISTRICTS 
    Table 50-1 sets forth the sign types permitted within each zoning district of the City of Kearney. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002) 
50-110 - AUXILIARY DESIGN ELEMENTS 
    Table 50-2 sets forth auxiliary design elements permitted within each zoning district of the City of Kearney. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002) 
50-111 - MAXIMUM PERMITTED SIGN AREA 
    Table 50-3 sets forth the maximum sign area permitted within each zoning district of the City of Kearney. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002) 
50-112 - PERMITTED SIGNS BY NUMBERS, DIMENSIONS, AND LOCATION 
    Table 50-4 sets forth the maximum permitted numbers of signs per premises; the maximum permitted dimensions of each sign; and the required setbacks for detached signs. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002) 
50-113 - OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS 
A.  Conformance Required. No billboard sign shall be erected, placed maintained, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered which does not comply with all he regulations established in this section. 
B.  Maintenance. For the purposes of this section, maintenance shall mean the routine repairing, restoring, or replacing of the sign to its constructed condition with the same type of materials used in the original sign structure and face, or to approved upgraded materials. 
C.  Required Maintenance for Nonconforming Signs. 
1.  Cleaning and painting of the structure including supports, faces trim, ladders, catwalks, railings and any other structural features and the immediate area around the sign structure. 
2.  Changes in advertising messages and content including use of a vinyl overlay or wrap. If structural modifications are required to secure the vinyl overlay or wrap, a sign permit is required and said changes must be approved by the City. 
3.  Faces and trim shall be maintained, replaced or repaired as necessary. The same number of faces, or less shall be maintained and the size of any given face shall not be increased. 
4.  Lighting system may be added or replaced on any billboard as long as the lighting complies with Section 47-108 of the Kearney City Code, requiring shielded, sharp cutoff, downcast lighting fixtures. Existing fixtures may be repaired with like equipment. Changes or additions of lighting fixtures shall require an electrical permit and said changes shall be approved by the City. 
5.  Safety features including ladders, catwalks, safety cables and railings may be replaced, repaired or added. Said safety features shall be designed to conform to accepted industry standards. A sign permit shall be required if safety features are added and said changes must be approved by the City. 
D.  Reconstruction and Modification of Existing Nonconforming Outdoor Advertising Signs. No sign shall be reconstructed or modified except as specified in paragraph E below. The following shall constitute a substantial change to a sign and are therefore not considered maintenance or acceptable reconstruction and are herein prohibited: 
1.  Any change in the location of the sign. 
2.  Any increase in the size or dimension or height of the sign. 
3.  The addition of additional face or faces. 
4.  An increase in the number of poles supporting the structure. 
5.  An increase in the height of the poles. 
E.  Modifications to Existing Nonconforming Outdoor Advertising Signs. An existing legal or nonconforming sign may be modified or reconstructed as follows: 
1.  The structural supports may be replaced with like materials or upgraded to steel. 
2.  Any existing sign damaged by any cause, natural or manmade, may be replaced or repaired to original condition, or modified as stated in 1 above, provided there is no increase in size, height, or number of faces. Nonconforming roof-mounted signs that are damaged by any cause in excess of fifty (50) percent of their replacement value shall be permanently removed. 
3.  Message area attachment systems may be changed or updated provided the area of the message surface is not increased. 
4.  A sign required to be moved to a new location because of a local, state or federal project requires approval of the new location by Planning Commission and City Council and the relocated sign must comply with all regulations in force and effect at the time the relocation is approved. 
5.  A replacement billboard sign can be relocated within one hundred fifty (150) feet of its current location. The new sign location must remain within the legally described property of the existing sign. The Chief Building Official or his or her designee may approve the relocation provided the sign is not located any closer to the road right-of-way or abutting property. 
F.  Registration of Existing Legal or Nonconforming Outdoor Advertising Signs. The Owner of every existing legal or nonconforming outdoor advertising sign shall pay an annual occupation tax for each sign face as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. At the time the occupation tax is due, the Owner shall complete the required form confirming the location, number of faces, size of each face, height of the structure, materials description, condition of each sign, and any other related information requested by the City. The Owner shall sign an affidavit stating that the information provided is accurate and that the sign has not been modified in the past twelve (12) months. Any modifications will require a Sign Permit from the Building Services Division. 
G.  Electronic Changeable Message Signs. Electronic Changeable Message Signs, hereinafter known as ECMS, are considered outdoor advertising signs and shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  For each ECMS face erected, a minimum of two (2) existing sign faces must be permanently removed. 
2.  The proposed ECMS must be located where one of the existing structures was removed to meet the 2:1 replacement requirement, or, if at a new location, the ECMS must meet all Code requirements pertaining to outdoor advertising signs and meet the 2:1 replacement requirement. 
3.  No two ECMS structures may have sign facings erected less than five thousand (5,000) feet apart measured from the center of the monopole along a line parallel with the highway. ECMS structures may be located on either side of the highway; however, each sign must only be visible from one direction of travel and must comply with the five thousand (5,000)-foot spacing on each side. 
4.  The ECMS sign faces shall not be more than three hundred (300) square feet in size and shall be no taller than thirty-five (35) feet. 
5.  Each advertisement displayed must remain fixed for at least ten (10) seconds. If there is more than one (1) advertisement per face, then when any advertisement changes, the entire face shall remain fixed for at least ten (10) seconds. 
6.  When an advertisement is changed, it must be accomplished within an interval of two (2) seconds or less. 
7.  Each ECMS must contain a default mechanism that will freeze the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs. 
(Ord. No. 7424, 3-11-2008; Ord. No. 8213, 1-9-2018) 
50-114 - OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS; REGULATIONS FOR NEW INSTALLATIONS 
    Within the total amount of sign area permitted to them, some parcels in the M-1, Limited Industrial District and M-2, General Industrial District may elect to devote a portion of their sign budgets to installation of an outdoor advertising sign, subject to the conditions contained in this section. For installation of new Electronic Changeable Message Signs (ECMS) refer to the regulations provided in Section 50-113 of this Chapter. 
A.  Location. Eligible properties must be located within two hundred (200) feet of the right-of-way line of Interstate 80 or within one hundred (100) feet of the right-of-way line of Highways 30, 44, or 10. 
B.  Impact on Business Identification and Other Signage. Utilization of this provision does not entitle any parcel to additional permitted sign area and the area of the sign counts against the total sign area permitted the parcel. The outdoor advertising sign shall count as a detached sign for the purpose of calculating the total number of permitted detached signs. 
C.  Maximum Size and Height. 
1.  The size of an outdoor advertising sign shall not exceed seven hundred (700) square feet. 
2.  The maximum height of such a sign shall be forty-five (45) feet. 
D.  Separation Factors. 
1.  Where permitted along Interstate 80, outdoor advertising signs shall be separated by one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet from any other outdoor advertising sign of any size and three hundred (300) feet from any other detached sign. 
2.  Where permitted along other settings, outdoor advertising signs shall be separated by one thousand (1,000) feet from any other outdoor advertising sign of any size and three hundred (300) feet from any other detached sign. 
3.  Any such outdoor advertising sign shall be separated by two hundred (200) feet from any property in a residential zoning district, including RR-1, Rural Residential Single-Family District through R-4, Urban Residential Multi-Family District, and RM, Mobile Home Residential District. 
E.  Other Standards. 
1.  New installations of stacked signs or other installations of two (2) signs facing the same direction on a single structure are prohibited. Double-faced, back-to-back signs are permitted, provided that the angle formed by the sign faces does not exceed fifteen (15) degrees. 
2.  Side-by-side signs are not permitted regardless of which direction they face. 
3.  The area around the base of the sign shall be maintained by the sign owner or property owner in clean condition. A radius of ten (10) feet around the base of the sign shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 48. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 7424, 3-11-2008) 
50-115 - SIGN MASTER PLAN FOR LARGE PROJECTS 
    For projects with an overall site area in excess of six (6) acres, an applicant may submit a Sign Master Plan, detailing the size, location, and design of all signs on the site. The Sign Master Plan may adjust the strict application of these standards, but must clarify the exact nature of the adjustments. Such a Sign Master Plan shall be approved by the City Council after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission. This review follows the same process as review of a PD District. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 7424, 3-11-2008) 
Table 50-1: 
Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning Districts 
Sign Types AG RR-1 
RR-2 R-1 
R-2 R-3 
R-M R-4 C-O 
UC C-1 C-2 CBD C-3 BP M-1 M-2 Detached Signs Residential P P P P P P P P N N N N N Premise Identification P P(C) P(C) P(C) P (C) P P P P P P P P Directional P(C) P(C) P(C) P(C) P(C) P P P P P P P P Ground P P(C) P(C) P(C) P P P P P P P P P Pole N N N N N N P P P P N P P Attached Signs Awning N N N N N P P P P P P P P Banner N N N N N P P P P P P P P Building Marker P P P P P P P P P P P P P Canopy N N N N N P P P P P P P P Premise Identification P P(C) P(C) P(C) P P P P P P P P P Incidental P(C) P(C) P(C) P(C) P P P P P P P P P Marquee N N N N N P P P P P P P P Projecting N N N N N P P P P P P P P Roof, Integral N N N N N N N N N N N N N Roof, Above Peak N N N N N N N N N N N N N Wall P P P P P P P P P P P P P Window P P P P P P P P P P P P P Miscellaneous Flag Sign N N N N N N P P P P P P P  
P: Permitted for All Uses 
P(C): Permitted for Civic Uses 
N: Not Permitted 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 7009, 12-9-2003) 
Table 50-2: Auxiliary Sign Elements 
AG RR-1 
RR-2 R-1 
R-2 R-3 
R-M R-4 C-O 
UC C-1 C-2 CBD C-3 BP M-1 M-2 Design Element Illumination Indirect P(C) P(C) P(C) P(C) P P P P P P P P P Direct N N N N N N N N N N N N N Internal P(C) P(C) P(C) P(C) P P P P P P P P P Neon N N N N N P P P P P N P P Flashing N N N N N N N N N N N N N Flame N N N N N N N N N N N N N Bare Bulb N N N N N N N N N N N N N Other Electronic Information N N N N N P P P P P P P P Moving N N N N N N N N N N N N N Rotating N N N N N N N N N N N N N  
P: Permitted for All Uses 
P(C): Permitted for Civic Uses 
N: Not Permitted 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002) 
Table 50-3: 
Permitted Signs by Maximum Permitted Area and District 
    This Maximum Permitted Area for all signs on a premises excluding directional signs, building marker signs, and United States, State, or University flags shall not exceed the lesser of the following: 
Zoning District AG RR-1 
RR-2 R-1 
R-2 
R-3 
R-4 
RM UC 
C-O C-1 
(Note 6) C-2 CBD C-3 BP M-1 
M-2 Square Feet of Signage per Linear Foot of Frontage NA NA NA 0.5 .75 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.0 2.0 Maximum Permitted Sign Area In Square Feet Note 1 Note 2 Note 3 300 
Note 4 300 
Note 5 800 500 800 300 800  
Note 1: Two hundred (200) square feet for civic or commercial uses, two (2) square feet for residential uses, including home occupations. 
Note 2: Fifty (50) square feet for project identification signs or civic uses, two (2) square feet for residential uses, including home occupations. 
Note 3: Thirty-two (32) square feet for civic uses, fifty (50) square feet for project identification signs for multi-family or mobile home developments and for non-residential uses when permitted, two (2) square feet for residential uses, including home occupations. 
Note 4: Maximum limits apply to non-residential premises only. On premises with primary residential use, fifty (50) square feet for project identification signs for multi-family developments, two (2) square feet for residential uses, including home occupations. 
Note 5: One (1) Business Center Identification Sign with a maximum area of one hundred (100) square feet is permitted in addition to the Maximum Total Square Feet established here, subject to the regulations set forth by Table 50-4. 
Note 6: Signage programs in C-1(N) Districts may vary from these requirements, subject to approval of a Planned Development project. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 7009, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 7022, 1-27-2004; Ord. No. 8213, 1-9-2018) 
Table 50-4: 
Permitted Signs by Numbers, Dimensions, and Location 
    Each individual sign shall comply with the regulations for maximum quantity, maximum size, minimum setbacks, and height limits shown in this table: 
Zoning District AG RR-1 
RR-2 
R-1 
R-2 
R-3 
R-4 
RM UC 
C-O C-1 
(Notes 2, 4) C-2 
(Notes 3, 4) CBD 
(Note 4) C-3 
(Notes 3, 4) BP 
(Note 4) M-1 
M-2 
(Notes 3, 4) Detached Signs Number Permitted Per Premise 1 1 NA 1 NA 1 NA NA NA Separation of Signage Per Linear Foot of Street Frontage NA NA 1 per 150 1 1 per 300 NA 1 per 200 1 per 300 1 per 300 Maximum Size (sq. ft.) 100 
Note 4 NA 32 100 200 100 200 150 200 Maximum Height (feet) of Structure Above Ground (Note 5) NA NA NA 45 45 45 45 NA 45 Pole Signs Monument or Ground Signs 15 6 5 15 15 15 15 15 15 Front Yard Setback (feet) 25 5 2 2 2 0 2 2 2 Side Yard Setback (feet) 10 10 2 2 2 0 2 2 2 Attached Signs Maximum Size* (sq. ft.) 100 NA 50 150 NA NA 300 300 300 % of Street Facade NA 15% 20% 20% 20% 25% 20% 25%  
See Table 50-3 for maximum permitted sign areas. 
Note 1: In addition to its total permitted sign area, each premises used for a business center may have one (1) detached center identification sign, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The maximum area for a center identification sign shall be one hundred (100) square feet. 
2.  No center identification sign shall be within three hundred (300) feet of any other center identification sign or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any other detached sign on the same or adjacent premises. 
3.  The sign shall display no more than the name and location of the business center. 
4.  Each sign shall be subject to all other regulations for detached signs or graphics set forth in this Section. 
Note 2: Signage programs in C-1(N) Districts may vary from these requirements, subject to approval of a Planned Development project. 
Note 3: Within the total maximum sign allowance permitted by Table 50-3, properties in the M-1, and M-2 Districts may elect to locate an outdoor advertising sign in excess of three hundred (300) square feet, subject to the conditions set forth in Section 50-114. 
Note 4: One (1) non-illuminated directional sign with a maximum size of twelve (12) square feet is permitted at each major entrance to the development. Such sign shall be a monument or ground sign with a maximum height of four (4) feet. 
Note 5: The maximum permitted height for an Outdoor Advertising Sign; Regulations for New Installations in areas defined by Section 50-114 shall be forty-five (45) feet. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 7009, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 7022, 1-27-2004; Ord. No. 7253, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 7328, 3-13-2007; Ord. No. 7424, 3-11-2008; Ord. No. 8213, 1-9-2018) 
Chapter 52 - SUBDIVISIONS: BASIC CONDITIONS 

52-101 - PURPOSE 
    The purposes of this chapter is to: 
A.  Serve the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City and residents of Kearney and its surrounding jurisdiction. 
B.  Provide for the orderly development and growth of the City by prescribing rules and standards insuring the functional arrangement of streets, public improvements, open spaces, community facilities, and utilities. 
C.  Promote the creation of well-planned and attractive residential, commercial, and industrial developments within the city and its jurisdiction. 
D.  Avoid excessive costs to the taxpayers of Kearney or the residents of the jurisdiction of the City for the provision of public services and utilities, while maintaining high standards for these services. 
E.  Protect the unique environment of the City of Kearney by avoiding environmental damage whenever feasible and appropriate; and by encouraging flexibility in the design of subdivisions. 
F.  Provide the City of Kearney with the ability to grow incrementally through the eventual annexation of new developments. 
52-102 - JURISDICTION AND APPLICABILITY 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all property within the corporate limits of the City of Kearney and its two (2)-mile extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
B.  No owner of real property within the City of Kearney and its jurisdiction may subdivide or plat such property into lots for buildings or any other use, streets, or other forms of dedication for public use without gaining approval pursuant to this Ordinance. In addition, no individual may sell, offer to sell, or construct buildings on any lots or parts of real property that are not subdivided as required by State law or this section. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter apply to all zoning districts. However, specific standards and requirements may be modified for developments in TND, Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay; C-1(N), Neighborhood Center; MU, Mixed Use; or PD-1 and PD-2 Overlay Districts. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-901 
52-103 - INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT, AND SEVERABILITY 
A.  These regulations shall be held to provide the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. If any provision conflicts with any other provision of the Unified Land Development Ordinance, any other Ordinance of the City of Kearney, or any applicable state or federal law, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
B.  Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a previous approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit issued under any local, state, or federal ordinance or statute. 
52-104 - EXEMPTIONS 
    These regulations shall not apply in the following instances: 
A.  The division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels or tracts of more than ten (10) acres and not involving any new streets or easements of access. 
B.  A previously platted lot which may be divided as a minor subdivision with the provisions of this ordinance. 
C.  Land used for adjusting street or railroad right-of-way, a drainage easement or other public utilities subject to local, state or federal regulations, where no new street or easement of access is involved. 
D.  Any transfer of title by operation of eminent domain or court ordered partition or decree. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
52-105 - APPROVALS NECESSARY FOR ACCEPTANCE OF SUBDIVISION PLATS 
    All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in building lots, and the streets, alleys or other portions to be dedicated for public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of the lots adjacent thereto shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for its consideration. The Commission's recommendation shall be submitted to the City Council for its review and action, except that minor subdivisions may be approved upon review by the Chief Building Official and the City Manager or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 7777, 12-11-2012) 
Chapter 53 - SUBDIVISION APPROVALS AND PROCEDURES 

53-101 - PURPOSE 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures for subdivision applications and for review and action on applications by the Planning Commission and the City Council. The procedures are designed to assure adequate review and consideration of subdivision applications, while providing for an orderly and expeditious approval process. The Chapter provides procedures for the approval of two (2) types of subdivisions: Minor Subdivisions and Major Subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
53-102 - MINOR SUBDIVISIONS 
A.  Scope. The Minor Subdivision procedure may be used for dividing one (1) lot into two (2) parts, combining two (2) or more lots (or parts of lots) into one (1) parcel, or a combination thereof. This definition shall apply only once to any subdividing transaction or conveyance involving any specific lot or combination of lots. Transactions or conveyances classified, as minor subdivisions are hereby deemed not to constitute "subdivision development" as defined by Section 19-916 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. The following conditions for a minor subdivision shall apply: 
1.  All required improvements shall have been installed and be available to the resulting parcel. 
2.  No new dedication of public rights-of-way or easement can be involved. 
3.  Minor subdivisions shall comply with the Unified Land Development Ordinance requirements concerning minimum areas and dimensions of lots and blocks. 
4.  A survey of the lot(s) to be subdivided and abutting lots showing all existing structures, building setbacks, and utility easements shall accompany the request for minor subdivision approval. 
B.  Application and Approval Procedure. All applications for Minor Subdivisions shall be submitted to the Development Services Department, on the form provided by that Department. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following: 
1.  Legal description of the property. 
2.  A survey attached to the application showing proposed lots and abutting lots; and all existing structures, fences, and building setbacks on lots. 
3.  A fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall accompany the application. 
4.  Following review of the application, the Chief Building Official will provide his/her recommendation to the City Manager, who will approve or disapprove the application. In the event that the City Manager disapproves the application, the applicant may appeal to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days after receiving the notice of disapproval. 
5.  Following approval of a Minor Subdivision, the subdivider must file the survey and certificate of approval with the appropriate County Register of Deeds. The subdivider shall submit a copy of the recorded document of such filing to the Development Coordinator within ninety (90) days of the date of approval or the document shall be null and void. Consideration will be given to a written request from the subdivider to the Development Services Department to extend the filing date for thirty (30) days. 
6.  The Development Coordinator shall keep a complete and accurate record of all Minor Subdivision approvals. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 7777, 12-11-2012) 
53-103 - MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS 
A.  Applicability. The Major Subdivision procedures apply to all subdivisions, which are not approved or eligible for approval under the Minor Subdivision procedures. The owner or owners of any land, located within the jurisdiction of these regulations, who propose to plat said land into one (1) or more lots, blocks, tracts or parcels, when any parcel is ten (10) acres or less in area, or any owner of any land establishing any street, alley, park or other property intended for public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots, tracts or parcels of land fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, shall cause a preliminary and final plat to be made in regulations, unless exempted under Section 52-104. 
B.  Stages in the Approval Process. 
1.  Before filing an application for preliminary or final plat approval, the applicant shall meet with the Development Review Team (DRT), regarding general requirements and issues relating to the proposed subdivision. 
2.  At the DRT conference for a preliminary plat, the applicant shall submit a concept plan. The concept plan shall include: 
(a)  A location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing and proposed streets and public facilities. 
(b)  A schematic plan illustrating the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features and their relationship to existing and proposed site topography. 
(c)  A conceptual plan demonstrating feasibility to provide required infrastructure known as the Infrastructure Feasibility Plan. 
(d)  Review the policies, procedures and forms required by the City of Kearney for the filing of plats. 
3.  The DRT Staff shall: 
(a)  Review zoning requirements and the Comprehensive Development Plan requirements for the property in question and adjacent properties. 
(b)  Determine the availability and capacity of City improvements. 
(c)  Review setbacks, special right-of-way dedications for arterial, collector and local streets, access points and circulation patterns. 
(d)  Discuss the applicant's request, and consider feasibility of the proposed concept. 
4.  The DRT conference does not require a formal application or payment of a fee. 
C.  Preliminary Plat Application. 
1.  Application Requirements. After the DRT conference, the applicant shall prepare and submit an application for preliminary plat approval. The applicant shall prepare and file three (3) copies of a proposed preliminary plat, one (1) copy reduced to 81/2 by 11 inches, and one (1) full-size copy in portable document format (pdf). The application for preliminary plat approval shall be submitted to the Development Coordinator at least twenty-one (21) calendar days before the Planning Commission meeting at which the application will be considered. The application shall consist of a form established by the Development Services Department; the supporting documents required for Major Subdivisions in Table 53-1; and payment of a filing fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. The plat shall not be accepted until the filing fee has been paid. 
2.  Infrastructure Feasibility Plan (Preliminary): A conceptual plan demonstrating feasibility to provide required infrastructure to serve the subdivision. The plan shall depict the general location of the following utilities: 
(a)  Location of the following lines including widths of proposed easements. 
i)  Proposed lift stations, sanitary sewer lines and manholes. 
ii)  Proposed water mains. 
iii)  Proposed storm sewers. 
iv)  Proposed stormwater management and detention facilities. 
v)  Proposed electric lines including conduit delivering electricity to street lights. 
(b)  Proposed utilities easements. 
(c)  Existing two-foot contour lines from available sources (no field survey required for preliminary information). 
3.  Draft Subdivision Agreement: The preliminary plat application shall include a draft of a Subdivision Agreement prepared by the City following a format established by the City of Kearney. The Subdivision Agreement establishes the mutual responsibilities of City and subdivider, including financing of public improvements; the nature of performance bonds and guarantees that the developer will offer; and the financing arrangements proposed for the subdivision. The Development Review Team may elect to waive this requirement if it finds that such a subdivision agreement is unnecessary, or may elect to delay the Subdivision Agreement to coincide with the Final Plat application. 
4.  Utilities Comment Form. 
(a)  The subdivider will circulate a copy of the preliminary plat attached to the Utilities Comment Form provided by the City to the Utility Contact List provided by the City, and any other applicable providers of public services deemed necessary. The subdivider shall give utilities seven (7) days to respond. At the end of the seven (7) day period, the subdivider shall submit with the application, the Utilities Comment Form(s) received from these agencies to the Development Coordinator. If additional easements are requested, DRT will review the request to determine if the easement(s) is justified and appropriate. DRT will work with the developer to make changes to the plat, if necessary. 
5.  Preliminary Plat Approval Procedure. 
(a)  Following the comment period, the City Planner shall submit a written recommendation for action to the Planning Commission. 
(b)  The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing. 
(c)  Approval of a preliminary plat by the Planning Commission shall be considered an expression of conditional approval to guide the preparation of a final plat. The preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following rights: 
i)  The general terms and conditions under which the plat was approved will not change. 
ii)  The applicant may submit for approval a final plat for the whole or a part of the preliminary plat on or before the expiration date of the preliminary approval. For some subdivisions, the preliminary and final plats may be submitted and approved simultaneously. 
iii)  The preliminary plat approval shall stay in force for an indefinite period of time from the date of approval by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, establish a specific effective period or expiration date for a preliminary plat. 
iv)  If the Planning Commission rejects a preliminary plat, the applicant may submit the plat to the City Council. All records and reports relative to the plat shall be likewise sent to the City Council. The City Council may make such findings and determinations as they deem reasonable and in the best interests of the public. 
D.  Final Plat Application Process. 
1.  Application Requirements: The applicant shall prepare and submit an application for final plat approval. The application for final plat approval shall be submitted to the Development Coordinator at least twenty-one (21) calendar days before the Planning Commission meeting at which the application will be considered. The application shall consist of a form established by the City of Kearney; the supporting documents required for Final Plat Approval of Major Subdivisions in Table 53-1; and payment of a filing fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule. The final plat shall not be accepted for filing until the filing fee has been paid. 
(a)  The Final Plat Application shall include a finalized plan illustrating the proposed layout of streets, lots, blocks and all other information as required on the Final Plat Checklist. 
2.  Infrastructure Feasibility Plan (Final): A detailed plan demonstrating feasibility to provide required infrastructure to serve the subdivision. 
(a)  The plan shall depict the location and any proposed easements for the following utilities: 
i)  Proposed lift stations, sanitary sewer lines and manholes. The plan must show proposed top of curb elevations and proposed sanitary sewer manhole rim and flow line elevations. Septic drain fields shall be shown for rural subdivisions. 
ii)  Proposed water mains and fire hydrants. Well locations shall be shown for rural subdivisions. 
iii)  Proposed storm sewers. Critical existing and proposed flow line elevations shall be shown if requested by City Engineer. 
iv)  Proposed electric service lines including conduit delivering electricity to street lights. Any deviation from requirements must be requested and included in the subdivision agreement. Street lights shall be required as follows: 
1)  All street intersections. 
2)  End of dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs that are longer than two hundred fifty (250) feet in length. 
3)  Significant curves in streets. 
4)  Mid-block on blocks exceeding five hundred (500) feet in length. 
(b)  As requested by DRT staff: 
i)  Proposed stormwater management and detention facilities. 
ii)  Proposed utilities easement. 
(c)  Street grid and proposed utilities overlaid on the proposed contour lines. 
(d)  Proposed street grades. 
3.  Final Subdivision Agreement: The final plat application shall include the final Subdivision Agreement to be executed between the City and the applicant. The terms of this Agreement shall be acted upon along with action on the Final Plat. The Development Review Team may elect to waive this requirement if it finds that such a Subdivision Agreement is unnecessary. 
4.  Dedication Requirement: The "Dedication" on the final plat for a given subdivision shall dedicate the storm water management facilities contained on the proposed land and all appurtenances thereto contained within the boundaries of the subdivision to the use and benefit of all property owners in said subdivision (describe specific lots on final plat); that said owners shall be collectively and proportionally responsible for the ongoing maintenance of said storm water facilities in perpetuity, with such obligations stipulated as part of the Subdivision Agreement for said subdivision; said agreement by reference hereto made a part hereof and filed with the subdivision plat with the Register of Deeds. 
5.  Final Plat Approval Procedure: 
(a)  The DRT Staff and Planning Commission shall review the final plat for consistency with the approved preliminary plat and for compliance with the Unified Land Development Ordinance and other applicable local, state, or federal statutes and regulations. All required easements shall be shown on the final plat prior to final approval. Any additional easements requested and approved by DRT shall be, at a minimum, noted in a written addendum to the application and submitted to the Development Coordinator by 5:00 p.m. on the Thursday prior to Planning Commission. The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing. If the final plat meets all conditions of the ordinance and is substantially consistent with the terms of the preliminary plat approval, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval of the final plat and forward the plat to City Council for their action. The Final Plat presented to the City Council shall be identical to the plat acted upon by the Planning Commission. The final plat, executed by the Developer, must be submitted to the Development Coordinator on mylar or similar film, including any additional easements submitted by addendum, for execution by City Council by 12:00 p.m. the Monday prior to the City Council meeting. A space shall be reserved on the document for the Resolution number, to be completed by the City Clerk. 
(b)  If the Planning Commission finds in its review that the submitted final plat is inconsistent with the preliminary plat, does not comply with the conditions of relevant ordinances and statutes, or requires a waiver of any section of the Unified Land Development Ordinance, it shall hold a public hearing on the final plat. Following such public hearing, the Planning Commission shall transmit its recommendation concerning the inconsistencies on the final plat to the City Council. 
(c)  The City Council shall take final action on the application at a public hearing. The City Council is further empowered to grant waivers of a section of the Unified Land Development Ordinance after a waiver request has received a recommendation from the Planning Commission. 
E.  Filing the Final Plat. 
1.  The passage of a resolution by the City Council accepting the plat shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area shown on the final plat. Upon acceptance of a Final Plat by the City Council and prior to filing the plat with the appropriate County Register of Deeds, all property pins shall be installed by the developer's registered land surveyor. The property pins shall be five-eighths (5/8) inch by twenty-four (24) inch steel rod. 
2.  The subdivider must file the fully executed plat along with all applicable covenants and other documentation within ninety (90) days of City Council's approval of the final plat. The City Council upon written request of the subdivider may grant thirty (30) day extensions for filing of the final plat. 
3.  Filing the final plat shall be with the appropriate County Register of Deeds and the State Survey Record Repository and the applicant must file an executed print on mylar or similar film in the office of the Development Coordinator as satisfactory evidence of such recording before the City shall recognize the plat as being in force. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 7599, 6-8-2010; Ord. No. 7777, 12-11-2012) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-916 and 19-904 
Table 53-1: Application Requirements 
Plat Information Minor Subdivision Major Subdivision Preliminary Final Name, address of developer, owner and firm who prepared the plat. X X X Location map, showing boundary lines with reference to section, township and range lines X X Proposed name of subdivision. X X Identify surrounding property, railroad right-of-way, utility easements, parks, public open space, driveway; city limits, existing subdivisions, and other features within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the subdivision boundary. X Present and proposed zoning. X X X North arrow and bar scale. X X X Signature blocks for Planning Commission Chairman, Mayor and City Clerk. X Appropriate certification blocks.* X Existing monumentation including bearings and distances to reference points or monuments. X X Metes and bounds description, including dimensions, bearings, curve data, tangent length, radii, arcs, chords, and central angles for all centerlines and rights-of-way, and centerline curves on streets. X X Acreage of tract. X X Date of original and all revisions. X X X Dimensioning of setbacks. X X Proposed width and street names. X X New block and lot numbers. X X Proposed arrangement of lots, blocks, lot dimensions, and lot areas in square feet or acreage. X X Dimensions of building setback lines on front and side street. X Survey of lot(s) to be subdivided and abutting lots showing all existing structures, building setbacks, and utility easements. X Existing and proposed width of easements or land reserved for or dedicated to public use, width and name of proposed rights-of-way, easements and pedestrian ways. X X Phasing plan (if applicable). X X Payment of application fees. X X X  
Environmental Information Minor Subdivision Major Subdivision Preliminary Final Property lines within one hundred fifty (150) feet. X All existing water courses, floodplains, wetlands, habitat areas or other environmentally sensitive features within one hundred fifty (150) feet. X Existing rights-of-way and easements within one hundred fifty (150) feet. X Topography at two (2) foot contours including areas up to one hundred fifty (150) feet of the plat boundaries. X Existing site drainage system. X Drainage calculations and percolation tests if needed. X Improvements and Construction Information Infrastructure Feasibility Plan including location of water, sanitary sewer, all underground installations for serving the proposed subdivision including lighting, storm water management and detention. X 
(Concept) X 
(Detail) Road and paving cross-sections. X Subdivider shall contact all utility companies and dedicate easements when needed and submit Utilities Comment Form. X X Certifications and seals from licensed Professional Engineer and/or Registered Land Surveyor, as required by State Statute. X X Improvement financing plans, including sources of funding (private, assessments, public, Sanitary and Improvement Districts, and other sources). X X Draft Subdivision Agreement (if applicable). X Final Subdivision Agreement (if applicable). X Required Number of Copies of Plat Document. 2 3 3 Reduced 81/2 by 11 copy. 1 1 Required Minimum Scale of Plat Documents. 1"=100 feet 1"=200 feet 1"=100 feet Fully executed 18x24 inch submission on Mylar or similar print of Final Plat to appropriate County Register of Deeds and City of Kearney. X Electronic file in the portable document format (pdf) and all sheets shall be converted to pdf at full size of original documents to City of Kearney. X X X  
* The following certificates, which may be combined where appropriate: 
(1)  A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title, or other interest in the land subdivided, and consenting to the preparation and recording of the plat. 
(2)  A certificate signed and acknowledged as above dedicating or reserving all parcels of land shown on the final plat and intended for any public or private use including those parcels which are intended for the exclusive use of the lot owners of the subdivision. 
(3)  A certificate signed by the registered land surveyor responsible for the survey and final map. The signature of the surveyor shall be accompanied by his/her seal. 
(4)  The acknowledgment of a notary public according to the statutory short forms of acknowledgment as prescribed by Section 64-206 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7182, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 7777, 12-11-2012) 
53-104 - VACATIONS 
A.  Application. All requests for vacation shall be submitted to the Development Coordinator, for review and recommendation by the DRT Staff. The DRT Staff will forward the requests for review and approval to the Planning Commission and City Council. A fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be paid with the application. After approval of the vacation request by the City Council, the City will file the vacation ordinance with the appropriate County Register of Deeds. If the City Council does not approve the vacation request, a portion of the application fee, in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), will be refunded to the requester. 
B.  Vacation of Portions of Street Rights-of-Way. Requests may be made for vacating portions of street rights-of-way. Standard vacations will be of equal amounts on both sides of a street for a minimum of a block length corresponding to the petitioner's request and subject to the following standards: 
1.  Rights-of-way in excess of one hundred (100) feet shall be vacated to no less than one hundred (100) feet. 
2.  One hundred (100) foot rights-of-way shall be vacated to no less than eighty (80) feet. 
3.  Eighty (80) foot rights-of-way shall be vacated to no less than sixty-six (66) feet. 
4.  Rights-of-way of sixty-six (66) feet or less shall not be vacated to a narrower width. 
C.  Petition Content. The applicant's petition shall contain a written request giving the legal description of property abutting the portion of right-of-way for which the petition is filed. Such application shall contain a statement of ownership with mailing address for abutting property. The request shall also include a plat or survey showing the width of the street, the portion of the street to be vacated and abutting property with legal description. 
D.  Vacation Action. Should the DRT and the Planning Commission decide the request is in the best public interest and recommend approval, the following policy shall apply: 
1.  The Planning Commission will recommend to the City Council that the petition be approved and that the vacated right-of-way revert to abutting property owners on both sides of street for entire length of block in accordance with Section 16-611 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. 
E.  Purpose. 
1.  Assure even vacation on both sides of the street for the entire block, keeping the paved portion of the street (generally) in the center of the right-of-way. 
2.  Assure that the vacated street right-of-way reverts to abutting property owners. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 7777, 12-11-2012) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-611 
53-105 - VACATION OF STREET (NOT VACATED AS A PORTION OF A PLAT VACATION 
    Applicant shall submit a petition and a survey showing all portions of the street requested for vacation and abutting property with legal descriptions. Such application shall contain a statement of ownership with mailing address of all lands abutting those portions of street. 
A.  A street may be vacated and remain the property of the City only if the City owns both sides of the street. 
B.  The City may require that an easement be granted or maintained as a part of the vacation ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
53-106 - ALLEY VACATION 
    An alley may be vacated with ownership reverting to the owners of the adjacent real estate, one-half (1/2) of the alley to owner on each side. However, when an alley is taken wholly from one (1) or more lots, its vacation shall revert the ownership to the abutting property and become part of that property. When a portion of an alley is vacated only one (1) side of its center, the title to the property shall vest in the owner of the abutting property and become part of that property. 
53-107 - VACATION OF SUBDIVISION PLATS OR PORTIONS OF SUBDIVISION PLATS 
    An existing plat or portion of an existing plat must be vacated by ordinance prior to replatting, after hearings by the Planning Commission and City Council upon petition by the owners of such lands. 
A.  The ordinance granting the vacation shall specify if any public highways, streets, alleys or other public grounds are to be retained by the City. If the City does not retain any such lands, ownership shall revert to abutting lot owners. 
B.  Any vacation approved shall, at the owner's expense, be certified to the appropriate County Register of Deeds and be so recorded. The Register of Deeds shall then note such vacation on the plat by writing in plain, legible letters. Such notation shall also contain a reference to the volume and page in which the ordinance of vacation is recorded. The owners of the lands vacated shall cause the same to be replatted in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
C.  Where a plat or portion of a plat is vacated where water, sewer and paving are already installed, it shall be the responsibility of the petitioner to provide water and sewer to any newly created lots in the manner prescribed by the City's Utilities Department. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-917 
53-108 - EASEMENT RELOCATION FOR PUBLIC UTILITIES 
    Easement vacation and rededication require approval by the Planning Commission and City Council. The applicant shall submit for DRT Staff review and action, a signed petition, a utility release indicating all public utility companies have no objection to vacation of an existing public utility easement, and a survey including legal description showing the public utility easement to be vacated as well as the location and legal description of any newly dedicated utility easement. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 7777, 12-11-2012) 
Chapter 54 - SUBDIVISION DESIGN CRITERIA AND GENERAL STANDARDS 

54-101 - PURPOSE 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to provide flexible design alternatives in order to assure that subdivisions in the Kearney area create functional and attractive environments, minimize adverse effects, become assets to the City's urban and natural setting, and adapt to their specific situation. This Chapter defines specific types of subdivisions that have varying design characteristics, applicable to various settings within the City of Kearney and jurisdiction. It outlines specific design criteria that should be incorporated into the concepts of various types of subdivisions. 
54-102 - CITY OF KEARNEY SUBDIVISION DESIGN MANUAL 
    The City Engineer shall maintain the City of Kearney Subdivision Design Manual, setting forth the detailed standards for the design and construction of public improvements within subdivisions. All public improvements shall be constructed according to these standards. The Director of Public Works, Director of Utilities, and City Engineer shall conduct an annual review and update of the standards contained within the Subdivision Design Manual. 
54-103 - SITE DESIGN AND CONSTRAINTS 
A.  Consideration of Plans. The design of developments shall consider all existing local and regional plans for Kearney and its jurisdiction. These include the Comprehensive Development Plan for the City of Kearney. 
B.  Infrastructure Feasibility Plan required in accordance with Section 53-103.D.2. 
C.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Storm Water Permit. 
1.  All construction projects located within the City of Kearney's jurisdictional limits will comply with all federal, state and local storm water pollution prevention regulations. If the development meets or exceeds one (1) acre or is less than one (1) acre but part of a large common plan of development the owner shall obtain coverage under the general National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for storm water discharge. Application must be made for an authorization to discharge by submitting a Notice of Intent (NOI) using form CSW-NOI to the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (NDEQ). A copy of the general permit is available at the office of the City Engineer. For all development exceeding one (1) acre of disturbed area the subdivider shall comply with the terms and conditions of the general permit. A copy of the NOI shall be submitted to the City Engineer prior to the beginning of any construction activities. 
2.  All development under one (1) acre in size, commonly single family and small commercial projects, must apply and meet the requirements of the City of Kearney Codes or Ordinances pertaining to the building phase of development. 
D.  Reference to Public Works Stormwater Ordinance. 
1.  All construction projects must comply with requirements of Chapter 9, Article 16 of the Kearney City Code. 
E.  Preservation of Natural Features and Drainage Patterns. 
1.  To the maximum extent possible, development shall be located to preserve natural features of the site, to avoid areas of environmental sensitivity, and to minimize negative impact and alteration of natural features and drainage patterns. 
2.  The subdivider shall give maximum consideration to the preservation of the following areas as open space, to the extent consistent with reasonable utilization of land: 
(a)  Wetlands and other unique environmental areas, as defined in Section 404, Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 and delineated on wetlands maps prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Construction and fill activity shall be prohibited on wetlands in excess of one (1) acre in size. Development and fill upon wetlands smaller than one (1) acre in size should be avoided whenever possible, but regulated by permit authority of applicable state and federal agencies. 
(b)  Significant stands or mature specimens of trees shall be designated by required tree surveys. 
i)  Non-Residential and Attached Residential: No tree taller than twenty (20) feet or larger than four (4) inches in diameter (measured six (6) inches above the ground) shall be removed except when approved by the City Planner or his/her designee. Trees removed subject to City approval shall be replaced as noted in Table 54-1. The owner of a site with natural landscaping that is unhealthful (i.e. spaced too closely) may be permitted to plant replacement trees in the parkway or elsewhere in the City, if approved by the City Planner. 
Table 54-1: Tree Replacement Schedule 
Diameter of Removed Tree Number of Replacement Trees 4" to 12" 2 trees at 2" or 1 tree at 4" 13" to 25" 4 trees at 2" or 2 trees at 4" 26" or Greater 6 trees at 2" or 3 trees at 4"  
ii)  Single-Family Residential: Placement of the building must avoid trees taller than twenty (20) feet or larger than four (4) inches in diameter, measured six (6) inches above the ground. Any such tree removed or damaged shall be replaced by a species compatible with existing trees, on a one-to-one basis. The number of replacement trees will be limited by what can be reasonably accommodated within the available lot area. 
(c)  Flood plain lands, other than areas that have already experienced substantial development. 
(d)  Slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%) as measured over a ten (10) foot interval. Development on slopes over fifteen percent (15%) may be permitted only if an erosion and slope stabilization plan is submitted and approved with the development and if appropriate measures are taken in compliance with this approved plan. The City may, at its discretion, require the review and certification of such a plan by a licensed professional engineer. 
(e)  Habitats of endangered species. Development shall avoid fill or disturbance of habitat sites as identified on federal or state lists administered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service of the U.S. Department of the Interior, and applicable state environmental regulatory agencies. Developers are encouraged to preserve habitat areas as a connected open space consistent with the parks and greenways system designated in the Kearney Comprehensive Development Plan. 
F.  General Guidelines for Subdivision Layout. Subdivisions shall be designed to comply with the following overall performance objectives: 
1.  Avoidance of adverse effects on ground water and aquifer recharge. 
2.  Reduction and minimizing of cut and fill. 
3.  Avoidance or reduction of unnecessary impervious surfaces. 
4.  Prevention of flooding and encroachment of water onto other properties. 
5.  Provision of adequate access to lots, including alternative routes to lots and sites within the subdivision and minimizing of cul-de-sacs over six hundred (600) feet. 
6.  Mitigation of negative environmental effects on surrounding properties, including effects of shadow, noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities. 
7.  Respect for the urban character and traditional layout of Kearney, including providing continuity to established street and community facility networks; establishing linkages and connections between new development and existing parts of the City; and preserving historically and architecturally significant sites and buildings, determined as those sites or districts either listed on or determined to be eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places, as determined by the State Historic Preservation Officer. 
8.  Dedication of arterial, collector, and key local streets on the general alignments specified in the Comprehensive Development Plan. 
G.  Site Design Objectives and Approval. The Planning Commission and City Council shall take the above Site Design objectives into account during their review and approval of subdivision applications. 
(Ord. No. 7777, 12-11-2012) 
54-104 - SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT DESIGN CATEGORIES AND RULES 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish special design criteria for various types of subdivisions and developments. These categories reflect various policy contexts in the Kearney jurisdiction. 
B.  Subdivision and Development Design Categories. Subdivision and development categories, policy implications, contexts, and special application and regulatory requirements are set forth in Table 54-2. 
Table 54-2: 
Development Types and Policy Requirements 
Subdivision or Development Type Desirable Context Typical Zoning Characteristics Submission 
Requirements Conventional Rural Areas in the ETJ that will develop to low densities and unlikely to be annexed or receive urban services. 
Areas with relatively little environmental sensitivity. RR-1 Rural standards, including service by well and septic or other individual wastewater system. 
Gravel street surface, although streets may be hard-surfaced. 
Surface drainage Normal submission requirements outlined in Table 53-1. Conservation Rural Areas in the ETJ that will develop to low densities and unlikely to be annexed or receive urban services, but include significant environmental resources and constraints. RR-1 or RR-2 with C Overlay Rural standards, including service by well and septic or other individual wastewater system. May be designed to accommodate community wastewater systems. 
Gravel street surface, although streets may be hard-surfaced. 
Surface drainage. 
Significant reservations of open space, conserving environmentally sensitive areas. Normal submission requirements outlined in Table 53-1. 
Special submission requirements and demonstration of design techniques, set forth in Section 40-108. Urban Edge Areas relatively near to city limits or significant urban development, but within the Wood River watershed, or otherwise unlikely to receive short-term urban services. 
Areas which are generally within Kearney's long-term growth area, in which premature or very low density development could obstruct sound community development. AG 
RR-1 with or without C Overlay 
RR-2 Intermediate standards including hard-surfaced streets and community wastewater systems. Septic systems should generally be avoided in these areas. 
If septics must be used, community design should permit transition to full urban services, including increasing residential density if required for financial feasibility. 
Development may use conservation design techniques. Normal submission requirements outlined in Table 53-1. 
Design for future connections to urban services, including possible evolution to urban densities if septics are used. 
Subdivision agreement committing to non-opposition of eventual annexation and assessment for city services. 
In conservation settings, special submission requirements and demonstration of design techniques, set forth in Section 40-108. 
Demonstration of ultimate development of the site to provide adequate numbers of lots to provide for economically feasible extension of urban services. Conventional Urban Areas that are feasibly provided with City services. These areas are likely to be annexed if located outside the corporate limits. R-1 and higher Urban standards, including City water and sewer. 
May consider alternative storm water management mechanisms, including surface drainage and retention/detention. 
May include non-residential subdivisions. Normal submission requirements outlined in Table 53-1. Conservation Urban Areas that are feasibly provided with City services. but include significant environmental resources and constraints. Examples are sites in the Platte Corridor specific plan areas or in hills adjacent to development in the north or west part of the City. R-1 and higher with C Overlay Urban standards including city water and sewer. 
May use storm drainage alternatives, including retention/detention or managed wetlands. 
Significant reservations of open space, conserving environmentally sensitive areas. Normal submission requirements outlined in Table 53-1. 
Special submission requirements and demonstration of design techniques, set forth in Section 40-108. Traditional Neighborhood Developments Areas within the City limits or to be annexed where innovative planning following TND principles is appropriate. R-1 and higher districts with TND Overlay Urban standards including City water and sewer. 
Narrower streets and modified street system design from conventional development. 
Small lots, closer spacing of houses, reduced setbacks, and mixing of uses. Normal submission requirements outlined in Table 53-1. 
PD-1 application requirements with preliminary platting. Individual parts of project may subsequently use PD-2 zoning. Planned Development In-city areas that require special flexibility, including modifications of normal use and setback standards. 
Large projects with substantial urban impacts. 
Projects which may develop over a long period of time following a master plan. 
Planned developments should not be used to micro-design small developments. Standards in the Land Development Ordinance should be used to assure high quality development on small projects. 
PD-1 subdivisions generally apply projects that will develop over a period of time according to an adopted master plan. 
PD-2 subdivisions apply to multi-building site developments where architecture is determined, such as large apartment complexes or commercial centers. Any district with PD-1 or PD-2 Overlay, depending on appropriateness Urban standards, including City water and sewer. 
May include mixed uses and master planned development that modifies normal zoning standards. Submission requirements for PD-1 or PD-2 districts are set forth in Chapter 38. A PD-1 application, with proper documentation, may satisfy preliminary plat requirements.  
Chapter 55 - CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN 

55-101 - PURPOSE 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to assure the development of functional and safe circulation patterns within new subdivisions, in order to encourage economical and effective movement of motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians; provide access for public safety vehicles; and encourage the development of circulation systems that enhance the quality of life within new and existing neighborhoods in the City of Kearney and its planning jurisdiction. 
55-102 - GENERAL STANDARDS 
    The design of circulation systems should conform to the following general standards and requirements: 
A.  Roadway System Design. 
1.  The road system shall be designed to permit safe and orderly movement of traffic, to meet, but not exceed, needs of the present and future served population; to be simple and logical; to respect natural features, topography, and landscape, and to present an attractive streetscape. 
2.  The system shall conform with the City's Comprehensive Development Plan. For streets not shown on the Comprehensive Development Plan, the arrangement of streets shall provide for the logical extension of existing streets. 
3.  The street network of a subdivision should provide for logical, continuous extensions of streets to subsequent later developments. Such extensions shall make provision when necessary with a temporary turnaround with a radius of at least fifty (50) feet. 
4.  The system shall provide adequate traffic flow through a subdivision and provide at least two (2) routes from each lot within the subdivision to the rest of the City, except as explicitly permitted by the approving authorities. Additionally, the system should be designed to discourage through traffic from using local streets. 
5.  The system should provide good internal street network connectivity. Internal connectivity shall be measured by a Connectivity Index, calculated as: 
CI = L/N 
where 
N = the number of nodes (including intersections and cul-de-sac heads ) in a subdivision and 
L = the number of street links defined by those nodes. A desirable target for street connectivity is an index of 1.30 to 1.40. 
B.  Pedestrian and Bicycle Systems. 
1.  A continuous pedestrian system shall be provided within each non-industrial subdivision, designed to conduct pedestrians between every point in the subdivision in a safe manner. 
2.  In conventional subdivisions, the pedestrian system will ordinarily be provided by sidewalks placed parallel to and on both sides of each street, with exceptions permitted to preserve natural features, create visual interest, or maintain greenways and pedestrian ways proposed in the Kearney Comprehensive Development Plan. 
3.  In innovative developments, the pedestrian system may be an independent network diverging from streets but providing continuous pedestrian access between all points. 
4.  All aspects of the pedestrian system, including sidewalks and intersection crossings, must be designed to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
5.  Bikeways or recreational trails shall be required only if specifically indicated by the Comprehensive Development Plan. Any land dedicated for trail development shall be credited toward the satisfaction of pedestrian system and open space standards set forth by this ordinance. 
55-103 - STREET HIERARCHY AND DESIGN 
A.  Characteristics of the Hierarchy. 
1.  Streets shall be classified according to a street hierarchy with design tailored to function. 
2.  The street hierarchy shall be defined by road function and projected average daily traffic (ADT), as calculated by trip generation rates prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers or other generally accepted standards. 
3.  Each residential street shall be classified and designed to meet appropriate standards for its entire length. 
4.  The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the approving agencies that the distribution of traffic created by the subdivision will not exceed the design capacity of the proposed street system and its individual segments. 
5.  The categories, functions, and projected traffic loads of the street hierarchy are set forth in Table 55-1. 
B.  Cartway Width. 
1.  Cartway width for each street classification is determined by parking and curbing requirements based on form or intensity of adjacent development. 
2.  To promote economical development of streets, minimum cartway width should generally be used. Minimum cartway widths are set forth in Table 55-2. 
C.  Curbs, Gutters, and Shoulders. 
1.  Curbing shall be required for the purposes of safety, drainage, and protection of the pavement edge, as set forth in Table 55-3. 
2.  Requirements for curbs vary according to street function and the nature of adjacent development. Adjacent development is defined as urban or rural as follows: 
(a)  Rural: Residential or predominately agricultural land use where average lot frontage exceeds two hundred (200) feet, generally within an RR-1, Rural Residential (Rural Standards) District. 
(b)  Intermediate: Residential: Residential land use where average lot frontage may range from one hundred fifty (150) to two hundred fifty (250) feet within areas in the City's growth path, but unlikely to receive short-term urban services. 
(c)  Urban: Residential land use where average lot frontage is less than or equal to one hundred (150) feet; or adjacent land uses include commercial, office, industrial, or civic use types. 
3.  Where curbing is not required, edge definition and stabilization shall be provided. 
4.  Where curbing is required, shoulders and drainage swales may be used only if soils or topography make the provision of shoulders preferable to curbs; or where the character of an area is preserved by the use of shoulders and drainage swales. 
5.  Shoulders, when developed, shall be at least eight (8) feet in width on each side for all streets; and located within the right-of-way. Swale width is site-specific. Shoulders shall consist of stabilized turf or other acceptable material. 
6.  All curbs shall provide ramps for accessibility by handicapped people consistent with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
7.  Curb construction shall follow standards established by the City of Kearney. 
D.  Sidewalks. 
1.  Sidewalk requirements are determined by road classification and intensity of development, as set forth in Table 55-3. 
2.  Where sidewalks are not otherwise required by Table 55-3, the City Council may require their installation if necessary to provide access to generators of pedestrian traffic or major community features; to continue a walk on an adjacent street; to link parts of the City; or to accommodate future development. 
3.  In conventional development, sidewalks shall be placed generally parallel to streets within the right-of-way. Exceptions are possible to preserve important natural features or to accommodate topography or vegetation; when applicant shows an alternative for a safe and convenient pedestrian system; or in creative subdivisions. 
4.  In commercial areas, sidewalks may abut curb provided they are a minimum of five (5) feet wide. In industrial areas, sidewalks are not mandatory but may be ordered in by the City Council. 
5.  Pedestrian rights-of-way at least fifteen (15) feet in width may be required through the center of blocks over six hundred (600) feet in length if deemed necessary by the approving authorities to provide access to schools or community facilities; or to maintain a continuous pedestrian network within and between subdivisions and districts of the City of Kearney and its jurisdiction. Such rights-of-way shall be dedicated to the public in the same manner as streets. 
6.  Sidewalks shall provide a clear path of at least four (4) foot in width, free of any obstructions. 
7.  All sidewalks shall be constructed according to current standards in use by the City of Kearney. Sidewalks shall be of concrete construction four (4) inches thick except at points of vehicular crossing where they shall be six (6) inches thick and no less than a minimum of six (6) sack mix. 
8.  All sidewalks, crossings, and other segments of a continuous pedestrian system must comply with standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
E.  Bikeways and Recreational Trails. 
1.  Bikeways and recreational trails shall be required in subdivisions only when specified as part of the Comprehensive Development Plan. 
2.  All off-street recreational trails shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width for two-way traffic and comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. Surfacing of trails shall be acceptable to the City of Kearney. Gradients for bikeways and recreational trails should not exceed five percent (5%), except for short distances. 
3.  Recreational trails may satisfy part of the requirements of this ordinance for sidewalks or open space. 
4.  All residential streets shall utilize bicycle safe drainage grates at storm sewer inlets. 
F.  Alleys. It is the general policy of the City of Kearney to discourage the use of alleys outside of Planned Developments or Traditional Neighborhood Developments. When permitted in such projects, alleys shall be paved and shall have a width of not less than eighteen (18) feet. Alleys shall not be used for parking. 
G.  Right-of-Way. 
1.  Measurement: The right-of-way of a street shall be measured from lot line to lot line, and shall be wide enough to contain the cartway, curbs or shoulder, sidewalks and sidewalk setbacks, other necessary graded areas, and utilities. 
2.  Any right-of-way that continues an existing street shall be no less than that of existing street. 
3.  The requirements for rights-of-way for functional categories of roads is set forth in Table 55-3. 
4.  Dedications: Dedications of right-of-way for collector, subcollector, community, or arterial streets shall be made consistent with the Comprehensive Development Plan. 
H.  Street Design Standards. 
1.  Pavement. 
(a)  All streets shall be paved to current standards utilized in the City of Kearney except: 
(1)  Local streets in rural subdivisions. Rural subdivisions may utilize a gravel or crushed rock surface of sufficient thickness and with an adequate base to provide a durable surface. This permission is subject to submission of a petition by the platting owners binding themselves and all succeeding property owners to agree that all paving would be completed by a special assessment project if the subdivision were annexed by the City. Such petition shall waive any required resolution of necessity, any applicable limitations of the amount which could be assessed against subdivision property owners including intersection costs, and other costs normally paid by the City in special assessment projects. 
(2)  Local streets in intermediate subdivisions. Intermediate subdivisions may utilize forty-five (45) inch P.C.C.P. non-reinforced paving or five (5) inch hot mix asphaltic paving. 
(3)  Courts or lanes, which may utilize six (6) inch concrete, provided that such courts or lanes remain in private or private cooperative ownership. 
(b)  Street pavement thickness shall relate to the role of the street in the hierarchy, subgrade conditions, and pavement type. 
2.  Continuity of Arterial or Collector Streets. No subdivision shall prevent the extension of arterial or collector streets through and beyond the subdivision. The subdivider may plan and design collector streets not designated in the Comprehensive Development Plan subject to the approval of the City Council. 
3.  Cul-de-sacs. 
(a)  Cul-de-sac streets designed to have one (1) end permanently closed generally should not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length and shall be designed so that vision from entrance to end is not restricted. A longer length is permissible within conservation developments or in the case of unconventional developments, such as golf course subdivisions. 
(b)  The closed end of a cul-de-sac within a conventional subdivision shall have a turnaround with a street property line diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet in residential subdivisions. This diameter may be increased by the Planning Commission if deemed necessary in the case of a commercial or industrial subdivision. In very low density settings, the Planning Commission may allow the use of hammerhead designs or other non-standard designs. 
4.  Street Grades. Maximum permitted street grades are set forth in Table 55-2. In typical circumstances, the minimum permitted street gradient shall be 1.0%. In exceptional circumstances, the City Engineer may permit street gradients of less than 1.0%; however, under no circumstances may the gradient be less than 0.4%. 
5.  Street Intersections. 
(a)  Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as possible, unless limited by topography, existing street alignments, or other clearly defined constraints. 
(b)  In most cases, no more than two (2) streets should intersect at a single intersection. Exceptions may be made within TND, Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District or Planned Developments. 
(c)  Local streets shall minimize intersections with major arterials. 
(d)  New intersections along one (1) side of an existing or proposed street shall, if possible, align with intersections on the other side of the street. Offsets between adjacent intersections shall measure at least one hundred fifty (150) feet between centerlines. The use of T-intersections is encouraged on local streets within the interior of a subdivision. 
(e)  Intersection design standards are set forth in Table 55-2. 
6.  Block Size. 
(a)  The length, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be suited to the proposed land use and design of the proposed subdivision. Blocks within urban subdivisions shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length, unless necessitated by exceptional topography or other demonstrable constraints. Blocks within rural subdivisions shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet. 
7.  Specific design standards established by the City of Kearney's Subdivision Design Manual. 
8.  Other design standards shall be as set forth in Table 55-4. 
55-104 - LIGHTING AND WIRING 
A.  Underground Wiring. 
1.  All electric, telephone, television, cable TV, and other communication lines shall be provided by underground wiring within easements or public right-of-way, except where, in the opinion of the approving authorities, such location is not feasible. Poles for permitted overhead lines shall be placed in rear lot line easements; or in other locations designed to lessen their visual impact. 
2.  New lots adjacent to existing overhead service may utilize that service; however, new local service connections shall be underground. 
3.  Year-round screening of any above ground utility apparatus is required. Screening shall be consistent with the Landscape and Screening Standards set forth in Chapter 48. 
Table 55-1: Street Hierarchy 
Residential 
Street Type Function Guideline 
Maximum 
ADT Lane or Court Street providing private access to no more than twelve housing units. Private streets are permitted only in Planned Developments. 120-150 Local Loop A dedicated local street that terminates with two points of access to higher order streets and connects to no other streets along its length. The maximum length of a Local Loop is 1,320 feet. 120-500 Local Provides frontage to lots and carries traffic with origin or destination on street itself. Carries least traffic at lowest speed. East-west orientation provides best solar access. Local residential streets usually do not interconnect with adjoining neighborhoods or subdivisions. 250-1,000 Collector Conducts and distributes traffic between local streets and major streets in the community. Carries larger volume of traffic. Residential collectors interconnect and provide through access between residential neighborhoods. Collector streets should preserve one through traffic lane in each direction, without encroachment by parking. Collectors may be included in the City's Surface Transportation Program system for federal aid. 1,000-2,500 Frontage Road A street that generally runs parallel to a controlled access arterial and provides access to individual properties along its length. 1,000-2,500 Minor Arterials Provides community wide access between residential neighborhoods and to other activity centers in Kearney, including downtown and major commercial facilities. Direct access may be provided to other arterial streets. Parking should generally be prohibited on other arterials. Other arterials should be excluded from residential areas. These streets are part of the Surface Transportation Program system for federal aid. 2,500-7,500 Major Arterials Inter-regional road in the street hierarchy. Conveys traffic between activity centers, often at high speeds and with limited access. Should be excluded from residential areas. These streets are part of the Surface Transportation Program system for federal aid. 7,500+  
Table 55-2: 
Cartway Width, Grade, and Intersection Standards 
Residential Street Type Moving Lanes Maximum Grade Cartway Width Minimum Curb Radii Lane or Court (Private) Two 11-foot 10% (5%*) 25 feet 20 feet (Note 1) Local Loop Two 11-foot 10% (5%*) 28 feet 25 feet (Note 1) Cul-de-sac Two 11-foot 10% (5%*) 36 feet 25 feet (Note 1) Urban Local Two 11-foot 10% (5%*) 36 feet 25 feet (Note 1) TND or PD Local Two 10-foot 10% 28 feet 25 feet (Note 1) Urban Edge Local Two 12-foot 10% 28 feet 25 feet (Note 1) Rural Local Two 12-foot 10% 28 feet 25 feet (Note 1) Collector Two 12-foot 8% (5%*) 36 feet 35 feet (Note 1) Frontage Two 12-foot 8% (5%*) 30 feet 25 feet (Note 1) Arterials Note 2 6% Note 2 Note 2  
* Denotes Maximum Street Grade Within Fifty (50) Feet of an Intersection 
Note 1: Intersections shall be rounded at the curb line, with the street having the highest radius requirement as shown in Table 55-2 determining the minimum standard for all curb lines. 
Note 2: Arterial street width, grade, and curb radii are determined by state standards and the designation of individual street or roadway segments. 
Table 55-3: 
Curb, Sidewalks and Right-of-way Requirements 
Street Type Cartway Width Curb/Shoulder Sidewalk 
(Note 2) Total 
ROW Private Lane or Court 25 feet Not Required Required 50 feet Local Loop 28 feet Required Required 50 feet Cul-de-sac 36 feet Required Required 60 feet at approach100 feet diameter Local Rural 28 feet Not Required Not Required 66 feet Urban Edge 36 feet Curb One side 60 feet Urban 36 feet Curb Both sides 60 feet TND or PD 28 feet Curb Both sides 60 feet Community Boulevard (divided) 18 feet, 18 foot median Project specific Both sides 85 feet Community Boulevard (undivided) 36 feet Project specific Both sides 66 feet Collector Rural 25 feet Not Required Not Required 66 feet Urban 36 feet Curb Both Sides 70 feet* Frontage 30 feet Curb One side 40 feet Arterials Urban and Rural 36-48 feet 
(Note 1) Note 1 Note 1 66-80 feet minimum  
* Right-of-way widths for these classes of street may be modified within Traditional Neighborhood Developments, Planned Developments, or Conservation Subdivisions. 
Notes to Table 55-3. 
Note 1: Arterial street width, grade, and curb radii are determined by state standards and the designation of individual street or roadway segments. 
Note 2: The inner edge of the sidewalk is normally located one (1) foot off the property pin. Sidewalks may meander and diverge from this distance but should at no point be located closer than four (4) feet from the inside of the curb or edge of pavement. 
Note 3: Required sidewalks in Industrial zoning districts are not mandatory but the City Council may order in sidewalks in any zoning districts. 
Table 55-4: 
Street Design Requirements 
Street Type Minimum radius of horizontal curves Minimum sight distance on vertical curves Maximum Slope PCC Pavement Thickness Lane or Court 150 feet 150 feet 10% 6 inches Local Loop 150 feet 150 feet 10% 6 inches Local Urban 200 feet 150 feet 10% 6 inches Urban Edge 200 feet 150 feet 10% 6 inches Rural 200 feet 150 feet 10% 6 inches or gravel TND/PD 150 feet 150 feet 10% 6 inches Collector 300 feet 250 feet 8% 8 inches Frontage 300 feet 250 feet 8% 8 inches Arterials 400 feet 350 feet 8% 8 inches or determined by road design  
Chapter 56 - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE 

56-101 - PURPOSE 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to assure that all subdivisions developed in the City of Kearney, and its jurisdiction, are adequately furnished with necessary public services. These services include adequate water, wastewater management, and storm water drainage utilities; and park and open space resources. 
56-102 - WATER 
A.  Connection. 
1.  All installations shall be properly connected to an approved and functioning community water system, constructed in conformance with the applicable design standards of the City. 
2.  All residential subdivisions inside of the corporate limits of Kearney shall be connected to an existing public water supply system if such a system is available within three (300) feet of the subdivision. 
3.  Developments with more than fifteen (15) units and located within 0.5 mile of an existing public water system must provide adequate justification as to why they are unable to connect to such a system. For developments with more than fifteen (15) units and located more than 0.5 mile from a public water supply, the water supply strategy shall be considered by the approving authorities on a case-by-case basis. 
4.  In a pre-existing subdivision that is served by well and/or septic systems that would otherwise require connection under the provisions of this Chapter, the Board of Adjustment may grant permission to build on previously undeveloped lots of record, subject to compliance with Title 124 of the Nebraska Administrative Code, satisfactory percolation tests reviewed by the City Engineer, and other applicable requirements. 
5.  All proposals for new water supplies, extensions, or main installation shall be approved by the City of Kearney. 
B.  Capacity. 
1.  The water supply system shall be adequate to handle the necessary flow, based on complete development of the subdivision. 
2.  The demand rates for all uses, including emergency fire demand, shall be included in the computation of total water demand. 
3.  Fire protection shall be furnished for any development connected to the municipal water system. Computation of minimum fire flows shall be based on calculations of the American Insurance Association and National Board of Fire Underwriters. 
4.  Hydrants spaced for necessary fire flow and provided with adequate means of drainage as approved by the City Engineer and Fire Chief. All mains serving hydrants shall be at least eight (8) inches in diameter, should be looping mains, and should have appropriate state approvals. All fire hydrant leads shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter. 
5.  Installation of water systems shall conform to current design standards in use within the City of Kearney, as set forth by the Subdivision Design Manual. 
6.  A certification from a registered professional engineer shall be filed with the City of Kearney certifying that the water supply system of the subdivision is designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Section; and all applicable standards of the State of Nebraska. This certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of "as-built" system plans. The subdivision's engineer shall furnish five (5) sets of "as-built" drawings and one (1) electronic file compatible with the current version of AutoCad. 
7.  All state requirements shall be met and approvals from the Department of Health and Human Services Regulations and Licensure Division shall be obtained for all water systems. 
C.  Private or Community Well Systems. If the development does not meet the required criteria for connection to a public water system or for reasons of topography, economic feasibility, or other special condition proposes water service by a community and/or private well, the developer shall request a variance according to the following provisions: 
1.  The developer shall submit with the preliminary plat application an Economic Feasibility Study Report and an Environmental Impact Study report, prepared by a professional engineer, which documents the cost of providing City water service to the subdivision versus the cost of the proposed well system. 
2.  If a well system is approved by the City with the preliminary plat approval, the system shall be designed and built in accordance with regulations of the City Engineer and the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services Regulations and Licensure Division. Both agencies shall approve its construction before the City issues Certificates of Occupancy for any buildings in the subdivision. 
3.  If a public water supply system is proposed to be provided to an area within a ten (10) year period from the time of platting, as indicated in an officially adopted document of the City or other authorized agency, the City may require installation of a capped system or dry lines. Alternately, the City may require a payment in lieu of the improvement, to be credited toward the extension and connection of the subdivision to a future public water supply. 
4.  City approval to install a community and/or private well system shall be allowed subject to the following additional provisions: 
(a)  The system, including all distribution lines, hydrants, valves, and appurtenances, shall conform to current design standards in use within the City of Kearney and shall remain the property of the Developer and/or Homeowners' Association. 
(b)  The developer and all successive lot owners shall agree to connect to the City water system if installed to the subdivision. Such connection shall not be required for ten (10) years after the date of construction of the initial well system. 
(c)  With connection to the City water system, all existing lot owners shall be required to disconnect from and abandon the pre-existing well system in conformance with all local and state standards and shall share equally in the cost of such disconnection. Disconnection and abandonment shall be completed within six (6) months after connection to the City water system. 
56-103 - SANITARY SEWERS 
A.  Connection. 
1.  All installations shall be properly connected to an approved and functioning sanitary sewer system prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
2.  All residential subdivisions inside of the corporate limits of Kearney shall be connected to an existing public sanitary sewer system if such a system is available within three hundred (300) feet of the subdivision. 
Developments with more than fifteen (15) units and located within 0.5 mile of an existing public sanitary sewer system must provide adequate justification as to why they are unable to connect to such a system. For developments with more than fifteen (15) units and located more than 0.5 mile from a public sanitary sewer system, the waste disposal strategy shall be considered by the approving authorities on a case-by-case basis. 
In a pre-existing subdivision that is served by well and/or septic systems that would otherwise require connection under the provisions of this Chapter, the Board of Adjustment may grant permission to build on previously undeveloped lots of record, subject to compliance with Title 124 of the Nebraska Administrative Code, satisfactory percolation tests reviewed by the City Engineer, and other applicable requirements. 
3.  If the City creates a benefit fund for the purpose of financing public extensions of sanitary interceptor sewers to newly developing areas, each subdivision to be benefited by such extensions shall contribute to such a fund. Subdivisions within the City limits of Kearney at the time of platting; or subdivisions currently served by existing sanitary sewer service shall be exempt from this requirement. Contributions to the fund shall be computed on the basis of proportionate costs and benefits of necessary extensions. Assessments shall be made on a per lot basis for single-family development; a per-unit basis for multi-family residential development, and a site area basis for non-residential development. 
4.  All proposals for new public sanitary sewer systems or extensions of existing systems shall be approved by appropriate public agencies. 
5.  All state requirements shall be met and approvals from the Department of Environmental Quality or other appropriate state agencies shall be obtained for all wastewater disposal systems. 
B.  Capacity. 
1.  The sanitary sewer system shall be adequate to handle the necessary flow, based on complete development of the subdivision including peak flows. 
2.  Installation of sanitary sewer systems shall conform to current design standards in use within the City of Kearney as set forth by the Subdivision Design Manual. 
3.  A certification from a registered professional engineer shall be filed with the City of Kearney certifying that the sanitary sewer system of the subdivision is designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Section, and all applicable standards of the State of Nebraska. This certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of "as-built" system plans. The subdivision's engineer shall furnish five (5) sets of "as-built" drawings and one (1) electronic file compatible with the current version of AutoCad. 
C.  Private Wastewater Disposal Systems. If the development does not meet the required criteria for connection to a public sanitary sewer system and gravity sewer service connections, or if for reasons of topography, economic feasibility, or other special conditions, the developer proposes service by a private wastewater disposal system, the developer shall request a variance according the following provisions: 
1.  Subsurface or septic systems are not permissible on any lot created after the effective date of this Ordinance if the gross density of the subdivision is higher than one (1) unit per seventy thousand (70,000) square feet; if individual lots are smaller than one (1) acre; or in any urban subdivision. 
2.  The developer shall submit with the preliminary plat application an Economic Feasibility Study Report and an Environmental Impact Study report, prepared by a professional engineer, which documents the cost of providing City sewer service to the subdivision versus the cost of the proposed private disposal system. 
3.  The preliminary and final plat shall indicate the envelope for home sites on each lot. Percolation tests must be done on areas outside the envelopes of home sites. The preliminary plat application shall also show the location of wells and septic fields for each lot and/or for the subdivision as a whole, and shall submit percolation tests for each lot, taken at the proposed absorption field sites to determine the size of the field required for each lot. 
4.  The City shall consider all these submittals in determining whether to permit installation of private wastewater disposal systems for the subdivision. 
5.  If a private wastewater disposal system is approved by the City with the preliminary plat approval, the system shall be designed and built in accordance with regulations of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the City of Kearney's Subdivision Design Manual. The developer's professional engineer shall furnish the City with five (5) certified copies of "as-built" plans and one (1) electronic copy compatible with AutoCad showing service line locations and final sewer and maintenance access locations, lengths, elevations, and grades. 
6.  If a sanitary sewer system is to be provided to an area within a ten (10) year period, as indicated in an officially adopted document of the City the County, or other authorized agency, the City may require installation of a capped system or dry lines. Alternately, the City may require a payment in lieu of the improvement, to be credited toward the extension and extension of the subdivision of a future sanitary sewer system. 
7.  City approval to install a community and/or private wastewater disposal system shall be allowed subject to the following additional provisions: 
(a)  The system, including all sewer mains and appurtenances, shall conform to current design standards in use within the City of Kearney and shall remain the property of the Developer and/or Homeowners' Association. 
(b)  The developer and all successive lot owners shall agree to connect to the City sanitary sewer system if installed to the corner of their lot. Such connection shall not be required for ten (10) years after the date of construction of the initial wastewater system. 
(c)  With connection to the City sanitary sewer system, all existing lot owners shall be required to disconnect from and abandon the pre-existing well system in conformance with all local and state standards and shall share equally in the cost of such disconnection. Disconnection and abandonment shall be completed within six (6) months after connection to the City sewer system. 
56-104 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT 
A.  Design. 
1.  All subdivisions shall have a storm water management system that is adequate to prevent the undue or unplanned retention of storm water on the site. Undue retention does not include: 
(a)  Retention through planned facilities. 
(b)  Retention not substantially different from pre-existing conditions. 
2.  The design of the storm water management system shall be consistent with general and specific concerns and standards of the Comprehensive Development Plan and the drainage control programs of applicable public agencies. Design shall be based on environmentally sound site planning and engineering techniques. 
3.  To maximum degree possible, drainage from subdivisions shall conform to natural contours of land and not disturb pre-existing drainageways. 
4.  Adjacent properties shall not be unduly burdened with surface water from the subdivision. Specifically: 
(a)  There may be no unreasonable impediment of water from higher adjacent properties across the subdivision, causing damage to lower properties. 
(b)  No action shall unreasonably collect and channel storm water onto lower properties. The volume or rate of post-development run off based on the intensity of a ten (10) year design storm, shall not exceed the amount of pre-development runoff, and is to be managed in a manner consistent with Nebraska statutes and existing case law regarding such flows. 
5.  Design shall use the best available technology to minimize off-site runoff, encourage natural filtration, simulate natural drainage, and minimize discharge of pollutants. Best available technology may include detention cells, retention basins, swales, porous paving, terracing and similar engineering solutions. Storm water may be detained on a per lot basis or in a regional facility that serves the drainage basin. 
6.  No surface water may be channeled into a sanitary sewer system. 
7.  Where possible, a subdivision's drainage system shall coordinate with that of surrounding properties or streets. 
8.  All storm water design shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. The plat submission must include a Public Works Plan including preliminary drainage computations and demonstrations that the proposed storm water management system meets the requirements of this Section. 
9.  The location of all storm water management facilities and associated easements shall be clearly labeled on the final plat. 
10.  Final engineering design and drainage computations must be approved by the City Engineer prior to issuance of any building permits for any lot within the subdivision. 
B.  Maintenance. 
1.  The City of Kearney shall maintain all portions of the storm sewer system that have been accepted as part of the public system. 
2.  Routine and ongoing maintenance of all storm water management facilities constructed on private property after the date of passage of this ordinance is required as set forth in this section. The term "maintenance" is herein defined as including, but not limited to, the following situations: erosion, sedimentation, plant growth in excess of twelve (12) inches high, removal of undesirable animal infestation, litter control, compliance with State of Nebraska dam inspections, and any other related issues that the City or State may request. 
3.  For storm water facilities that serve more than one (1) lot, the owner(s) of each lot in the subdivision shall derive benefit from the storm water facilities in controlling storm water runoff and therefore each and every property owner in the subdivision shall collectively and proportionally be responsible for all cost associated with ongoing maintenance of storm water facilities within the subdivision in perpetuity. The proportionate share shall be determined based on the total amount of land area each owner owns on a square foot basis as compared to the collective total square footage of the benefited properties. 
4.  The aforementioned maintenance requirements shall be set forth in detail as part of the required Subdivision Agreement prepared in conjunction with the Final Plat for the subdivision with said agreement incorporated by reference on the final plat and filed of record with the final plat at the Register of Deeds in the appropriate county. 
5.  Upon verification that maintenance is required for a given storm water facility, the City shall give written notice to each property owner responsible for said maintenance informing said owner(s) that the required maintenance shall be performed within thirty (30) days of the date of notice. In the event that maintenance is not performed on private detention facilities by the lot owner(s) as set forth in this section, the City reserves the right to enter the site and perform the required maintenance and to assess the cost of said maintenance to each property owner that benefits from the storm water facility. The assessments for this maintenance cost will be based on the City fee schedule. 
C.  Erosion Control. 
1.  With the submission of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit an erosion control plan, prepared and certified by a licensed professional engineer, for any land disturbing activity. All grading activities must be carried out consistent with this approved erosion control plan. 
(Ord. No. 7595, 5-11-2010) 
56-105 - PARKS AND PUBLIC FACILITIES 
A.  Purpose. In order to serve the educational and recreational needs of new residents within the subdivision and promote the public health, welfare, community character and property values, residential subdividers are required to donate resources to make improvements to the City of Kearney's parks system as a condition of subdivision approval. 
56-106 - PARKS RESERVATIONS 
A.  General Requirements. The amount of park facilities for new residents is partly based on data and policy in the adopted City of Kearney Comprehensive Development Plan. The Plan reflect a local adaptation of standards of the National Recreation and Park Association (NRPA). The Comprehensive Development Plan is the result of a system-wide technical analysis and citizen participatory planning process, which identified near-term and long-range needs for the local parks system. 
    Given these findings, the City of Kearney has determined the following: 
1.  Location. Land donated for new parks shall be located based generally on the City's Comprehensive Development Plan and official map and shall specifically consider the design of each development and natural features present. The amount of land required shall not include wetlands, floodway, floodplain or storm water detention facilities. 
2.  Combining Parks and Schools Lands. Whenever possible, and whenever in the best interests of the City and the affected school district, land dedicated for park and recreation sites shall be contiguous to land dedicate for a school site. Where the subdivision is less than forty (40) acres, park and recreation land to be donated should, where possible, and in the best interests of the City and the affected school district, be combined with donations from adjoining developments in order to promote usable park and recreation lands, and thereby minimize hardship on a particular subdivider. 
B.  Park Donation Substitutes. If park land would be more appropriately located off-site, the City Council may agree to accept cash in lieu of land from a residential subdivider. The amount of land required from a residential subdivider may be reduced depending on the amount of the improved land, up to two (2) acres established as a private park by the subdivider, provided that such land is determined to be of equivalent value and available by right to all residents of the development. The subdivider shall present evidence, through physical design and legal documentation that the private facility shall be equally available to all residents of the development. 
C.  Criteria for Requiring a Contribution of Cash in Lieu of Park and Recreation Land. 
1.  General Requirements. Where the subdivision is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical or when the available land is inappropriate for parks and recreation land use, or when land for a park and recreation use cannot be made contiguous to land dedication for a school site, the City Council shall determine whether the subdivider shall be required to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the required land donation. 
2.  Park Accounting Trust and Use of Fees. 
(a)  The cash contributions in lieu of land for parks and recreation use shall be held in trust by the City of Kearney for expenditure by the City as determined by the City Council. Such cash contributions shall be used solely for the acquisition of land for parks and recreation which will be available to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of the subdivision or development, or for the improvement of recreation facilities and other parks already existing which will benefit the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 8089, 7-12-2016) 
56-107 - RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LANDS 
    The City Council may require reservation of sites to be purchased for schools and other civic facilities as a condition for approval of the subdivision. Where the Comprehensive Development Plan or the designation of the City calls for a larger amount of land in a particular subdivision or planned development for park and recreation use, or as additional public land that the subdivider is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the subdivider's contribution shall be reserved for subsequent acquisition by the City. Reservation of land for public acquisition shall be for a period not to exceed three (3) years from the date that the plat is officially recorded. 
56-108 - TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING 
    The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site and its surroundings must be suitable for its intended purposes. A subdivider shall allow the City to have access to the proposed sites for the purpose of conducting soil boring tests. 
56-109 - TIMING AND CONVEYANCE 
    Unless otherwise determined through a Subdivision Agreement, a subdivider shall convey to the City (or such other governmental body, corporation or such owner as determined by the City) the land required under this Section at the time of final approval by the City Council of the subdivision or re-subdivision plat or final development plan, by the delivery of the following documents: 
1.  A good and sufficient Trustee's or Warranty Deed conveying fee simple title free and clear of all liens and encumbrances (except liens or encumbrances dischargeable by cash accompanying said deed) except for current real estate taxes; 
2.  A deposit of money equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the most ascertainable taxes for the year, pro-rated to the date that the deed is delivered; 
3.  A plat of survey containing thereon the legal description of the property to be conveyed and any other matters which may be required by the City Manager, under and as advised by the City Planner, City Attorney, and the consulting City Engineer. 
56-110 - TIMING OF PAYMENT 
    Cash contributions required under this Section shall be paid as follows: 
A.  Fees Paid Prior to Final Plat. Unless otherwise provided by the terms of a developer agreement entered into between the City and the subdivider, all fees required pursuant to this Section, including fees arising from the development of land located in the City's two (2) mile planning jurisdiction that may be subject of an intergovernmental agreement, shall be due and owing prior to the final plat approval by the City Council. 
However, if the subdivider's lands are the subject of an annexation agreement, payment shall be made at the times and in the manner provided in said annexation agreement. 
B.  Procedures for Fee Collection and Administration. It shall be the duty of the Finance Director, or other official designated by the City Council to establish regulations and procedures for the collection and administration of the cash contributions required under this Section. 
56-111 - DEVELOPER AGREEMENTS 
A.  Developer Agreements May Establish Time and Manner of Compliance. The City may enter into a Developer Agreement with any subdivider which sets forth the time and manner of compliance with the terms of this Section and implementation of any other provisions of these regulations. 
B.  Prior Development Agreements. If any developer agreement has previously been entered into between the City and a subdivider, and that Agreement remains in full force and effect, the provisions of that agreement shall control, and this Section shall have no force and effect, provided that the subdivider complies with the terms of such Agreement. However, if such subdivider is not complying with the terms of that Agreement then the provisions of this Section shall apply and the City shall utilize the criteria set forth herein to determine the appropriate exaction amount, less credits, if any. 
    Further, if the development contemplated by a subdivider has either increased in number of units or has otherwise increased the demand for park and recreation facilities, then the Developer Agreement previously entered into between the subdivider and the City shall be amended and the subdivider shall provide additional land, or a pro-rata fee, based on the provisions of this Section, less credits, if any. 
56-112 - EASEMENTS 
A.  Utility Easements. 
1.  Urban Subdivisions: Easements for utilities shall be provided for in the subdivision dedication allowing for the construction, maintenance, repair, and replacement of utilities. Such easements shall be at least ten (10) feet in width, centered on the lot lines, and shall be provided along: 
(a)  All rear property lines. 
(b)  Side property lines where necessary to provide a continuous easement. Easement requirements may be waived with proof that such easements are not required by utility service providers. 
2.  Easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots. Easements of lesser width may be approved if accepted by utility providers. Easements shall connect with easements on adjoining properties. 
3.  Easements shall be approved in writing by any appropriate public or private utility provider intending to use such easement for their facilities. Such approval shall be submitted prior to final plat approval. 
4.  Rural Subdivisions: Easements for utilities shall be placed within street rights-of-way, without requirements for additional utility easements. 
B.  Drainage Easements. Where a subdivision is crossed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way shall be provided. It shall correspond generally with the extent of such watercourse, together with any additional construction or expansion necessary to allow it to conduct storm water adequately. Easements shall extend not less than twenty (20) feet on each side from the centerline of the waterway. The total width of any easement shall be sufficient to cover the one hundred (100) year flood plain calculated for a fully developed upstream drainage basin. Parallel streets or parkways may be utilized to preserve such drainageways. 
C.  Setback Requirements for Structures Adjacent to Creeks and Drainageways. 
1.  In addition to other applicable provisions of City ordinances, no persons shall be granted a permit for the construction of any structure, exclusive of fences, bank stabilization structures, poles signs, and non-related parking areas adjacent to any creek or stream unless such structure is located so that no portion whereof is any closer to the stream than will allow a maximum 3:1 slope between the water's edge (during normal flow conditions) of the stream and the closest point of the structure at-grade. 
2.  An exemption from the provisions of Subsection 1 above may be granted if all of the following conditions are met and required certification is filed with the City of Kearney: 
(a)  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that adequate bank stabilization structures or slope protection will be installed in the construction of said structure, having an estimated useful life equal to that of the structure, which will provide adequate lateral support so that no portion of the structure adjacent to the stream will be endangered by erosion or lack of lateral support. 
(b)  Certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of "as-built" construction plans for the structure, as well as "as-built" plans of depicting any bank stabilization or slope protection measures or structures. 
(c)  In the event that the structure is adjacent to any stream that has been channelized or otherwise improved by any agency of government, then such certification providing this exemption must take the form of a certification as to the adequacy and protection of the improvements installed by such governmental unit. 
D.  Other Easements. The subdivision shall provide easements for other public utilities that cross through it, in a form acceptable to the City or appropriate public agency. 
56-113 - DEDICATIONS 
    Before final plat approval is granted to the subdivision, dedications to public use of all streets, alleys, other public rights-of-way, or other parks and public lands shall be completed as required by this Ordinance. 
Chapter 57 - IMPROVEMENT FINANCING AND GUARANTEES 

57-101 - PURPOSE 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure the equitable financing and proper installation and maintenance of required streets, utilities, and other improvements. The guarantee shall be structured to provide adequate assurances to the City while not adding unnecessary costs to the developer. 
57-102 - APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE 
A.  Improvement Districts. This Chapter applies to subdivisions which require the installation of streets, utilities, or other public improvements by the City or developer. Whenever subdivision improvements are requested, the Council may create a district for each type of improvement. With the exception of districts created to advance public projects for, or at the request of, political subdivisions as that term is defined at Section 13-903 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, all developers will be required to deposit with the City, within thirty (30) days after the Council accepts the engineer's estimate for the project, fifty percent (50%) of the total estimated cost of the improvements outlined in Section 57-103. In the event that developers fail or refuse to make the deposit, the City will not proceed further and may repeal the district. The remaining costs of the improvements outlined in Section 57-103 shall be assessed to the property within the district. Assessments levied against new subdivisions shall draw interest at a rate approximately two percent (2%) above the projected rate of interest of the bond required for the project. 
B.  Developer Constructed Infrastructure. An alternative procedure for installation of public improvements is available, whereby the developer constructs all necessary public improvements at his/her expense under a City approved engineering contract, specifications, and design drawings. The application and procedures for developer constructed infrastructure are contained in Chapter 9, Article 13 of the Kearney City Code. 
57-103 - RULES FOR DISTRIBUTING IMPROVEMENT COSTS FOR DISTRICTS 
A.  Responsibility of Subdivider. The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation and/or construction of all improvements required by this Chapter and shall warrant the design, materials, workmanship, construction, and performance of such improvements for two (2) years after the date of completion. All costs of said improvements, less any deposits paid to the City shall be assessed to the property within the district: 
1.  Paving: Thirty-six (36) foot wide, six (6) inch Portland Cement concrete slab in place, curb in place, excavation or fill, grading, and the portion of "T" intersections abutting building lots. 
2.  Water: Eight (8) inch diameter water mains and services installed at the time of construction. 
3.  Sanitary Sewer: Eight (8) inch diameter sanitary sewer mains; manholes, fittings, and stub outs installed at the time of construction. 
4.  Storm Sewer: Adequately sized storm sewer systems (if the system is piped, the developer shall be responsible for up to twenty-four (24) inch diameter pipe) that provide effective runoff for storm water generated on the development site as well as storm water traveling across the site. Storm sewers shall be installed before the streets are graded and paved. A storm water management system adequate to provide for the collection, retention, and removal of surface runoff, extending to the boundaries of the subdivision. 
5.  Engineering: Engineering costs shall include engineering for paving, water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer. 
6.  Sidewalks: As required by this ordinance. Construction of sidewalks may be delayed until after completion of site grading and construction, but must be completed prior to occupancy of the structure. 
B.  Responsibility of the City. Generally, the following rules shall be followed in distributing costs for public improvements. Allowable public costs will be those items that have demonstrable benefit to the general public. The following improvements shall be an obligation of the City and are subject to any plans or policies as may be adopted by the City from time to time, budgetary constraints and considerations, and design and construction schedules. These items may include: 
1.  Pavement: Costs for paving "T" intersections (except portions of "T" intersections abutting building lots). Pavement width in excess of thirty-six (36) feet or slab thickness in excess of six (6) inches for streets designated as collector or arterial streets in the Kearney Comprehensive Development Plan or any subsequent amendment thereof. On collector and arterial streets requiring a higher standard of paving than normal, the additional cost shall be borne by the City or other public agency. 
2.  Water: Those costs required to be paid by the City for extension of water lines, pursuant to the Kearney City Code. The incremental cost of water mains over eight (8) inches in diameter, valves, fittings, booster pumps and fire hydrants. 
3.  Sanitary Sewer: Those costs required to be paid by the City for extension of sewer lines, pursuant to the Kearney City Code. Sanitary outfall sewers or water lines outside of the limits of a subdivision that serve areas larger than that of the subdivision, provided that such extension is consistent with the sequencing of development specified in the Comprehensive Development Plan. The additional costs of sanitary sewers over eight (8) inches in diameter, when such sewers are required by the City. Costs for sewage treatment plants and lift stations will be paid for by the City, provided the City Council approves their installation. 
4.  Storm Sewer: Oversized storm sewers or drainage structures required to serve other areas in the watershed. Such expenses may also be assessed on an area basis to properties served by the improvement. 
5.  Park and Recreation facilities: Consistent with the Comprehensive Development Plan. 
6.  Street Signs: Street signs of equal design and quality to the signs typically being installed by the Public Works Department. 
C.  The subdivider in lieu of installing and constructing said improvements at his/her expense, may, along with all owners of property to be affected by such improvements and all perfected lienholders, petition the City Council to cause the construction of such improvements. This petition shall waive any required resolution of necessity, any applicable limitations of the amount which could be assessed against subdivision property owners including intersection costs, and other costs normally paid by the City in special assessment projects. 
57-104 - SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT 
A.  Condition for Approval of Plat. As a condition for final approval, each subdivision plat must include a subdivision agreement entered into between the City of Kearney and the subdivider, unless specifically waived by the Director of Public Works. Additionally, no contract for the construction of public improvements involving a subdivision within the extraterritorial jurisdiction but outside the corporate limits of Kearney shall be awarded without the approval of such an agreement. 
B.  Components of the Agreement. The agreement shall include provisions for the financing and distribution of responsibilities among the City and the subdivider in accordance with Section 57-103 for land acquisition, design, and installation of public improvements as provided by Section 57-102. The agreement shall also state specifically how public services will be provided in the subdivision prior to annexation by the City. 
57-105 - SUBDIVISIONS CONTIGUOUS WITH CITY 
    Developments which are contiguous to existing improvements (water, storm and sanitary sewer, streets, etc.) are strongly encouraged. Unless otherwise provided as a specific part of the subdivision approval by the City, all subdivisions now or hereafter laid out adjoining or contiguous to the corporate limits of the City shall be included within such corporate limits and become a part of the City of Kearney. The residents of the subdivision shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges and subject to all laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City of Kearney. 
57-106 - NON-CONTIGUOUS DEVELOPMENT 
    Developments are considered non-contiguous to existing improvements when either (1) the improvement is not immediately accessible to the development or (2) the improvements which are immediately accessible to the development do not have the available capacity to serve the development and other existing improvements must be extended to the development in order to supply the development. In cases of non-contiguous developments, the following shall apply: 
A.  When developments require extension of improvements to developments not contiguous to existing improvements, the developer and City shall negotiate the allocation of cost. 
B.  The City may create improvement districts and levy special assessments to pay for such improvements if it is in the best interest of the City. 
57-107 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES 
A.  As a condition of the final approval of the plat and prior to recording it with the appropriate County Register of Deeds, the City Council shall require and accept the following: 
1.  The furnishing of a performance bond, letter of credit, cash escrow, or other guarantee in a form acceptable to the City, in an amount not to exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of the improvement installation. 
2.  A specification of the time allowed for the installation of improvements. This period may be extended by the City Council. 
3.  The performance guarantee amount and requirement, along with the permitted time for installation, shall be included within the Subdivision Agreement negotiated between the City and the Developer and approved with the Final Plat. 
57-108 - BUILDING PERMITS 
A.  Permit Issue Criteria. A building permit may be issued for a new building in a new development only after: 
1.  All public improvements required by Code have been installed, or 
2.  The City has awarded a construction contract for the public improvements and the construction of the improvements is reasonably expected to be completed prior to the building's certificate of occupancy, or 
3.  The developer has entered into an infrastructure agreement for the public improvements and the construction of the improvements is reasonably expected to be completed prior to issuing the building's certificate of occupancy. 
B.  Exceptions. There may be circumstances which warrant approval to proceed with building construction prior to one of the above three criteria being met. In that case, the City Council may enter into an agreement with the developer to allow building construction to proceed. Otherwise, building construction shall not be permitted. The agreement will be developed on a case-by-case basis, depending on the specific circumstances. Some of the agreement's requirements may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  The developer provides justification demonstrating why the "Permit Issue Criteria" in section 57-108A cannot be met. 
2.  The developer initiates the permanent public improvement process (either the City creates the improvement districts or the developer enters into an infrastructure agreement) and construction of the permanent public improvements is not expected to be completed prior to issuing the building's certificate of occupancy. 
3.  The City may allow temporary use of well, septic, and gravel roads while awaiting construction of the permanent public improvements. In this case, the developer will be solely responsible for all costs, liabilities, and disruptions associated with the temporary improvements and the transfer to the permanent, public improvements. The agreement will address the allowed duration for the temporary use of well, septic, and gravel roads. Performance bonding in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of the construction of the public improvements, as determined by the City, may be required as security from the developer to ensure the developer will construct and/or connect to the permanent public improvements when they are available. Authority will be granted to the City to enjoin the developer from continued use of the temporary well, septic, and gravel roads or the transferring to permanent public improvements. 
4.  The developer shall hold the City harmless for any and all costs and disruptions related to the use of well, septic, and gravel roads; transferring to permanent public improvements; and all problems which arise from building construction taking place prior to the construction of the permanent public improvements 
C.  Buildings on Corner Lots. Building permits for buildings on corner lots shall be issued only after improvements on all abutting streets have met the "Permit Issue Criteria" in section 57-108A for the entire length of the lot. 
D.  Certificates of Occupancy. Buildings shall be occupied and certificates of occupancy issued only after all improvements are in place, unless otherwise provided for under section 57-108B. 
57-109 - NOTIFICATION OF COMPLETION AND ACCEPTANCE BY CITY 
A.  Notification. Upon substantial completion of all required improvements, the developer shall notify the City Engineer in writing, as well as submitting a certification from a registered professional engineer, attesting to the adequacy of the installation. 
B.  Inspection and Acceptance. 
1.  The City Engineer shall inspect all installations, and shall approve, partially approve, or disapprove the installation. Upon completion of improvements, he/she shall file a statement with the City Council and City Planner certifying that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily or listing the defects in the improvements. 
2.  If the installation is approved, the City Engineer shall notify the developer of acceptance in writing. Such acceptance shall release the developer from liability pursuant to the performance guarantee for the installation. The City has the right to retain up to ten percent (10%) of the value of the performance guarantee for a period of up to one (1) year from the date of acceptance to remedy any deficiencies which appear during that period. 
3.  If improvements are not accepted or not completed within the specified time, the performance guarantee shall be forfeited and used by the City to complete satisfactory installation of improvements. 
4.  No residential occupancy permits shall be issued for a subdivision unless the installation of improvements has been inspected and approved in full by the City Engineer. 
Chapter 58 - NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT 

58-101 - PURPOSE 
    The purposes of the Nonconforming Development regulations are: 
A.  To allow for reasonable use of legally created lots of record that do not meet current minimum requirements for their respective zoning districts. 
B.  To provide for reasonable use of legally constructed structures that do not meet current site development regulations for their respective zoning districts. 
C.  To allow for the reasonable continuation of legally established uses that do not meet current use regulations for their respective zoning districts. 
D.  To limit the continuation and provide for the gradual replacement of nonconforming uses. 
58-102 - REGULATIONS ADDITIVE 
    Regulations for nonconforming uses are in addition to regulations for nonconforming structures. In the event of a conflict, the most restrictive regulation shall apply. 
58-103 - NONCONFORMING LOTS 
A.  Pre-Existing Lots of Record. Nonconforming lots of record existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall be exempt from the minimum lot area and lot width requirements of each zoning district. Such lots may be developed with any use allowed by the regulations for the district and must comply with all other site development regulations set forth by the Zoning Regulations. 
B.  Exceptions: 
1.  Previously platted corner lots of fifty (50) feet or less may reduce the street side yard setback to fifteen (15) feet. 
C.  Reductions Due to Public Acquisition. If a portion of a legally existing lot in any district is acquired for public use, the remainder of this lot shall be considered a conforming lot. 
(Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
58-104 - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES 
    These regulations apply to buildings and structures that were constructed legally under regulations in effect before the effective date of these Regulations. 
A.  Continuation. A lawful nonconforming structure existing on the effective date of this section may be continued, repaired, maintained, or altered, subject to the provisions of this Section. 
B.  Additions or Enlargements to Nonconforming Structures. 
1.  A lawful nonconforming structure may be added to or enlarged if the addition satisfies one (1) or more of the following conditions: 
(a)  The enlargement or addition, when considered independently of the existing building, complies with all applicable setback, height, off-street parking, and impervious coverages. 
(b)  The nonconforming building and impervious surface coverages on the site are not increased and the building, after the addition, conforms to height and off-street parking regulations applicable to its zoning district. 
(c)  The addition projects no further into a required side yard setback than the existing building; the length of the side wall of the addition is the smaller of twenty-five (25) feet or fifty percent (50%) of the length of the existing nonconforming side wall; and the enlarged building complies with building and impervious coverage, front and rear yard setbacks, and height regulations applicable to its zoning district. 
2.  No permitted addition to a nonconforming structure may place a wall within ten (10) feet of a window of an adjacent pre-existing residential structure. 
3.  Nonconforming buildings shall be limited to one (1) addition or enlargement pursuant to these regulations. 
C.  Moving of Nonconforming Structures. A lawful nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved in whole or in part to another location on its lot unless every part of the structure conforms to all site development regulations applicable to its zoning district. 
D.  Repair of Nonconforming Structures. A lawful nonconforming building damaged by fire, explosion, storm or other calamity, except flood damages, may be repaired and reconstructed provided there is no increase in the degree of nonconformity. 
E.  Conversion of a Conforming Building. A conforming building shall not be changed in any way that will result in a nonconforming development. 
F.  Applicability of Landscaping and Screening Regulations. A pre-existing structure, building, or development shall be exempt from Chapter 48, Landscaping and Screening Regulations. However, any expansion of such structure, building, or development or any adjacent new development onto property that is or becomes vacant on or after the effective date of these regulations shall be subject to Chapter 48. 
58-105 - NONCONFORMING USES 
A.  Continuation of Nonconforming Uses. 
1.  Any nonconforming use lawfully existing on the effective date of these regulations may continue, subject to the limitations of this Chapter. 
2.  Whenever the use of a premises becomes nonconforming through a subsequent change in the Unified Land Development Ordinance or zoning district boundaries, such use may be continued or changed to another nonconforming use of the same or lesser intensity if approved by the City Council at a public hearing following a public hearing by the Planning Commission including their recommendation to the City Council. 
B.  Change of Nonconforming Uses. A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or lesser intensity, as measured by the Intensity Rating in the Use Matrix as shown in Table 14-1 of Chapter 14, provided an application for such change is first approved by the City Council after public hearing and recommendation of the Planning Commission. 
C.  Enlargement of Nonconforming Uses. A building or structure housing a lawful nonconforming use may not be added to or enlarged. 
D.  Abandonment of Nonconforming Use. 
1.  If any structure or property used as a lawful nonconforming use becomes vacant or unused for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, any subsequent use must conform to all use regulations applicable to the property's zoning district. 
2.  If a structure housing a nonconforming use converts to a conforming use, it forfeits any further claim to nonconforming use rights. 
E.  Allowance for Repairs. Repairs and maintenance of a structure occupied by a nonconforming use may be made, provided that no structural alterations are made other than those required by law. 
F.  Damage or Destruction of Structures. Should a structure occupied by a lawful nonconforming use be damaged to the extent that the cost of restoration exceeds sixty percent (60%) of the replacement cost of the structure, the nonconforming use shall no longer be permitted. 
G.  Nonconforming Uses and Conditional Use Permits. A lawful pre-existing use which would require a Conditional Use Permit in its zoning district shall be presumed to have the appropriate Permit and shall be considered a conforming use. The use shall be subject to the regulations governing lapses or revocation of Permits, set forth in Chapter 59. 
58-106 - NONCONFORMING RESIDENTIAL USES 
A.  Application. These provisions apply to high-density residential uses, typically duplex or multi-family uses, which are present in structures that were originally constructed for single-family occupancy. For the purpose of this section of the ordinance a conversion shall be defined as a single-family dwelling where two (2) or more separate dwelling units have been created. These conversions are divided into two (2) categories. Category One consists of existing single-family conversions located in any R-1 zoning district. Category Two consists of existing single-family conversions in residential zoning districts R-2 and R-3 and all commercial and industrial zones. In both categories, these nonconforming uses are inconsistent with zoning or other development regulations in force when the uses were established and/or were established or constructed without benefit of a building permit or other required City review and approval. The regulations in this section provide a mechanism for establishing compliance for both categories of conversions. 
1.  Category One. Existing R-1 conversions must provide proof that the conversion occurred prior to the adoption of Zoning Ordinance No. 1645 on the date of November 14 1961 to qualify as legal nonconforming uses. Any single-family structure converted to multiple living units after 1961 without benefit of required permits shall be deemed an unlawful nonconformance and shall be returned to single-family use and occupancy. 
2.  Category Two. Existing conversions of single-family structures in zoning districts R-2 and R-3 and all commercial and industrial zones qualify to apply for the registration system described below in Sections 58-106.B through 58-106.K, establishing nonconforming rights for these uses. 
B.  Registration System for Category Two Properties. The City of Kearney hereby establishes a Nonconforming Use Registration System for nonconforming residential uses located in zoning districts other than R-1. In order to establish existing owner's rights to validate and continue nonconforming uses in structures that were originally constructed as single-family dwellings, the owner of each such property shall register each premises located in R-2 or R-3 zoning districts prior to October 15, 2002 as determined by the City Council on a form available from the City of Kearney Building and Zoning Division. All work required to comply with parking requirements and minimum life safety standards (Sections 58-106.E and F) shall be completed and a Nonconforming Use Certificate issued within twenty-four (24) months of the next day following the last day of the six (6) month registration period. Once the property is properly registered with the City, the owner may begin the construction work immediately, or may choose to wait, as long as all required work is completed, inspected, and approved by the City before the deadline expires. 
C.  Nonconforming Use Rights. 
1.  Any Category Two property that is properly registered and meets the criteria required in this section shall receive full recognition as a lawful nonconforming use, subject to all the rights and restrictions provided by Section 58-105, and the owner of such property shall be issued a Nonconforming Use Certificate by the City of Kearney Building and Zoning Division. 
2.  Any nonconforming residential use that is not registered and/or cannot meet the criteria required in this section may be deemed in violation of the City's Unified Land Development Ordinance. The City shall take any steps appropriate to terminate such unlawful uses. 
D.  Conformance with Parking Requirements. 
1.  Each registered and lawful nonconforming residential use shall comply with the Off-Street Parking Regulations in Chapter 49 within twenty-four (24) months of the adoption of this Ordinance. Required parking that takes access from an unimproved alley may be gravel, crushed rock, crushed concrete or similar aggregate surface. The area designated for gravel parking shall be contained within a physical boundary such as landscape timbers, bricks, railroad ties, split-rail fence, etc. and the aggregate shall be a minimum of four (4) inch depth. Figure 48-1 illustrates scenarios acceptable and unacceptable to meet the location requirements for off-street parking. 
2.  At least fifty percent (50%) of the area of the street yard and forty percent (40%) of the area of the rear yard shall remain as landscaped area after the completion of any effort to comply with parking requirements. No tree may be removed to comply with these parking requirements unless authorized in writing by the City of Kearney Building and Zoning Division. If trees are removed with authorization from the City, mitigation shall be required at the following ratios: 
(a)  For trees removed under six (6) inches in caliper, one (1) tree not less than two (2) inch caliper. 
(b)  For trees removed six (6) inch caliper or greater, two (2) trees no smaller than two (2) inch caliper or one (1) tree no smaller than three (3) inch caliper. 
(c)  In certain situations, where there is inadequate space for replacement with large canopy species, the City may authorize smaller ornamental species at a mitigation rate of twice that specified above. The ornamental trees shall not be less than 1.5 inch caliper. 
Mitigation trees shall be planted on the same property at a location mutually agreed upon by the owner and the City. 
E.  Minimum Life Safety Standards. Each registered and lawful nonconforming residential use shall provide and comply with the following minimum Life Safety Standards within twelve (12) months of the adoption of this ordinance. 
1.  Smoke detectors shall be installed in each sleeping room and hallways leading to sleeping rooms and may be solely battery-operated, in accordance with Section R313 of the International Residential Code. 
2.  Each below-grade sleeping room shall have at least one (1) window meeting the requirements of Section R310 of the International Residential Code. All above-grade sleeping rooms shall have at least one (1) operable window. 
3.  All kitchens and bathrooms shall be provided with ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protection, in accordance with the National Electrical Code. 
4.  All stairways with four (4) or more risers shall have a handrail in accordance with Section R311 of the International Residential Code. 
5.  All stairways with six (6) or more risers shall have a wall switch controlled lighting outlet in accordance with the National Electrical Code. 
F.  Fees. A fee of $50.00 per premises shall be paid at the time of application. 
G.  Inspection Required. Each premises shall be inspected by a City Inspector to verify that the Off-Street Parking Requirements and Minimum Life Safety Standards have been satisfied within the required time deadline before the nonconforming residential use shall be considered legal and become registered. 
H.  Reinspection Fees. A reinspection fee of $50.00 may be charged for multiple inspections of the same premises. 
I.  Contested Applications. Applications which are disputed or contested by citizens, property owners, or the City administration shall be decided by the Chief Building Official. Any applicant whose application is denied may appeal to the Board of Adjustment within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Chief Building Official. 
J.  Nonconforming Use Certificate. The owner of property that has met these requirements shall be issued a Nonconforming Use Certificate by the City of Kearney Building and Zoning Division. 
K.  Nonconforming Use and Development. 
1.  The established registered nonconforming use rights are subject to the provisions of Section 58-105. 
2.  High-density residential uses that comply with the permitted use regulations and density requirements of their respective zoning districts and meet all requirements in Section 58-106 are considered lawful conforming uses. These uses may be categorized as nonconforming structures based on their inconsistency with some development regulations and are subject to the provisions of Section 58-104. 
    Pre-existing structures that qualify as Category Two nonconforming residential uses on lots that do not meet the requirements of this Ordinance shall not be prohibited, based solely on the size of the lot, from seeking legal nonconforming uses status under the provisions of this section. These existing conversions must meet all other applicable requirements of this section to qualify. 
(Ord. No. 7062, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 7195, 8-23-2005) 
Chapter 59 - ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

59-101 - PURPOSE 
    The Administration and Procedures Provisions establish the methods for implementation of the Zoning Regulations. These provisions include procedures for reviewing specific uses within certain zoning districts; amending the Zoning Regulations; and granting variances. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
59-102 - SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE 
A.  Purpose. The Site Plan Review Procedure provides for the administrative review in addition to plan review required by other sections of the Kearney Municipal Code of projects that have potentially significant effects on traffic circulation or a significant effect on land uses in adjacent neighborhoods. The procedure provides for review and evaluation of site development features and possible mitigation of unfavorable effects on surrounding property. 
B.  Administration. The City Planner, or his/her designee shall review, evaluate, and act on all site plans submitted pursuant to this procedure. An applicant may appeal a denial of any application to the Planning Commission and City Council. 
C.  Uses Requiring Site Plan Review. All uses indicated as subject to Site Plan Review in Table 59-1 are subject to the provisions of this section, unless otherwise subject to a Planned Development Review or a Conditional Use Permit procedure for specific zoning districts. 
D.  Application Requirements. An application for a Site Plan Review may be filed by the owner(s) of a property or the owners' authorized agent with the City Planner. The application shall include the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant. 
2.  Owner, address, and legal description of the property 
3.  A description of the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use. 
4.  A site plan, drawn to a scale sufficient to permit adequate review and dimensioned as necessary, showing the following information: 
(a)  The date, scale, north point, title, name of owner, and name of person preparing the site plan. 
(b)  The location and dimensions of boundary lines, easements, and required yards and setbacks of existing and proposed buildings and site improvements. 
(c)  The location, size, and use of proposed and existing structures on the site. 
(d)  The location of all proposed site improvements, including parking and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular access, sewers, sidewalks, utilities, service areas, fencing, screening, landscaping, and lighting. 
(e)  Location of any major site feature, including drainage and contours at no greater than five (5) foot intervals. 
(f)  Any other information that may be required for review by the City Planner, or his/her designee. 
E.  Administrative Action and Appeal. The City Planner, or his/her designee must act upon each complete application within ten (10) working days of filing. An applicant may appeal a denial to the Planning Commission and City Council within ten (10) days of the action. 
F.  Review and Evaluation. 
1.  The City Planner, or his/her designee, shall review and evaluate the site plan based on the criteria established in Table 59-1 and conformance with applicable regulations in these Zoning Regulations. 
2.  The City Planner, or his/her designee, shall make the following findings before approval of the site plan: 
(a)  The proposed development, together with any necessary modifications, is compatible with the criteria established in Table 59-1. 
(b)  Any required modifications to the site plan are reasonable and are the minimum necessary to minimize potentially unfavorable effects. 
(c)  The site plan conforms to the Zoning Regulations. 
G.  Modification of Site Plan. The City Planner, or his/her designee, may require modification of a site plan as a prerequisite for approval. Required modifications may be more restrictive than base district regulations and may include, but not be limited to, additional landscaping or screening; installation of erosion control measures; improvement of access or circulation; rearrangement of structures on the site; or other modifications deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, community character, property values, and/or aesthetics. 
H.  Term and Modification of Approval. 
1.  A Site Plan Approval shall become void two (2) years after the date of approval, unless the applicant receives a Building Permit and diligently carries out development prior to the expiration of this period. 
2.  The City Planner, or his/her designee, may approve an application to modify a previously approved site plan if he/she determines that the modification does not affect findings related to the criteria set forth in Table 59-1. 
3.  The City Planner, or his/her designee may revoke a Site Plan Approval if he/she determines that the development is not complying with the terms and conditions of the approval. Such revocation may be appealed to the Planning Commission and City Council. 
I.  Approval to Run With Land. An approval pursuant to this section shall run with the land until the expiration date of such approval. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
59-103 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT PROCEDURE 
A.  Purpose. The Conditional Use Permit Procedure provides for public input and discretionary Planning Commission review and recommendation to the City Council for uses within zoning districts, which have unusual site development or operating characteristics that could adversely affect surrounding properties. 
B.  Administration. The City Planner shall be responsible for the administration of the Conditional Use Permit Procedure. The Planning Commission shall review, evaluate, and submit a recommendation to the City Council for each application. The City Council shall then review, evaluate, and take action on the Conditional Use Permit application. 
C.  Application Requirements. An application for a Conditional Use Permit may be filed with the City by the owner(s) of a property or the owners' authorized agent. The application shall include the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant. 
2.  Owner, address and legal description of the property (shall be verified with a certified copy of the last deed or document of record from the appropriate County Register of Deeds Office). 
3.  A description of the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use. 
4.  Any graphic information, including site plans, elevations, other drawings, or other materials determined by the City Planner to be necessary to describe the proposed use to approving agencies. 
5.  Filing fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be paid. 
D.  Approval Process. 
1.  The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each Conditional Use Permit and, following such public hearing, shall make a recommendation to the City Council on the application. 
2.  A failure to act on the part of the Planning Commission shall be considered a denial of the application. 
3.  The City Council, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on the application and, following such public hearing and after consideration of the Planning Commission recommendation, shall act on the application. 
E.  Criteria for Review. 
1.  The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and approve the site plan based on the criteria established in Table 59-1 and conformance with applicable regulations in these Zoning Regulations. 
F.  Scope of Approval. 
1.  The City Council may, at their discretion, grant a Conditional Use Permit to a specific owner or applicant; however, the Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may establish special site development or operational regulations as a condition for approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
2.  The City Council shall not grant a Conditional Use Permit for any home occupation/home-based business, which is otherwise prohibited under Section 46-112. 
G.  Lapse and Revocation of Permit. 
1.  A Conditional Use Permit shall become void two (2) years after its effective date if the applicant has not carried out development or occupancy during that period. 
2.  The City Council may, upon notice and hearing, revoke a Conditional Use Permit should the operation of the use subject to such permit violate the conditions under which the permit was granted. 
H.  Previously Approved Conditional Use Permits. 
1.  Any conditional or special use approved under regulations in effect before the effective date of these Regulations shall be considered to have a valid Conditional Use Permit, subject to requirements imposed at the time of its approval. 
2.  Any use lawfully established before the effective date of this Ordinance and required by this Unified Land Development Ordinance to have a Conditional Use Permit within its respective zoning district shall be deemed to have such a valid Conditional Use Permit, provided that it complies with all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003; Ord. No. 7115, 9-14-2004; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
TABLE 59-1: 
CRITERIA FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW AND CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 
Criteria Applies To Land Use Compatibility Site Plan Review Conditional Use Permit Development Density Site area per unit or floor area ratio should be similar to surrounding uses if not separated by major natural or artificial features. X X Height and Scale Height and Bulk Development should minimize differences in height and building size from surrounding structures. Differences should be justified by urban design considerations. X X Setbacks Development should respect pre-existing setbacks in surrounding area. Variations should be justified by site or operating characteristics. X X Building Coverage Building coverage should be similar to that of surrounding development if possible. Higher coverage should be mitigated by landscaping or site amenities. X X  
Criteria Applies To Site Development Site Plan Review Conditional Use Permit Frontage Project frontage along a street should be similar to lot width. X X Parking and Internal Circulation Parking should serve all structures with minimal conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles. X X All structures must be accessible to public safety vehicles. X X Development must have access to adjacent public streets and ways. Internal circulation should minimize conflicts and congestion at public access points. X X Landscaping Landscaping should be integral to the development, providing street landscaping, breaks in uninterrupted paved areas, and buffering where required by surrounding land uses. Parts of site with sensitive environmental features or natural drainageways should be preserved. X X Building Design Architectural design and building materials should be compatible with surrounding areas or highly visible locations X Traffic Capacity Project should not obstruct traffic on adjacent streets. Compensating improvements will be required to mitigate impact on street system operations. X X External Traffic Effects Project design should direct non-residential traffic away from residential areas. X X Operating Hours Projects with long operating hours must minimize effects on surrounding residential areas. X X Outside Storage Outside storage areas must be screened from surrounding streets and less intensive land uses. X X  
Criteria Applies To Public Facilities Site Plan Review Conditional Use Permit Sanitary Waste Disposal Developments within 300 feet of a public sanitary sewer must connect to sewer system. Individual disposal systems, if permitted, shall not adversely affect public health, safety, or welfare. X X Sanitary sewer must have adequate capacity to serve development. X X Storm Water Management Development should handle storm water adequately to prevent overloading of public storm water management system. X X Development should not inhibit development of other properties. X X Development should not increase probability of erosion, flooding, landslides, or other run-off related effects. X X Utilities Project must be served by utilities. X X Rural estate subdivisions should be located in designated areas which can accommodate utility and infrastructure installation consistent with the need to protect the environment and public health. X X Comprehensive Plan Projects should be consistent with the City of Kearney's Comprehensive Development Plan. X  
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
59-104 - AMENDMENT PROCEDURE 
A.  Purpose. The Amendment Procedures describe the methods by which changes may be made in the text of the Zoning Regulations (text amendment) and/or the official boundaries of Zoning Districts (rezoning). 
B.  Initiation of Amendments. 
1.  Text amendments may be initiated by a citizen, the Planning Commission or City Council. 
2.  A filing fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be paid for an application for text amendment. 
3.  Rezonings may be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent; the Planning Commission; or the City Council. 
4.  A filing fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be paid for an application for rezoning. 
C.  Rezoning Application Requirements. An application for a rezoning may be filed with the City Planner, or his/her designee. The application shall include the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant. 
2.  Owner, address and legal description of the property (shall be verified with a certified copy of the last deed or document of record from the appropriate County Register of Deed's Office). 
3.  A description of the reason for the rezoning application and the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use. 
4.  Any graphic information, including site plans, elevations, other drawings, or other materials determined by the City Planner to be necessary to describe the proposed use to approving agencies. 
5.  A filing fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be paid. 
D.  Amendment Process. 
1.  The Planning Commission, following ten (10) days' notice and publication, shall hold a public hearing on each proposed text or rezoning and, following such public hearing, shall recommend action to the City Council. A vote either for or against an amendment by a majority of all Planning Commission members present shall constitute a recommendation to the City Council. A vote either for or against an amendment by less than a majority of all Planning Commission members present shall constitute a failure to make a recommendation to the City Council. 
2.  The City Council, following ten (10) days' notice and publication, shall hold a public hearing, and shall act on the proposed amendment. 
3.  Protest: If a valid protest petition opposing an amendment is filed with the City Clerk by eligible property owners, pursuant to Section 19-905 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council. A valid protest petition must meet the following criteria: 
(a)  Submission of the petition in the office of the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after the conclusion of the public hearing on the amendment by the Planning Commission. 
(b)  Notarized signatures by at least one (1) of the following: 
(1)  The owner or owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the property proposed for rezoning. 
(2)  The owners of twenty percent (20%) of the total area, excepting public rights-of-way and public property, within the zoning jurisdiction of the City and within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed rezoning. 
E.  Required Notice and Publication. Prior to consideration of amending, supplementing, changing, modifying, or repealing these regulations by the governing body, notice of public hearings shall be provided by two (2) of the three (3) following methods, as determined by the City: 
1.  Notice By Posted Sign: A notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property upon which action is pending. Such notice shall be not less than eighteen (18) inches in height and twenty-four (24) inches in width with a yellow or white background and black letters not less than one and one-half (11/2) inches in height. Such posted notice shall be so placed upon such premises that is easily visible from the street and shall be so posted at least ten (10) days before the date of such hearing. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, mutilate, destroy or change such posted notice prior to such hearing. 
2.  Publication: At least ten (10) days before the date of hearing, the City Clerk shall have published in a daily newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Kearney, a Notice of the time, place and subject matter of such hearing. 
3.  Notification By Mail of School District: The Planning Clerk shall mail notice of the time, place and subject matter of any Planning Commission rezoning hearings to the School District Administrative Official and/or Chair of the Board of Education, within whose boundaries the subject site is located. The notification shall be submitted to the applicable official and/or Board of Education at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such meeting. Each school district to be affected by such rezoning proposal shall be notified. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
59-105 - EXTENSION OF THE EXTRA-TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION 
    Upon the automatic extension of the two (2) mile Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction due to annexation, the City Council with the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall zone properties within the newly established jurisdiction concurrent with adoption of the annexation ordinance. The zoning shall consider the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Kearney and the present use of the land. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 16-901 
59-106 - BUILDING PERMITS 
A.  Administration and Enforcement. The Director of Public Works shall administer and enforce these regulations and may direct other persons to assist him/her. 
    If the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee shall find that any of the provisions of these regulations are being violated, he/she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He/she shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by these regulations to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
B.  Building Permits Required. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit therefore, issued by the Building Official. No building permit shall be issued by the Building Official except in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, unless he/she receives a written order from the Board of Adjustments in the form of an administrative review, special exception, or variance as provided by these regulations. 
C.  Application for Building Permit. All applications for building permits shall include plans if applicable in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. 
    The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the Building Official, including existing or proposed building or alterations; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of these regulations. One (1) copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the Building Official, after he/she shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. One (1) copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the Building Official. 
D.  Expiration of Building Permit. 
1.  If the work described in any building permit has not begun within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall be canceled by the Building Official; and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. 
2.  If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within two (2) years of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the Building Official, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained. 
3.  The expiration date of a building permit may be established for a period longer than two (2) years if established at the time that such permit is issued by the City. The Building Official, or his/her designee may, at his/her discretion extend the expiration period of the building permit. 
E.  Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans, Permits. Building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Building Official authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of these regulations, and punishable as provided by Section 59-114. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
59-107 - SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES 
    Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
59-108 - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
A.  Establishment. 
1.  A Board of Adjustment is hereby established to provide relief in situations of hardship or to hear appeals. The Board shall consist of five (5) regular members, plus one (1) additional alternate member who shall attend and vote only when one (1) member is unable to attend for any reason. 
2.  Each member shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council for a three (3) year term and is removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. One member of the Board shall be appointed from the Planning Commission, and the loss of membership on the Commission by such member shall also result in his/her immediate loss of membership on the Board of Adjustment and the appointment of another Planning Commissioner to the Board. 
3.  The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules and regulations in accordance with these regulations and the laws of the State of Nebraska pursuant to Sections 19-901 to 19-914 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. All meetings and records shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The Board shall keep a record of its examinations and other official actions and shall be a public record. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
4.  A filing fee as set forth in the City of Kearney Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall accompany each appeal to the Board of Adjustment. 
B.  Procedure for Appeals. 
1.  Appeals shall be made to the Board of Adjustment through the office of the Building Official in written form as determined by the Building Official. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and shall decide the appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of the public hearing. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action, unless the Building Official certifies to the Board that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. 
2.  The Board shall provide a minimum of ten (10) days' notice of a public hearing on any question before it. Notice of the hearing shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property on which the application has been made; by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Kearney; and by written notice to the appealing party. 
3.  Upon the public hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The concurring vote of four (4) out of five (5) members of such Board as so composed shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the appellant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any Unified Land Development Ordinance, or to effect any variation in such regulations. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 7358, 6-12-2007 effective October 1, 2007) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-905 
59-109 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
    The Board of Adjustment shall have only the following powers and duties: 
A.  Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decisions or determination made by the Building Official, or his/her designee in the enforcement of these regulations or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures 
B.  Interpretation of Zoning Map: To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any zoning regulation, requests for interpretation of any map. 
C.  Variances to Relieve Hardships Relating to Property: To authorize, upon appeal, variances from the strict application of these regulations where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of the zoning regulations; or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, such strict application would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardships upon the owner of such property. 
1.  Requirements for Grant of a Variance. No such variance shall be authorized by the Board unless it finds that: 
(a)  Strict application of the zoning regulations will produce undue hardship. 
(b)  Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and in the same vicinity. 
(c)  The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance. 
(d)  The granting of such variance is based upon reason of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of convenience, profit, or caprice. 
(e)  The condition or situation of the property concerned is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to these Zoning Regulations. 
(f)  The granting of the variance will not cause substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of any ordinance or resolution. 
2.  Findings by Board. The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of Section 59-109C have been met by the applicant for a variance. 
3.  Conditions for Grant of Variance. 
(a)  In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with these regulations. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable under Section 59-114 of these regulations. 
(b)  Under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of these regulations in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of these regulations in said district. 
(c)  No non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and no permitted or non-conforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
D.  Board has Powers of Building Official on Appeals: Reversing Decisions of Building Official. In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the Building Official from whom the appeal is taken. 
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision, or determination of the Building Official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under these regulations, or to effect any variation in the application of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Neb. Rev. Stat. 19-910 
59-110 - APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
    Any person or persons, or any taxpayer, officer, department, board or bureau of the City aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may seek review of such decision by the District Court for the County in the manner provided by the laws of the State and particularly by Section 19-912 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
59-111 - DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL, BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, CITY COUNCIL, AND COURTS ON MATTERS OF APPEAL 
A.  It is the intent of these regulations that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Building Official, and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the Building Official, and that recourse from the decisions of Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law. 
B.  Under these regulations the City Council shall have only the duties of: 
1.  Considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments, or the repeal of these regulations as provided by law. 
2.  Establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Section 59-108. 
3.  Directing a city officer to appeal a decision of the Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
59-112 - SEVERABILITY CLAUSE 
    Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
59-113 - COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS 
    Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is allowed to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaints stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Building Official. He/she shall record properly such complaint immediately, investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002) 
59-114 - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION 
A.  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of the Unified Land Development Ordinance, being a part of the Code of the City of Kearney, Nebraska, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for any one offense, recoverable with costs, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days. Each day such violation continues after notice of violation is given to the offender may be considered a separate offense. 
B.  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
C.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 6864, 3-12-2002 effective April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 6964, 6-10-2003) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code beginning with Supplement 1. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 8232  4-24-2018 1 21-103 2 22-103 3, 4 47-104, 47-105 5 49-109 8253  6-12-2018 1, 2 8-1902, 8-1903 8266  8-14-2018 1 8-807 8280  8-28-2018 1 9-103 2, 3 9-106, 9-107 8285  9-11-2018 1 14-1 2 46-110 8321  2-12-2019 1, 2 13-104, 13-105 3 46-104 4 14-113 5 15-102 6, 7 16-101, 16-102 8, 9 18-101, 18-102 8323  2-12-2019 1-3 9-1016-9-1018 4 9-1020 5 9-1035 6 9-1041 7, 8 9-1048, 9-1049 9-11 9-1051-9-1053 12 9-1055 8324  2-12-2019 1 1-210 8329  2-26-2019 1       Rpld 6-108 8332  3-12-2019 1 8-2001 8333  3-12-2019 1, 2 6-101, 6-102 3 6-110 8337  4-23-2019 1, 2 8-1515, 8-1516 8342  5-14-2019 1 3-2902 2 3-2907 8343  5-14-2019 1, 2       Rpld 3-2903.01, 3-2903.02 8344  5-14-2019 1       Added 3-3101-3-3105 8345  5-14-2019 1 9-1032  
